Background
Sleep is a biological process that is necessary for optimal
neurologic function, as well as systematic biology, including
metabolism, appetite regulation, immunity, hormonal
balance, and cardiovascular system [1, 2]. Sleep disorders
affect a considerable number of people globally and may
be increasing in prevalence [3]. University students with
sleep problems may also experience a decline in health
and academic performance [4]. In different surveys in the
United States, the prevalence of poor sleep quality has reportedly
been between 27 and 60% of university students
[4, 5]. In one study, the prevalence of sleep disorders in
Iranian University students was reported by 40.6% [6]. It
appears that residency in dormitories has been cited as an
influential factor that affects sleep quality in students [7].
Results of a survey from 23 countries revealed that physical
activity was below the recommended levels for the
majority of university students. More than 50% of
American university students are not sufficiently active
[8]. Also, there is a growing concern for the physical inactivity
of Iranian university students [9].
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) recommends
regular physical activity for proper sleep hygiene.
AASM suggests exercise can be a non-pharmacological
intervention for sleep quality improvement [10]. In a systematic
review of 34 studies, 29 studies reported a positive
effect of physical activity on sleep quality and its duration
among all age groups [11]. Although numerous studies reported
the effectiveness of exercise on sleep quality of
people in different age ranges across various chronic conditions
[12–19], there are contradictory results regarding the
impact of exercise on the sleep quality of university students,
especially those that reside in dormitories [20–24].
In a quasi-experimental study conducted in Iran, exercise
did not have a significant effect on the sleep quality of students
[20]. Some studies have shown that gender is an indicator
of sleep quality [25], with women reportedly suffering
from sleep dysfunction more than men [21, 25]. The intensity
of exercise is another factor that was evaluated in limited
studies [18, 23].
Daily fatigue is one of the consequences people with sleep
dysfunction deal with [26]. While the effect of exercise on
fatigue has been evaluated in chronic diseases [27, 28], there
are few studies on young adults, as well as in dormitory students.
The present study was designed to investigate the effects
of an eight-week aerobic exercise intervention on
sleep quality and daily fatigue. It was hypothesized that
regular aerobic exercise with increasing intensity would improve
sleep quality and decrease fatigue level among female
students living in dormitories.
Methods
Study design and sampling
This study was conducted from October to December
2015. Two out of eight dormitories at the Iran University
of Medical Sciences (IUMS) were randomly selected. One
of the randomly selected dormitories was the experimental
group, whereas the second served as the control group.
A non-probability sampling method was used to enroll
participants in each of the two selected dormitories. The
use of quasi-experimental design minimized the influence
of confounding covariates such as students’ interactions
regarding the intervention and the process of the study.
Participants
Forty eligible volunteers were enrolled from each of the
two dormitories. Participants were Iranian females between
18 and 26 years of age who met the following criteria:
BMI < 29 (kg/m2), non-smoking, no use of
acupuncture or other complementary medicines over the
last 6 months, and no exposure to stressful events over
the past 3 months. They were not enrolled or later
dropped out based on the following criteria: a presence of
physical or mental illness or surgical history, unwillingness
to continue the study, absent for three consecutive or five
non-consecutive exercise sessions, involvement in daily
physical activity beyond the study protocol, the use of
complementary medicines or herbal therapy that influences
sleep or fatigue level (i.e., energy-enhancing drugs
and/or sleeping medications).
Tools
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) was used to
measure sleep quality [29]. This tool consists of seven
areas including: subjective sleep quality, sleep latency,
sleep duration, sleep efficiency (the percentage of sleeping
time during the time in bed), sleep disturbances
(night time waking), use of sleeping medications, and
daytime dysfunction (distress and impaired daytime
functioning). Scoring of answers was based on a scale of
0 to 3 (total score of 21). Higher scores indicate poorer
sleep quality [29]. In the present study, all participants
received a score of zero for area six (the use of sleeping
medications) since we did not allow students who took
sleeping medication to participate. Several studies have
evaluated the validity and reliability of the PSQI as a
measurement for sleep quality [30–32]. In one Iranian
study, the reliability of the Persian version of the PSQI
had a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.77 [33]. In our
sample, the PSQI Cronbach’s alpha coefficient was 0.80.
The Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI-20) was
used to assess the fatigue level. This instrument consists
of a 20-item survey that covers the following five dimensions:
general fatigue (impairment of overall daytime
functioning), physical fatigue (body tiredness), mental fatigue
(fatigue related to cognition), reduced activity, and
reduced motivation. The score of each dimension ranges
from 4 to 20. The composite score of fatigue level is the
sum of the five dimensions’ scores (i.e., composite score
ranges from 20 to 100). Higher scores indicate greater
fatigue. The validity and reliability of MFI-20 have been
tested previously [34]. The reliability of the Persian version
of MFI-20 was evaluated in Multiple Sclerosis [35].
The reliability of the MFI-20 in the present sample resulted
in a Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of 0.85.
Study procedure
Following a discussion of the research objectives and informed
consent, the participants in both experimental
and control groups individually filled out a demographic
questionnaire, the PSQI, and the MFI- 20.
At the beginning of each session, a German Buere digital
heart rate display was worn around the wrist of the participants.
The participants in the experimental group collectively
received aerobic exercise plan from an exercise specialist in
the dormitories’ gym. The participants exercised with the
trainer during three one-hour sessions weekly for eight consecutive
weeks. Each session included a 10 min warm-up
(marching, top-to-bottom movements), 35 min of basic aerobic
exercises (10min combined exercises, 20 min of mental
activity, 5 min mat exercise), and a 15 min cool-down. The
schedule was from 17:00 to 18:00 pm. The subjects performed
the exercises at 45–50% of maximum heart rate
(mild intensity) during the first 4 weeks of intervention and
at 65–70% of maximum heart rate (moderate intensity) during
the second 4 weeks of the intervention [16]. Intensities
were estimated using Karvonen’s formula (i.e., maximum
heart rate minus the subject’s mean age [31]. At the end of
the fourth and eighth weeks of the intervention, all participants
in the study filled out the PSQI and MFI-20 questionnaires.
Students in the control group did not receive any
intervention and performed their daily routines (Fig. 1).
Sample size
The sample size was estimated based on the expected difference
in study outcomes between the experimental and control
groups. To be able to detect a 25% difference in sleep
quality between two groups, a study with a sample size of 72
would be required (36 per each group). As such, the study
would have a power of 80% at a 5% significance level. The effect
size was assumed to be 1. However, this study recruited
40 students for each group to avoid follow-up losses.
Statistical tests
Results were analyzed using SPSS version 25. Kolmogorov-
Smirnow was used to test the normality of the variables. All
variables were identified as non-normal (except BMI). The
Mann–Whitney test was utilized for variables with nonnormal
distribution. An independent sample T-test was utilized
for BMI. To compare the qualitative data, Chi-square
and the exact Fisher test were used. Friedman’s test was utilized
to compare each component of sleep quality at different
time periods in each group.
Results
A total of 67 participants, 32 participants in the experimental
group and 35 participants in the control group,
completed this eight-week study (Fig. 2). There were no
significant differences in the demographic characteristics
(Table 1), sleep quality (Table 2), and fatigue level
(Table 3) between the two groups at baseline. After four
and 8 weeks of aerobic exercise, the total scores for sleep
quality and its components (except for sleep duration
after 4 weeks intervention) were significantly lower than
the control group (Table 2). Aerobic exercise resulted in
a significant reduction of the total score of fatigue level
and its dimensions in weeks four and eight compared to
the control group (Table 3). The results of the Friedman
test indicated significant improvement in all components
of sleep quality and fatigue level in the treatment group
after completion of the intervention (Tables 2 and 3).
Moreover, we observed a significant increase in subjective
sleep quality, daytime dysfunction, and the global
PSQI scores in the control group over time (Table 2).
Discussion
Our results demonstrated that 8 weeks of aerobic exercise
was able to improve all sleep components, although
improvement in sleep duration was not significant after
4 weeks of intervention. It seems that increasing the intensity
of exercise from mild to moderate enhanced all
aspects of sleep quality. Also, after four and 8 weeks of
intervention, an aerobic exercise decreased the total fatigue
score and its components. Since both control and
experimental groups underwent midterm exams, the exercise
intervention was also able to positively affect the
sleep quality during the exams period. The preventive
role of exercise in this regard should also be emphasized
due to its clinical applications.
The majority of the studies show positive impact of
aerobic exercise on sleep quality in students, with one
single exception. Studies show that exercise significantly
improved sleep quality among students [23, 24]. However
in an Iranian quasi-experimental study, at least
three sessions per week for 3 months of intervention in
48 students (24 female and 24 male) had no significant
influence on sleep quality in either gender [20]. The difference
in findings can be attributed to confounding factors
(i.e., marital and employment status, household
type, intake of herbal medicine, and exercise type which
were not disclosed in the study.
The varying intensity levels of physical activity may
affect sleep quality differently. Moderate-intensity exercise
is generally defined at 65–70% of maximal heart rate
[36]. Our results revealed that increasing the intensity of
exercise from mild to moderate after 4 weeks could improve
sleep quality. According to consultation with
sports science expert, the intervention should be designed
from mild to moderate activity for participants
who did not exercise regularly. Our results revealed that
increasing the intensity of exercise from mild to moderate
after 4 weeks could improve sleep quality. Consistent
with our results, several studies report the benefits of
moderate physical activity on sleep [18, 23, 37–40]. A
systematic review also showed that moderate exercise
has promising outcomes on sleep quality [41]. Thus,
examining exercise intensity is imperative to understanding
the linkage between physical activity and sleep.
Time of day is also a critical components of exercise
[39]. In the present study, early evening exercise increased
sleep quality. Morin et al. similarly found that
physical activity early in the evening improves the quality
of sleep [42]. Results from a systematic review and
meta-analysis showed that moderate evening exercise
may have positive impact on sleep [43]. Further studies
are required to examine the effects of exercise at different
times of day on sleep quality.
Concerning the frequency of physical activity, consistent
with our results, some studies found that regular physical
activity can lead to a more efficient sleep period [44, 45].
A survey reported a positive association between increased
frequency of exercise and sleep in young adults [43]. Wu
et al. did not observe an association between physical activity
and better sleep quality [46]. In a study surveying
athletes, 1 day without physical activity had harmed subsequent
sleep [47], concluding the benefits of frequent engagement
in physical activity on sleep.
According to our findings, four and 8 weeks of aerobic
exercises also improved fatigue level and its components
in university students. De. Veris’s study revealed significant
beneficial effects of aerobic exercises on fatigue
level of university students [48]. In one study of multiple
sclerosis patients, aerobic exercises significantly reduced
fatigue level compared the control group [28]. Physical
activity in individuals with pulmonary arterial hypertension
could also reduce fatigue severity [14].
Generally, the results of various surveys show that physical
activity may decrease fatigue level and promote sleep
quality through various mechanisms. Perhaps the most
possible mechanism could be attributed to anxiety reduction
through exercise [49]. Sleep might also serve as a
down-regulation function. During the sleep period, decrease
in body temperature occurs as a normal biological
process. Given that physical activity increases body
temperature, the body seeks to regain its homeostasis and
thereby uses the same processes during the sleep period
to decrease body temperature by dilation of blood vessels
and increased blood flow to the peripheral regions of the
body [50]. This process therefore acts as a catalyst of sleep
initiation. Moreover, studies showed the anti-depressant
effects of exercise which mediated by nightly increases of
non-rapid eye movement (NREM) and decreases in REM
sleep as well as alteration of Slow-wave sleep (SWS)
through temperature elevation [49, 51]. Exercise is often
advocated for physiological health benefits and could improve
mental health by affecting fatigue level [52]. Additionally,
physical activity could impact sleep through the
cardiac system by accelerating the re- entrainment to a
shifted light–dark cycle [49].
Conclusions
Poor quality sleep and daily fatigue are prevailing among
dormitory students, especially female students. Therefore,
non-pharmacological approaches are recommended
due to their low-risk and accessibility. Aerobic exercise
activities is one of the suggested strategies. Given the
findings of the present study, performing a regular aerobic
exercise with increasing its intensity is recommended
as a practical approach to improve fatigue and
sleep quality in non-athletic students.