
Key points 
 
The average sensitivity of anterior-posterior Lodox-

Statscan for spinal injuries was 9% (1–14% depend


ing on the spinal region) with a high overall specificity > 98% 

 
The overall interrater reliability was slight (slight 

κ = 0.02); the radiology attending showed the highest 

sensitivity for detecting spinal injuries. 

 
The sensitivity of anterior-posterior Lodox-Statscan 

was higher for potentially unstable injuries (18%) 

compared to stable injuries (6%) 

Introduction 

Spinal injuries are a common finding in polytraumatized 
patients with an incidence of 18–40% [1, 2]. The early 
identification of spinal injuries is critical in the initial 
management of the trauma patient to avoid adverse 
events due to incorrect immobilization and mismanagement 
[3, 4]. According to the guidelines of the National 
Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE), spinal injuries 
are suspected if a patient has any significant distracting 
injuries, a reduced level of consciousness or is under the 
influence of drugs or alcohol, which might be associated 
with confusion or uncooperativeness. Moreover, in the 
clinical examination, a spinal injury is assumed when a 
patient suffers from any spinal pain, hand or foot weakness 
or altered sensation, priapism (unconscious or exposed 
male) or a history of past spinal problems, 
including previous spinal surgery or conditions that predispose 
to the instability of the spine [5]. If any of these 
criteria are met, the next step is radiological imaging, 
which is pivotal for the correct diagnosis and treatment 
of spinal injuries. 

In the quest for improved imaging techniques in the 
emergency room, the Lodox-Statscan (LS), initially used 
in the South African mining industry to reduce diamond 
theft, has evolved into a promising time-saving diagnostic 
tool [6]. The LS uses a linear scanning technique with 
a highly collimated (laser-like) X-ray fan beam, which 
spreads out in only one direction. On the contrary, conventional 
X-ray systems use a wide cone-beam around 
the primary photons, which causes more room scatters 
and increases overall patient radiation. The translating 
C-arm of the LS allows imaging angles between 0° (AP 
view) and 90° (lateral view). The X-ray tube, X-ray fan 
beam, collimating slit and detector all move together 
along a linear scanning path, producing images from 
100 mm/ 4in square and up to 1800 mm/70 in by 680 
mm/ 27 in compared to approximately 400 mm/ 16 in 
square by conventional X-ray systems [7]. An anterior-
posterior (AP) full-body scan by LS with minimal 

radiation dose is completed within 13 s [6], imaging in 
two planes within 3 to 5 minutes [8]. 

Especially in a setting challenged by high patient numbers 
and limited physical and human resources, the high 
speed of imaging allows a reduction in resuscitation time 
[9]. In 2007, routine LS was implemented in the modified 
Bernese Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS), replacing 
the conventional radiographs of the lateral 
cervical spine, AP-chest, and AP -pelvis [10]. A second 
plane is usually performed if there are concerns for an 
immediate CT scan such as a pregnancy or a highly unstable 
patient. While many studies have compared CT 
scans and conventional radiographs as a diagnostic tool 
[11–13], only a limited number of studies validated the 
diagnostic accuracy of the LS. These studies have reported 
a sensitivity of 49–83% and specificity of 95– 
100% for the diagnosis of spinal injuries on LS [14, 15]. 
However, in our study, we included a higher number of 
patients and also analyzed the interrater reliability. To 
our knowledge, no study has analyzed the diagnostic accuracy 
of AP-LS for spinopelvic injuries. 

The objective of the current study was to evaluate the 
AP-LS as a diagnostic tool for spinal injuries in a Level 1 
trauma center using a CT scan as the reference method. 
Therefore, we analyzed sensitivity and specificity and 
interrater reliability of AP-LS to detect spinal injuries 
specifically for cervical, thoracolumbar and spinopelvic 
injuries. 

Materials and methods 

All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant 
guidelines and regulations. General consent of patients 
was obtained. The institutional review board 
(Health and Welfare Directorate of the Canton of Bern, 
Switzerland; Cantonal Ethics committee for research, 
Project ID 2019–02142) waived the need for informed 
consent. All methods were carried out in accordance 
with relevant guidelines and regulations. All the experimental 
protocols were approved by the institutional review 
Board (Health and Welfare Directorate of the 
Canton of Bern, Switzerland; Cantonal Ethics committee 
for research, Project ID 2019–02142). 

Patients 

The study group was a consecutive series of polytraumatized 
patients admitted to our Level I trauma center. 
The inclusion criterion was solely an Injury Severity 
Score (ISS) ≥16. 

Between 02/2009 and 12/2012, 344 patients aged 16 
years and older with an ISS equal to or greater than 16 
underwent AP-LS and a full-body CT scan upon presentation 
in the emergency department. Data were retrieved 
from individual patient records and the picture archiving 
and communication system (PACS) image software 

(Sectra Workstation IDS7, Version 19.3, Sectra AB© 
Sweden). Independent variables included age, sex, 
mechanism of injury, and ISS. 

Sample size calculation 

The study will focus on a total of 335 participants. This is 
a diagnostic test accuracy study to estimate the sensitivity 
and specificity of LS in detecting fracture. Diagnostic measures 
will be estimated with 95% Wilson confidence intervals. 
We expect the prevalence of fracture to be between 
20 and 40% [1, 16], sensitivity to be between 40 and 70% 

[1] and specificity between 85 and 100% [1]. A sample of 
335 participants will result in a two-sided 95% Wilson 
confidence interval around the sensitivity and specificity 
as shown in the tables below (Supplemental material 
Table 1a Sensitivity table; Table 1b Specificity table). 
Radiographic imaging 

The AP-LS was performed by an LS (Statscan Critical 
Imaging System, Lodox Systems [Pty] Ltd., Johannesburg, 
South Africa). The LS C-arm rotates around the 
patient with an angle between 0 and 90 degrees and can 
provide an AP view within 13 s (138 mm/s) [1]. The patient 
was positioned with the upper extremities lateral to 
the body to avoid an overlay with the thorax, spine and 
pelvis. Detailed information about the LS Linear Slot 
Scanning Radiography System can be found at the companies 
online presence (http://lodox.com). 

A full-body CT scan followed the performance of an 
LS. All CT examinations were performed using a 16slice 
multidetector-row computed tomography system 
(Sensation 16, Siemens, Forchheim, Germany) with collimation 
of 16 by 1.5 mm and a reconstruction slice thickness 
of both 2 mm and 5 mm. 

The full-body CT scans of all patients were analyzed 
in terms of spinal injuries by two independent (blinded) 
investigators. All injuries were classified according to the 
AO-Classification for spinal injuries [17–19]. If the classification 
was not concordant, the two investigators 
reached a consensus. The results of the CT scans were 
used as the diagnostic reference. 

Image analysis 

The full-body CT scans of all patients were analyzed in 
terms of spinal injuries by two independent (blinded) investigators. 
These were both senior physicians: An experienced 
radiologist and an experienced spine surgeon. 
All investigators went over various planes (ap, lateral 
and sagittal planes) while evaluating the CT scans for 
spinal injuries. 

The AP-LS was assessed for signs of spinal injuries 
by three independent observers (physicians with the 
following speciality and experience: radiology attending 
with > 5 years of experience, orthopedic attending 

with > 5 years of experience, and orthopedic resident 
with < 5 years of experience). If any spinal injuries 
were visible on AP-LS, the number (some patients 
presented with multiple spinal injuries) and level(s) of the 
spinal injury were noted. The level of the injury was 
classified as cervical, thoracic, lumbar, or sacropelvic. 

Data sharing statement 

All data generated or analyzed during the study are included 
in the published paper. 

Statistical analysis 

SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 25.0, 
IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, 2017) was used to perform the 
statistical analyses. 

Diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity, specificity, negative, 
and positive predictive values) was calculated for each of 
the following levels: cervical (occipitocervical and subaxial 
combined), thoracic, lumbar spine, and sacropelvic. 
The AUC (Area under the operator receiver characteristics 
curve) was computed for the three observers, namely 
the radiology attending (RA), orthopedic resident (OR), 
and the orthopedic attending (OA). The AUC ranges 
from 0.5–1. Values of 0.9–1.0 show that the test has an 
excellent discrimination ability, whereas values of 0.8– 

0.9 demonstrate a good, 0.7–0.8 a fair, 0.6–0.7 a poor, 
and 0.5–0.6 fail discrimination ability of the test [20]. 
The sensitivity and specificity were further calculated 
for stable versus potentially unstable injuries. Stable injuries 
were defined as the following: A0-, A1-and A2type 
subaxial and thoracolumbar injuries and: A-and B-
type sacropelvic injuries. Potentially unstable injuries 
were defined as the following: A3 and A4-type as well as 
B-and C-type subaxial and thoracolumbar injuries, and 
C-type sacropelvic injuries according to AO-Spine classification 
[21]. If a patient presented with a stable and potentially 
unstable fracture, he or she was allocated as 
potentially unstable. 

Interrater reliability between the three observers was 
calculated using Fleiss’ Kappa and rated, according to 
Landis and Koch [22]. Kappa values range from − 1to+ 
1 and are interpreted as follows: < 0.00 poor, 0.00–0.20 
slight, 0.21–0.40 fair, 0.41–0.60 moderate, 0.61–0.80 
substantial, and 0.81–1.00 almost perfect interrater 
reliability. 

Results 

Patients demographics 

Three hundred forty-four consecutive patients were 
eligible for inclusion. Twenty-four patients were 
excluded due to incomplete CT scan (n = 17) or missing 
informed consent (n = 7). Three hundred twenty patients 
(332 spinal injuries; mean age: 48 ± 19 years; 
range 17–89 years; 89 women) were included. An 
le 1). 

The diagnostic accuracy of the anterior-posterior full-
body digital X-ray (Lodox Statscan) for the different levels 
of spinal injuries 

The overall sensitivity of AP-LS was 9%, with an overall 
specificity of 99%. Depending on the injury level, sensitivity 
was between 1 and 14%, specificity between 98 and 
100% (Table 2). The sensitivity was lowest for cervical 
spinal injuries (0–3%) and highest for thoracic spinal injuries 
(2–20%). The overall positive predictive value 
(PPV) was 63%, and the negative predictive value (NPV) 
was 76%. Depending on the level of injury, PPV and 
NPV ranged between 58 and 67% and 72–80%, respectively 
(Table 2). 

The overall AUC was < 0.7 (0.49–0.61), independent 
of the injury level, demonstrating a poor value of the 
AP-LS as a diagnostic instrument in the case of suspected 
spinal injuries (Table 2). 

We summarized occipitocervical and subaxial injuries 
to cervical spinal injuries because the three clinical observers 
were asked to rate cervical spine injuries. The 
AUC was lowest for cervical spinal injuries (0.51 [95% 

CI: 0.43,0.58]) and highest for thoracic (0.55 [95% CI: 
0.48,0.63] and lumbar spinal injuries (0.55 [95% CI. 0.48, 
0.63]. The RA presented the highest values of AUC (0.58 
[95% CI: 0.50,0.65], whereas the OR attained the lowest 
values (0.50 [95% CI: 0.43,0.57] (Table 2, Fig. 2). 
The sensitivity of the anterior-posterior full-body digital 
X-ray (Lodox Statscan) for stable and potentially unstable 
injuries of the spine 

The sensitivity of potentially unstable injuries was higher 
compared to stable injuries. The difference was highest 

aData are mean ± standard deviation with percentages in parentheses. bData 
are median with interquartile range in parentheses. ISS Injury Severity Score 

in potentially unstable sacropelvic injuries with a 5% 
(95% CI: 2,17) sensitivity in stable injuries versus 26% 
(95% CI: 13,45) for potentially unstable injuries. Similar 
trends were observed in the thoracic and lumbar spinal 
regions: 6% (95% CI:13,35) in stable thoracic versus 21% 
(95% CI:2,19) in potentially unstable thoracic injuries, 
and 20% (95% CI:5,20) in potentially unstable versus 
10% (95% CI:5,20) in stable lumbar spinal injuries. Since 
it is difficult to clearly assign occipitocervical injuries to 
stable or unstable, only the overall sensitivity was given 
for these types of injuries. Only one C1 ring injury of 
the upper cervical spine was correctly identified, which 
leads to low sensitivity of 1% (95% CI:0,13). In subaxial 
spinal injuries, only a slight difference of 1% (95% CI:0, 

16] in stable versus 4% (95% CI:0,30) in potentially 
unstable spinal injuries was evident (Table 3). 
Interrater reliability 

Interrater reliability was calculated for each level of 
spinal injuries. Results revealed poor interrater reliability 
for cervical spinal injuries (κ = − 0.01; 95% CI: − 0.07, 
0.06), the interrater reliability was fair for thoracic (κ = 
0.22; 95% CI: 0.15, 0.28) and slight for lumbar (κ = 0.19; 
95% CI: 0.13, 0.26) and sacropelvic spinal injuries (κ = 
0.04; 95% CI: − 0.02, 0.10). The mean interrater reliability, 
independent of the spine region, was slight (κ = 0.02; 
95% CI: 0.00, 0.03). 

Examples of a misdiagnosed and correctly identified 
injury are shown in Figs. 3 and 4. 

Discussion 

In the present study, 64% (207/320) of polytraumatized 
patients (ISS ≥ 16) presented with spinal injuries, diagnosed 
by CT scan. Our results showed a low diagnostic 
accuracy of the sole anterior-posterior LS in the detection 
of spinal injuries. The overall sensitivity of the 
anterior-posterior LS was low (1–14%) with high specificity 
(98–100%) independent of the injury level. The positive 
and negative predictive values were 58–67% and 
72–80%, respectively. ROC-curves and interrater reliability 
(of three blinded observers) displayed a low diagnostic 
value of anterior-posterior LS in the case of 
suspected spinal injuries. 

One of the biggest advantages of the LS is the time 
and dose savings compared to a CT scan and conventional 
radiography. For the LS, there is neither a need 
to undress nor to transfer the patient to another table. 
With the C-Arm running around the patient, an AP 
view of the whole body takes less than 13 s and an additional 
maximum of 15 s to create an image on the 
screen [7]. Especially in an emergency setting, there is 
an urgency of completing the full (radiological) diagnostic. 
It has been shown that the delay of the full-body 
CT scan after conventional x-rays of the chest and 

pelvis (as recommended in the ATLS-algorithm) is 
about 47 min [23]. This delay can be decreased by performing 
AP-LS imaging (the time span between AP-LS 
and a full-body CT scan is about 37 min) [15]. Besides, 
LS has a low dose of radiation because of the collimated 
x-ray fan beam. The radiation dose for an AP chest and 
AP pelvis view is 680 μSv and hence, much higher when 
compared to an AP-LS with 99.15 μSv [24]. Therefore 
LS dose is (as a percentage of conventional x-ray dose) 
72% (chest) and 2% (pelvis) [25]. 

To our knowledge, this is the first study, including 
over 300 polytraumatized patients with three blinded, 
independent examiners who assessed AP-LS for spinal 
injuries. Other studies assessing the accuracy of (AP-)LS 
compared to CT scans included between 184 and 245 
polytraumatized patients [1, 15, 26]. All studies compared 
LS with CT scanning, to determine the sensitivity 

[1] and diagnostic accuracy [15, 26] of LS investigation 
in detecting injuries to the chest, thoracolumbar spine, 
and pelvis. In addition, a recent study by Yang et al. 
evaluated the available evidence for the clinical effectiveness 
and biohazard safety of the LS in acute medical 
emergencies [14]. The assessments of the included studies 
were mainly done by AP-LS, out of these studies only 
one stated, that in total 8 patients received an additional 
lateral view. In comparison to these studies, our results 
revealed a lower overall sensitivity of AP-LS of 9% compared 
to 70% [14, 26], 59% [1, 14], and 49% [15]. However, 
a similarly high specificity, compared to our 
results, of 98–100% was found [14, 15]. Additionally, the 
same tendencies with the lowest sensitivity for cervical 
(1% compared to 57% [26]) and higher for thoracolumbar 
spinal injuries (13% compared to 74–83% [1, 26]) 
were reported. We did not find previous results for 
sacropelvic injuries. This wide range of diagnostic accuracy 
was addressed before. In the review of Yang et al. 
[14], they stated on a notable risk of bias of the individual 
studies evaluating the LS diagnostic capability. 
However, two other studies have examined the accuracy 
of injury detection (not spine specific) by clinicians 
using AP-LS, reporting an overall fracture-site 
dependent sensitivity of 89% [15, 27]. However, these 
studies did not assess the interrater reliability [15]or 
did not have a CT scan of all patients [27]. In our 
study, we choose two orthopedic surgeons and one 
radiologist for the evaluation of spinal injuries. In our 
institution, it is standard that a radiologist prepares a 
written report and an orthopedic assistant doctor 
(resident), together with an experienced orthopedic 
spinal surgeon, evaluates all images as a basis for the 
indication for treatment. The experienced attendings 
from both radiology and orthopedics showed a higher 
sensitivity compared to the orthopedic resident. Our 
findings are consistent with the results of Holdt et al. 

Table 3 Sensitivity of AP-LS for the detection of spinal injuries. 
Injuries were classified as stable (subaxial and thoracolumbar: 
A0-, A1-and A2-type injuries; sacropelvic: A-and B-type 
injuries) and potentially unstable spinal injuries (subaxial and 
thoracolumbar: A3 and A4-type injuries, B-and C-type injuries; 
sacropelvic: C-type injuries) according to AO-Spine classification 
[21]. Since it is difficult to clearly assign occipitocervical injuries 
to stable or unstable, only the overall sensitivity was given for 
these types of injuries 

Table 3 Sensitivity of AP-LS for the detection of spinal injuries. 
Injuries were classified as stable (subaxial and thoracolumbar: 
A0-, A1-and A2-type injuries; sacropelvic: A-and B-type 
injuries) and potentially unstable spinal injuries (subaxial and 
thoracolumbar: A3 and A4-type injuries, B-and C-type injuries; 
sacropelvic: C-type injuries) according to AO-Spine classification 
[21]. Since it is difficult to clearly assign occipitocervical injuries 
to stable or unstable, only the overall sensitivity was given for 
these types of injuries (Continued) 

Data in parentheses are numerators and denominators with 95% confidence 
intervals in brackets 

[27]. They showed for peripheral skeletal injuries that 
the diagnostic accuracy of LS highly depends on the 
expertise of the evaluating clinician as well as the 
clinical suspicion and trauma mechanism [27]. 

The current study demonstrated higher sensitivity for 
potentially unstable compared to stable spinal injuries, 
with the identification of potentially unstable spinal injuries 
being of high clinical relevance. Nevertheless, a 
fair amount of potentially unstable injuries of the thoracolumbar 
spine could not be detected by the AP-LS 
(Fig. 3). Similar results were reported by Deyle et al. with 
a distinctive proportion of unstable thoracic spine injuries 
(76%) that required stabilization [1]. Moreover, the 
diagnostic accuracy was lowest for the cervical spine, including 
the occipitocervical spine (C0/C1 and C1/C2). 
The sub-analyses showed that only one of 41 injuries of 
the upper cervical spine was correctly identified. Even in 
non-polytraumatized patients, cervical spine injuries can 
be difficult to diagnose on plain radiographs [28]. Often, 
special x-rays, especially for the occipitocervical spinal 
region (e.g. transoral), are needed to rule out bony injuries 
or injuries to the atlanto-dental and -occipital ligaments. 
The majority of injuries to the cervical spine are 
discogenic and/or ligamentous injuries, which can usually 
need loaded (flexion/extension) x-rays to be diagnosed. 
Overall, another possible explanation could be 
the higher overlying of bones and organs in combination 
with artifacts from, e.g., a stiff neck or clothes, especially 
at the cervical spine (Fig. 3). 

The main strength of our study was the high number 
of polytraumatized patients with suspected spinal injuries. 
Another strength was the number of observers, who 
are of different specialties and training levels (radiology 
attending, orthopedic attending and orthopedic resident), 
as well as blind to the clinical information. In the 
study of Deyle et al., the preliminary diagnosis was made 
by a physician, followed by a definitive diagnosis by a 



radiologist [1]. In the study by Jöres et al., all AP-LS 
were examined by two radiologists [15], whereas Chen 
et al. did not describe the number and specialty of the 
observer. One other study with two musculoskeletal radiologists 
focused on the diagnostic of the pelvis and appendicular 
skeleton, but not on spinal injuries [29]. 
Besides, we provided the first data on the diagnostic accuracy 
of AP-LS on sacropelvic injuries. 

The main limitation of our study is the missing lateral 
LS plane. The sensitivity for the detection of spinal injuries 
might be higher, especially for A-or B-type injuries. 
Because lateral planes are not included in our 
standard clinical protocol, this plane is missing in most 
patients. Therefore, we could not implement this data 
into our analysis. Other limitations of the study are, that 
we did not evaluate the patients’ clinical outcomes as 
well as the cost-effectiveness. 

Conclusion 

This study demonstrated a high specificity but low overall 
sensitivity and diagnostic accuracy of the sole 
anterior-posterior LS in the detection of cervical, thoracic, 
lumbar, or sacropelvic spinal injuries. In the polytraumatized 
patient, anterior-posterior LS imaging 
within the Advanced Trauma Life Support-algorithm is 
a helpful tool to diagnose life-threatening injuries, especially 
in the detection of chest and extremity injuries 
and in a setting challenged by high patient numbers 
[10]. However, if spinal injuries are suspected, performing 
a full-body CT scan is mandatory for a correct 
diagnosis. 
