The diagnosis of pancreatitis in the emergency department
has been increasing in the pediatric population
over the last 15 years but the etiology of this is uncertain
[1–10]. It is possibly due to increase in rates of childhood
obesity and subsequent increase in biliary tract disease
[9, 11–14]. Studies have shown that biliary disease
is usually the most common comorbidity associated with
pediatric pancreatitis [2, 15–17]. However, these studies
include a wide age range including both young children
and adolescents. Another theory about the cause of increased
childhood pancreatitis is a heightened awareness
of pancreatitis among clinicians and increase in widespread
access to lipase testing [1, 6, 7, 9]. There are few
studies that focus primarily on younger patients and
describe the etiology, risk factors and outcome of these
patients, and no studies that look specifically at preadolescent
children in the emergency department [18].
Traditionally, testing for pancreatitis in children has
never been a routine occurrence since pancreatitis was
rare in this population. However, with the reported
increase in incidence, the larger questions are who needs
to be screened for pancreatitis and if the disease has the
same associations, course and recurrences as in adults.
While adolescents are more comparable to young adults
physiologically and likely have many similar risk factors
for pancreatitis such as biliary disease, there is very little
information on the risk factors, disease presentation, severity
and recurrence in the pre-adolescent population.
Our objective was to determine the characteristics of
this patient population in order to illuminate this population
and disease. With a better description of these
children, emergency physicians may be better able to
identify them and avoid a delay in diagnosis, which
would improve quality of care.
Methods
We performed a retrospective study of all consecutive
pediatric patients under the age of 13 years between
2006 and 2016 who presented to the pediatric emergency
department with a final diagnosis of pancreatitis.
Our pediatric emergency department at Loma Linda
University Medical Center is a tertiary referral center
with approximately 30,000 ED visits per year and is the
only children’s hospital serving San Bernardino and
Riverside counties in Southern California with > 1 million
children. An ICD code of acute, recurrent or chronic
pancreatitis and age less than 13 years were used to query
the medical records database. Children transferred from
an outside facility were included. Exclusion criteria included
patients 13 years of age or greater, patients with
traumatic pancreatitis, and patients with a diagnosis of
acute pancreatitis(AP) but without evidence of at least 2
of the following: 1) abdominal pain compatible with AP
(abdominal pain of acute onset, especially in the epigastric
region), 2) serum amylase and/or lipase ≥3 times upper
limits of normal (reference ranges: amylase 20-90 U/L,
lipase 10-45 U/L), 3) imaging findings consistent with AP
[1]. Charts of patients with a previous history of pancreatitis
but currently admitted for an unrelated problem and
with no other signs or symptoms of concurrent pancreatitis
were also excluded.
Using a standardized data collection form and trained
data collectors not blinded to the study objective, the
following data points were collected: gender, height,
weight, ethnicity, past medical history, medications, and
whether or not the patient had a family history of pancreatitis.
The following test results were collected: aspartate
aminotransferase(AST) level, lipase level, amylase level,
total bilirubin level, triglyceride level, ultrasound(US)
results, computed tomography(CT) results, endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography(ERCP) results, and
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography(MRCP) results.
Finally, the stated etiology of pancreatitis, whether
the episode was acute, chronic, or recurrent, and the number
of previous pancreatitis episodes were obtained.
We planned to develop etiologic categories starting
with cholelithiasis, triglycerides, and medications. Other
categories were determined in a post hoc manner. We
assumed that alcohol would not be a significant etiology
in this age group due to previous research showing that
alcohol use disorder is nonexistent to extremely rare in
the preadolescent age range, use of alcohol among
children has declined significantly over the last 10 years,
and that alcohol has been found to be nearly negligible
as an etiology for pediatric pancreatitis [19–25]. Patients
with traumatic pancreatitis were identified and excluded
as this group has been studied extensively.
Descriptive statistics were used. Detailed descriptions
of patients with no known risk factors who were found
to have pancreatitis were to be determined. This study
was approved by our institutional review board.
Results
During the 10 year period from 2006 to 2016, we identified
153 visits to the emergency department for children
less than 13 years with a final diagnosis of pancreatitis.
There were 14 patients diagnosed as having traumatic
pancreatitis and these were excluded, leaving 139 patients
with nontraumatic pancreatitis.
Of the 139 visits, 85 visits were children with a first
episode of acute pancreatitis, and 54 were visits for recurrent
pancreatitis. The median age for all visits was 8 years
(IQ range 5–11). The median age for acute pancreatitis
visits was 8 years (IQ range 4–11). Thirty patients had
identified recurrences. The median time from the first
acute episode to a first recurrence was 6.3 months (IQ
range 2.5–12months). The median time to any recurrent
episode after a previous episode was 6 months (IQ range
3–12 months). Of patients with acute pancreatitis, 35 patients
(41%) were male and 50 (59%) were female, and the
median lipase level was 881 U/L (IQ range 398–1688). Of
the patients with recurrent pancreatitis, 23 patients (43%)
were male and 31 (57%) were female, and the median
lipase level was 1091 U/L (IQ range 358–2130).
Of the acute pancreatitis visits and their etiologies, we
identified seven broad categories in a combination of
presumed grouping and post hoc analysis: Cholelithiasis
related, Medication induced, Hypertriglyceridemia, Autoimmune
or Systemic related, Genetic or Structural, Postsurgical,
and Uncertain etiology.
Twenty two (26%) of the acute cases were patients
with uncertain/undetermined etiologies of which 13
(15%) were listed as idiopathic and 9 (11%) were possibly
infectious (Table 1). One patient in the idiopathic group
had one identified recurrence.
Seventeen (20%) of acute pancreatitis patients had
concurrent or postulated contributing systemic illnesses
including acute and chronic inflammatory and autoimmune
diseases (Table 1). The only diseases with more
than one patient were those with diabetes type one with
DKA, Kawasaki’s disease, and Celiac disease. The only
identified recurrence was one patient with possible Celiac
disease who had two recurrences during the study period.
Sixteen (19%) of acute pancreatitis cases were
medication-induced or medication-associated with the
most common being valproic acid and chemotherapy.
One patient who was on the chemotherapy pegaspargase
had an identified recurrence. (Table 1).
Cholelithasis-related etiologies included 14 (16%) of the
acute cases with 11 of these having no known history of
gallstones. Of the patients with no history of gallstones,
nine of the eleven were overweight or obese. Four patients
in this group had identified recurrences. (Table 1).
13 (15%) of the patients were found to have a genetic,
congenital or structural abnormality included five patients
with congenital choledochal cysts, three patients
with propionic acidemia, two patients with hereditary
pancreatitis, one patient with Hennekam syndrome on
TPN, one patient with Caroli disease, and one patient
with a possible pancreatic/ampulla duct stricture (Table
1). Five of the 13 patients in this group had identified recurrences
during the study period
There were three cases of post-operative pancreatitis after
appendectomy, spinal fusion surgery and ERCP, respectively.
The patient with spinal fusion had two identified recurrences.
No patients had hypertriglyceridemia during the study
period.
There were 54 visits for recurrent pancreatitis of which
20 patients had one episode each of recurrent pancreatitis;
six patients each had two episodes of recurrent pancreatitis;
one patient had three recurrences; one patient had
five recurrences; two patients each had seven recurrences.
Of the 30 patients with recurrent pancreatitis, 16 were
found to have underlying genetic etiologies or structural
risk factors including 11 patients with genetic variations,
one patient treated for autoimmune pancreatitis, one patient
with Caroli disease, one patient with Hennakam
syndrome, one patient with Celiac disease, and one patient
with a pancreatic duct stricture. Four patients of
those with recurrent pancreatitis were diagnosed with
chronic pancreatitis, three of which were found to have
genetic mutations associated with pancreatitis: one with
an HT1–12 gene defect and two with a PRSSI mutation.
All patients had pancreatitis determined by an elevated
lipase or amylase level and symptoms of pancreatitis
except for six patients, who were included in our analysis.
Of the six patients, two were diagnosed with chronic
pancreatitis and treated for their episodes despite normal
lipase levels and no imaging findings of acute pancreatitis;
three patients were diagnosed with recurrent acute
pancreatitis based on imaging: one with an US showing an
echogenic pancreas, one with a CT showing a pseudocyst,
and one with an US and CT showing a thinned pancreas
and infected pancreatic pseudocyst. The last patient had a
known choledochal cyst and was admitted for surgical
correction after developing abdominal pain without lipase
elevation. Any patients with elevated lipase but without
pain or imaging consistent with AP would have been excluded,
but there were no patients found in this category.
Regarding location of diagnosis, of the 85 patients with
acute pancreatitis, 26 patients (31%) were first seen and diagnosed
at an outside community hospital and transferred
to the ED, two (2.4%) patients had pancreatitis diagnosed
by labs through a primary care physician, two (2.4%) patients
were diagnosed by labs at an urgent care, and one
(1.2%) patient was diagnosed by labs at an oncology clinic.
All other patients were seen first and diagnosed in the
pediatric emergency department. Of the 54 patients with
recurrent pancreatitis, eight (15%) patients were diagnosed
at outside community hospitals, five (9%) patients were diagnosed
by labs through a primary care physician, and
three (5.5%) patients were diagnosed by labs at an urgent
care. The remaining 38 patients were seen and diagnosed
first in the pediatric emergency department.
Discussion
We identified medications, treatments, and certain medical
and genetic conditions associated with acute pancreatitis.
These included valproic acid, chemotherapy, Celiac disease,
choledochal cysts, proprionic acidemia, and cholelithiasis.
We were surprised by how many patients were identified
as having an unknown or suspected autoimmune/systemic
etiology, with these two groups comprising nearly half the
cases of acute pancreatitis. However in our study it was extremely
rare for any of these patients to have an identified
recurrence. Other studies of pediatric pancreatitis showed
similar significant proportion of idiopathic cases [26–33].
And while we anticipated that hypertriglyceridemia would
be uncommon, it was surprising that none of the patients
had elevated triglyceride levels. However, this does correlate
with the infrequency of pediatric pancreatitis caused by
hypertriglyceridemia in the literature [34]. As suspected,
alcohol induced pancreatitis was not determined to be an
etiology for pancreatitis in this group. Cholelithiasis
remained a significant risk factor for acute and recurrent
pancreatitis, but as theorized, represented a much smaller
proportion of cases than in adults.
Genetic and structural defects represented a significant
percentage of patients with recurrent and chronic pancreatitis.
This high frequency is similar to that seen in
other studies of pediatric pancreatitis [19, 27, 33, 35].
This highlights the importance of pursuing an investigation
for an underlying genetic or structural etiology,
especially in those presenting with a recurrent episode of
pancreatitis or evidence of chronic pancreatitis.
Limitations to this study were that being retrospective,
some data was incomplete or missing, and while most patients
did not have any recurrent episodes, it is unknown if
they did have a recurrence but were seen at another
institution. While the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is
generally straightforward given the widespread use of
lipase, it is often more difficult to determine the exact
etiology of pancreatitis. Some of the patients with the
etiology listed as unknown or uncertain had risk factors
such as cholelithiasis or family history that were
not listed as the etiology.
Many of the patients presented to surrounding nonpediatric
emergency departments and may have had a
lipase ordered due to routine abdominal pain lab protocols
that are more common in adults. When evaluating
the presenting signs, symptoms and chief complaint,
there were a group of patients who may have been diagnosed
only because of this. Since labs are less routinely
required or ordered in children than in adults presenting
with abdominal pain, it is possible we may be missing
pancreatitis in children without known risk factors.
However, since the vast majority of children without risk
factors had no known recurrences, the importance of
diagnosing these episodes is uncertain.
This paper from one regional pediatric facility supports
the suspicion that pre-adolescent pancreatitis has a much
different distribution of etiologies than in adults. There
were many more patients with systemic disease-related
pancreatitis, genetic factors, and medication-related cases.
While cholelithiasis was still an important risk factor, it
comprised only 16% of acute cases as compared to 29–
40% in adults [29, 36]. Another way that pediatric pancreatitis
may differ from adult pancreatitis is in recurrence
rate. Amongst patients with acute pancreatitis in our
study, just 15% of these patients had identified recurrences
while the rate of recurrence in adults has been described
between 20 and 30% [37, 38].
Conclusions
The etiology of pancreatitis in pre-adolescent children has a
different distribution than in adolescents and adults, with
cholelithiasis much less frequent. Certain genetic and structural
biliary or pancreatic factors represent a larger proportion
of cases in children and a much higher proportion of
recurrent pancreatitis. Concurrent autoimmune, systemic
disease or viral illness contributing to pancreatitis is also
more common than in adults. Patients on pancreatitiscausing
medications or with known genetic or structural
pancreatic issues should be tested for pancreatitis if presenting
with concerning symptoms. Likewise, patients with
recurrent pancreatitis should be evaluated for genetic
etiologies or structural defects. Patients without pancreatitis
risk factors rarely developed recurrent pancreatitis.
Hypertriglyceridemia was not found to be an etiology in
this study. Chronic pancreatitis with evidence of pancreatic
exocrine insufficiency was uncommon.