Poor communication during patient handover is recognised
internationally as a root cause of a significant proportion
of preventable deaths [1] and as such is named
as one the of the top five World Health Organisation
improvement priorities [2]. Despite the introduction of a
number of recommended strategies to reduce this harm,
the handover phase of care continues to impact negatively
on patient outcome [3–6]. It is widely accepted
that handover of patients in any clinical setting carries
significant risk [7]. However, handover of critically ill or
injured patients from the pre-hospital to Emergency
Department (ED) team carries additional risk due to the
time critical nature of the process and multiple human
factors involved in dealing with stressful clinical events
[5, 8]. Such knowledge has led to calls for further, more
rigorous research into handover, and to develop solutions
to support handover in diverse environments [5, 9, 10].
Despite the limited evidence on pre-hospital to ED
handover practice, a number of pragmatic options,
informed by theory, have been recommended. These
include for example, the development of shared mental
models, standardisation of approach (an agreed handover
system and format/mnemonic) applied at the interface
between professional domains, and the introduction of
technology to support and enhance the process [5, 7, 11].
But unfortunately, cultivating a movement towards a
shared mental model has remained a challenge with
evidence of considerable inconsistencies in mnemonic
usage and preference both nationally and internationally
[12–15]. Beyond these higher level, theoretically informed
systems and processes, there are other more fundamental
and pragmatic challenges to consider and address.
Recording clinical data used during handover accurately
and with ease is incredibly challenging during the
delivery of prehospital care. These data are the cornerstone
of clinical handover, independently or aggregated,
they provide an immediate clinical impression of the
patient’s condition [16, 17]. Excluding some of these
essential variables during pre-alert or handover may
delay subsequent life-saving interventions [18, 19]. The
importance of developing tools to support the recording
and handover of these data is established in the study by
Bhabra et al. [20] who identified only 33% of data is
retained on first handover when relying on memory
alone, but where a standardized, printed form was used,
99% of information was retained. Rightly, therefore,
attention has recently been directed towards the use of
technology in supporting both data capture and handover
with the development of natural language generation software
[21, 22] and in exploring ambulance clinicians use of
electronic patient report forms [23]. Hardware placed in
ambulances to support the recording of clinical data used
during handover is often in tablet form. However, this
technology is not always carried by ambulance clinicians
to the patient’s side, particularly in those incidents that are
time-critical. Consequently, data is often retrospectively
entered, post-handover. And whilst technology continues
to advance in this area, more rapid and accessible
methods are required now to support the recording of
essential clinical data in the high acuity patient.
Pragmatic workarounds have been developed by
ambulance clinicians and currently it is not uncommon
for clinical data to be recorded on the back of a gloved
hand or on scrap paper [21, 24, 25]. However, there are
potential infection control risks with the former and
neither practice necessarily comply with data protection
legislation. Additionally, data recorded will be variable
and with heavy contamination of gloves being a particular
problem in these environments, glove changes can be
frequent [26]. As such, both gloves or paper will be
easily discarded or lost.
There currently exists a paucity of evidence, and therefore
understanding and knowledge, on how ambulance
clinicians can best record and deliver information essential
for handover. There is therefore an immediate need to
investigate and develop more pragmatic and low-tech
solutions to record information that supports information
exchange between ambulance clinicians and ED staff.
Methods
This project aimed to measure the feasibility and acceptability
of a novel intervention designed to support clinical
information recording and delivery during pre-alert
and handover within the pre-hospital and ED setting.
Design and setting
A simple pre and post-test design was used with a historical
control. The Scottish Ambulance Service (SAS) is a
national service covering 30,420 sqm, serving a population
of 5.4 million [27] and responding to around 650,000 emergency
calls per annum [28]. The service is primarily set
within an Anglo-American model of care [29] whereby
road based Paramedics and Emergency Medical Technicians
(EMT) deliver the majority of care. At the time of study the
service operated within 5 geographical Divisions (North,
East, South, West and West Central). The study was undertaken
in West Central Division, which covers the most
densely populated areas in the West of Scotland. Our intervention
hospital and ambulance station were therefore
located in a busy urban setting in the centre of Glasgow;
population 606,000. During the 3 month study period
(February to April 2017) the ED received 22,913 patients
[30], with Ambulance Clinicians at the intervention station
responding to circa 5339 emergency calls during the same
time period [31].
Participants
Eligible participants included all ambulance clinicians
(n = 69) based at one city centre Ambulance Station
and all nursing and physician staff (n = 99) based in
the ED of a large city hospital in Glasgow. The
ambulance station selected was the largest in Glasgow
and, as such, provided a broad demographic pool of
clinicians; clinical grade EMT’s 45% [n = 31] vs.
Paramedic 55% [n = 38]) and clinical experience (service
in years range from 1 to 40). Due to organisational time
pressures we intentionally kept to a minimum the data requested
from ED staff and so only demographic data on
job title was sought (Nurse/Physician). All ED participants
were invited to complete the respective pre and post-test
questionnaires.
Intervention design
The intervention design was informed by the collective results
of two unpublished studies i) a survey investigating
handover in the pre-hospital domain and ii) a pre-test
survey of handover practices of local ambulance clinicians
(n = 23/69; 33%). A study stakeholder group was formed to
synthesize the results of both along with published evidence
and particularly within the context of existing challenges
affecting key points in the handover process: pre-handover,
arrival, handover and post-handover [7]. A specific focus
was retained on the technical aspects of information
recording in both the prehospital and in-hospital settings.
The stakeholder group consisted of front line ambulance
clinicians (n = 6), an Emergency Medicine physician and
ED registrar, senior paramedic managers (n = 4), an applied
health service researcher and a Union representative.
Infection Control and Data Protection Leads from the SAS
ensured compliance with existing legislation and authorised
the final prototype used in testing.
A graphic design expert designed the card based on the
stakeholder group’s requirements. The prototype intervention
consisted of a double-sided A6 card in high contrast
colour with pre-alert and handover clinical information
requirements on opposing sides. Corresponding boxes for
clinical variables were available for writing in with a
marker pen. Included variables and final mnemonic choice
were based on the synthesized data and a compromise on
both the needs of the ambulance clinicians and ED staff.
The variables included were known prognostic indicators
(individually or collectively) for degrees of severity in
injury and illness [32, 33].
The intervention was piloted in a simulated setting
with prehospital critical care practitioners and physicians
prior to being finalised. The simulation led to a change
in physical format from a card encased in a sealable
plastic cover to a stand-alone, high density plastic card
(Additional file 1). A number of pens were tested and a
type selected that ensured rapid dry and non-smudge
properties. To support the concept of a shared mental
model, an A4 ‘ambulance form’ (AF) was developed for
use within the ED (Additional file 2). This consisted of a
pre-printed A4 sheet placed next to the ambulance radio
located within the ED; this is the radio system that
receives pre-alert calls from ambulance clinicians who
are bringing in critically ill patients. The AF content
duplicated the information provided on the ambulance
pre-alert and handover card.
Intervention procedure
Ambulance clinicians (n = 69) at the participating station
were each issued a personal issue pre - alert and handover
card (PAHC) with pens. An instruction notice was placed
at various strategic locations around the ambulance
station. Cards were to be used in time-critical cases with
both the pre-alert and handover sections to be completed
contemporaneously with assessment at appropriate times
during care. During pre-alert and handover clinical information
would be delivered in the sequence provided on
the PAHC. For data protection purposes recording of date
of birth and surname was not permitted. Post incident,
these data were transferred onto the electronic patient
report form in the ambulance as per usual practice. In
accordance with infection control procedures the cards were
cleaned using Tuffie© wipes and dried with a paper towel.
Within the ED, those receiving the ambulance
pre-alert were instructed to record all clinical information
provided via the radio call in the respective boxes
on the AF. On arrival within the ED ambulance clinicians
then verbally delivered the clinical information in
the sequence provided on PAHC. Receiving staff would
record this handover information in the respective sections
on their AF.
Data collection tools
Pre-test measures
Subjective During February 2016 opinions of ED staff
on ambulance clinician handover were measured via a
short online survey (Additional file 3). In the absence of
rigorously validated and accepted measures of perceptions
of pre-alert and handover quality in the ED, the
survey development was informed through key elements
of handover identified in the study by Ledema et al. [3]
along with the clinical experiences of study investigators.
Due to the significant pressures of the ED environment,
the survey was deliberately designed to be short and succinct
and thus reduce time required for completion. Five
domains of handover were measured using a five point
Likert scale (1- Always to 5 – Never). The domains measured
were: i) Structure ii) standardised iii) Focus iv) repetition
avoidance and v) interruption avoidance. Potential
participants (n = 99) received an e-mail containing a link
to the online survey along with information on the project.
Consent was presumed by completion of the questionnaire.
These data formed the historic control.
Objective Base-line data on pre-alert and handover were
extracted from the month preceding the intervention
introduction (January 2017) using the paper-based
AF which had already been introduced for use by ED
staff. Key clinical data were recorded on these sheets
during the pre-alert and handover. Ambulance Clinicians
in the intervention station were not made aware of
the study prior to its commencement.
Post-test measures
Subjective Following the 3 month intervention test
period (February – April 2017) questionnaires were sent
to both ED and Ambulance Clinicians during May 2017.
Ambulance clinicians were sent a paper-based questionnaire
(Additional file 4), while ED staff were invited
again, via e-mail, to complete the online questionnaire
(Additional file 3). The different questionnaire formats
reflected the operational environments for each clinical
group and were designed to improve response rates.
Ambulance Clinicians are established as hard to reach
populations in questionnaire based research and traditionally
deliver low response rates [34–36]. The decision to use
paper-based surveys for ambulance clinicians was informed
by the predictable difficulties experienced with a highly mobile
workforce, their inability to access computers and past
studies undertaken in similar settings [37, 38] that used evidence
informed methods [39, 40] which had previously provided
improved response rates. The questionnaire for
ambulance clinicians focused on measuring the feasibility
and acceptability of the prompt card. Questions consisted of
Likert scales and dichotomised yes/no responses. ED staff
repeated the same questions used in the pre-test questionnaire.
This permitted comparisons between the pre-test (historical
control) and post-test measures.
Prior to distribution, questionnaires were assessed for
ease of completion and comprehension. This led to a small
number of changes in wording to aid comprehension.
Again participants were provided with a cover letter and information
sheet with consent presumed by completion of
the questionnaire. For ambulance clinician participants
pens were provided in the invitation envelops and a cardboard
‘post box’ located in the ambulance station mess
room to facilitate ease of completion and submission.
Objective Ambulance Forms were routinely completed
by ED Nurses during handover and collected by receptionists
thereafter. These forms were divided into i) a
pre-alert information section and ii) a handover information
section and included the same variables as were
presented in the ambulance clinician’s pre-alert and
handover cards. Frequency counts were used to measure
clinical variables recorded during both the pre-alert and
handovers provided by ambulance clinicians. These data
permitted pre and post-test data comparisons to be made
on the interventions impact.
Analysis
Data were recorded on Microsoft Excel 2010 prior to
conversion to Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
(SPSS) (v.21). Descriptive statistics were used to present
the results of the questionnaire. Chi Square tests were
used to compare the frequency counts between the
hospital pre-alert pre and post-test objective data. Mann
Whitney U analysis was used to compare the median
ratings of the pre and post-test measures on opinions of
handover quality.
Results
Ambulance participants
A four week intervention run-in period from 1st to 28th
February was permitted to enable ambulance clinicians
and ED staff to familiarise with the intervention. During
the 3 month study period ambulance clinicians at the
intervention station responded to 5339 call and conveyed
1938 (30%) of these patients to the participating
ED. There were approximately 160 (20/week) pre-alerts
made to the ED during this time period. Thirty six
percent of ambulance clinicians (n = 25) completed the
post-test questionnaire; paramedics 70.8% (n = 18) vs
Technicians 29.2% (n = 7). The median length of service
in years was 16 (IQR 8–30).
Acceptability and perceived utility of intervention
Ninety six percent (n = 24) of participants reported receiving
the intervention. Most felt both the pre-alert and
handover components of the card were ‘useful’ to ‘very
useful’ (92%; n = 23 for pre-alert and 72%; n = 18)
for handover). In measuring the utility of the intervention,
questions focused on the use of the card, its legibility,
format and pen performance. Over three quarters of
responders (76%; n = 19) reported using the card to record
clinical information and almost all (92%; n = 23) felt
it ‘useful’ to ‘very useful’ in supporting pre-alert. A small
proportion 16% (n = 4) reported recording information
on back of gloved hand and 8% (n = 2) still relying on
memory. Almost two thirds of participants (65%; n = 16)
stated they ‘often’ or ‘always’ used the card for handover.
The pen was perceived to perform well with 60% rating
it either ‘good’ (12%; n = 3) or ‘very good’ (48%; n = 12).
However, a small proportion (12%; n = 3) rated the pen as
either ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’. Perceptions on the cards
legibility in both bright or poor lighting were also sought.
Sixty four percent (n = 16) rated it as ‘easy’ (24%; n = 6) or
‘very easy’ (40%; n = 10) to read in bright lighting and 56%
(n = 16) ‘easy’ (24%; n = 6) or ‘very easy’ (32%; n = 8) to
read in poor lighting. Forty percent (n = 10) were neutral
in their response.
Emergency department participants
Thirty seven percent (n = 37/99) of ED Staff responded
to the pre-test questionnaire; Doctors 63.2% (n = 24) and
Nurses 36.8% (n = 13). Slightly less responded to the
post-test questionnaire; 29% (n = 29/99); Doctors 48% (n
= 14) and Nurses 52% (n = 15).
Perceptions of handover quality
ED staff (Nurses and Physicians) were asked to rate their
experiences of different aspects of Ambulance Clinician
handover (as per ‘domains’ outlined in methods section
previously). The overall responses in the pre-test survey
were relatively neutral but clearly demonstrated a requirement
for improvement in each of the handover domains
measured. Results from the post-test survey
demonstrated small but statistically significant improvements
in perceptions of handover in 3/5 domains measured
(Table 1).
Objective measure of pre-alert information
Ambulance pre-alert forms were routinely used within
the ED throughout both the pre-and post-test stages of
the study. To provide an indication of any change in
handover clinical information provision data were taken
from three time points i) the month leading up to the
intervention introduction, ii) the end of week 5 (after
the 4 week bedding in period) and iii) at week 8. Figure 1
demonstrates the trend in variables provided during
pre-alert starting at beginning of week 5 of intervention
period. Frequency counts and proportions of the variables
recorded during pre-alert are presented in Table 2.
There was a statistically significant improvement in the
delivery of 2/7 (29%) clinical variables during pre-alert.
However, non-significant improvements were apparent
in the remaining five other clinical variables. Small,
non-significant reductions, were also noted in three
other variables. Overall demonstrable improvements
were identified in 8/12 (67%) variables.
Analysis of the handover section of the ambulance
forms within the ED proved problematic. Of the forms
that were collected only 32/57 (56%) had at least one of
the data fields completed. Only 10.5% (n = 6) were fully
completed and as a result comparisons with pre-test
data were not undertaken. And so, whilst the results
suggest a perceived improvement in the quality of handover
this could not be measured more objectively as had
originally been planned.
Discussion
We aimed to test the feasibility and acceptability of a
novel low tech intervention to support the prehospital
recording and delivery of clinical information for use by
ambulance clinicians during pre-alert and handover. Our
measures focused on ambulance clinician’s perceptions
of the intervention and both subjective and objective elements
of the pre-alert and handover process from the
ED clinician’s perspectives. We also sought to determine
whether the data collection tools developed for this
study would be sufficient in providing useful measures
of improvement in a larger trial.
Acceptability of the intervention
Our study has determined that, overall, Ambulance Clinician
participants felt the intervention was useful to very
useful, using it to both record and support the delivery
of clinical information in the majority of pre-alert and
handovers. The perceptions of participating ED staff on
handover quality were also positive with significant improvements
in 3 out of 5 handover domains measured
and small, non-significant improvements in the
remaining 2 domains. During pre-alert, despite statistically
significant improvements in the provision/recording
of only n = 2 (29%) clinical variables, overall, positive
trends were identified in n = 8 (67%) variables. Had we
extended final measures beyond the 12 weeks, permitting
more familiarity with the intervention and embedding
in clinical practice, these figures may have
continued to improve.
Feasibility of the introduction of the low-tech
intervention
Our intervention was designed to be intuitive, practical
and one that, with minor modification, would seamlessly
replace existing clinical data recording practices when
managing high acuity patients. As such we decided that
no formal education would be provided to ambulance
clinicians to support the interventions introduction (with
the exception of station notices). There were possible
risks associated with this approach however. Educational
practices within the host ambulance service frequently
consist of clinical bulletins posted in station boards or
distributed via e-mail and intranet. The efficacy of this
educational format has not been formally measured in
this setting, however some research has established that
similar ‘online’ forms of education for ambulance clinicians
does not necessarily improve adherence to guidance
[24]. Additionally, other studies strongly advocate
education and training in handover ([25, 41]. The finding
that this deliberately pragmatic and considered approach
was well accepted by participating clinicians, and that so
many ambulance clinicians reported using the intervention
for its intended purpose were therefore welcome.
This also may suggest that this intuitive intervention could
be introduced on a larger scale in future trials with little
requirements for formal education.
Initial assessment of the interventions ability to share
clinical data
Although this study was not designed or powered to address
the question of intervention efficacy, we accessed the data
recorded on the AF’s within the ED to identify trends. Previous
work using similar measures [42] determined that an
average 50% of clinical variables were received from ambulance
clinicians during handover, but that only 72.9% of the
information received was documented by ED staff. Although
we only report on pre-alert rather than handover data, our
pre-intervention average for vital signs provided/recorded
was 47.6%, slightly lower than those reported by Carter et al.
[42]. However, post intervention, our proportion of clinical
variables provided/recorded improved to an average
of 69.4%; a 46% increase and proportionately higher than in
the study by Carter et al. [42]. Although we were unable to
objectively determine if these improvements were as a direct
result of the intervention, no other changes in pre-alert or
handover were introduced during the study period. And so
these identified difference are likely to be a result of the
intervention and provide an indication that it may have
positively impacted on data provision during pre-alert.
It should be noted too that we are also comparing different
stages and forms of communication to those presented
in the study by Carter et al. [42] i.e. pre-alert via
radio call v’s face-to-face handover. There are distractions
and pressures likely to present during a
face-to-face handover in the ED that do not exist during
radio communication; the patient for one. These are
likely to impact on the amount and quality of data provided
and recorded during handover and may therefore
negatively impact on the proportions of variables
recorded [25, 41]. Our study does however highlight the
importance of this pre-alert phase of information
exchange prior to the physical handover. The ability to
provide timely and accurate clinical information prior to
arrival, and handover, at the ED has been shown to improve
care in specific time critical conditions [43, 44]. It
is advisable therefore that such pre-arrival information is
considered as an essential and central component of the
broader handover process and system.
Our measured indications of improvements may also
have been influenced by the introduction of a common
system for use by both ambulance and ED clinicians.
We fostered the shared mental model concept [7] by
ensuring both professional groups used the same
mnemonic and as such a common understanding of
clinical variables required and provided was developed
within the system. Ensuring a common expectation on
the provision of specific clinical variables has also been
shown to improve efficacy of handover [45]. The ability
to manually and accurately record pre-alert information
contemporaneously [20] negates the requirement for
information retention during periods of high cognitive
demand and also appears to have supported this process.
Either these individual components, or their cumulative
parts, may have contributed to the improvement in
perceptions of ED participants and the proportion of
clinical data provided or recorded during pre-alert.
Notably there were no statistically significant improvements
in two of the subjective handover domains measured;
‘structured’ and ‘focused’. On reviewing the AF
format it was clear that the sequence of clinical data
boxes, particularly in the pre-alert section, did not
match the sequence provided on the ambulance PAHC.
It is highly probable that this had an impact on the flow
of pre-alert and handover recording by ED staff and may
partially explain why there were no perceived improvements
in these variables measured. This was valuable
learning and as such changes will be incorporated into
future interventions to ensure continuity of clinical
variable sequence in both the PAHC and AF.
Challenges and considerations for recording tools aimed
at measuring pre-alert and handover data
ED staff consistently used the ambulance pre-alert section
of the form to record the pre-alert information thus
suggesting this section of the form was a useful and feasible
measurement tool. It should be noted that there are
likely to be occasions whereby ambulance clinicians,
working alone in the rear cab of an ambulance, will be
required to prioritise vital signs measured. For example,
during management of an unconscious patient the absolute
need to provide airway management will take priority
over a temperature recording. Similarly the check
and identified presence of a radial pulse in a time critical
patient serves as a proxy measure of blood pressure and
may replace, at least in the short term, the need to record
a blood pressure. It is likely therefore that these
practical elements may partly explain the variability in
frequency counts and inability to consistently reach
100% of clinical variables provided during pre-alert. It
also highlights the difficulties in ensuring that all clinical
variables are ‘always’ provided during pre-alert and
handover. Occasionally, this is not feasible and should
be considered as a limitation to any objective measure.
However, problems were encountered with the completion
of the handover section. There were two elements
that may have influenced this. Firstly, in our ED
site handover data from ambulance clinicians were not
always recorded on the AF contemporaneously. This is
not unusual in the ED setting. Well known pressures on
ED’s i.e. crowding and capacity issues lead to distractions
known to impact on the accuracy of information recording
[41], and perhaps on a reliance on recall of verbal information,
previously identified as a contributor to
information loss [20, 41, 46]. Secondly, and perhaps a
more significant contributor to data loss, were our data
collection methods. To ensure data capture, clerical staff
were instructed to photocopy the AF’s at (or very near
to) the time of handover. Ironically this may have led to
forms being removed too early and before full completion.
Thus, the investigators enthusiasm to capture data
early is likely to have had a significant impact on the recording
of handover data. These combined factors,
therefore, are probable contributors to the loss of information
on AF’s. Essentially, future studies must ensure
support
the objective measure of the handover component
of new interventions. Consideration of an observational
component via video recording [47] or an external,
supernumerary, observer for contemporaneous note taking
would also be helpful and advisable in future studies.
These identified issues also highlight the complex nature
of the handover process and the need for investigation beyond
just the technical aspects [7]. Low tech or high tech
interventions may provide solutions to support the recording
and delivery of known essential clinical information
during handover, however, more research is clearly
required to investigate the non-technical and system elements
of ambulance clinician to ED handover. Such systems
will undoubtedly require multi-modal interventions
to ensure the accurate transfer of clinical information during
high acuity situations. As such, our novel low-tech
intervention tested in this small-scale study may perhaps
be viewed upon as one small component of a larger system
of handover. A system that needs further development
of multiple components in order to address both the
technical and non-technical aspects of handover. Only
when these multiple elements of handover are addressed
will any true improvements in handover quality and safety
be realised.
Strengths and limitation
This was a small-scale study to measure utility and acceptability
of a novel intervention. It was conducted in one
large city centre ambulance station in Scotland. However,
the results were positive and demonstrated the ease at
which a simple, pragmatic intervention could be introduced
within the prehospital domain. The ambulance
clinician response rate was low (36%, n = 25) and, as such,
is prone to response bias. However, in terms of demographics
we found no difference in median length of service
between study participants (Mdn = 16; IQR 8–30)
and overall station population (Mdn = 15; IQR 3.5–23.75);
U = 715; p = 0.247. Similarly, there were no difference
between proportions of grade; paramedics 55% (n = 38) vs
70.8% (n = 18) and Technicians 45% (n = 31) vs 29.2%
(n = 7); χ2 (1, N = 94) = 1.83, p = 0.176. Despite these
similarities in demographics, low response rates and
small sample size limit the results generalisability to
the wider ambulance population and as such these results
should be interpreted with caution. However, the
study was not designed to be generalisable or provide
a definitive answer to the interventions effectiveness
on improving handover. The ‘Hawthorne effect’ may
also have been present during this study with a positive
impact on ambulance clinicians pre-alert and
handover behaviours [48]. Further research is planned
on a larger scale across one Division in Scotland.
The key learning that has taken place during the
undertaking of this study will support improvements to
methods used to further test both the subjective and
objective efficacy of the intervention. Specifically these
will include the introduction of additional evidence
based methods to improve response rates to questionnaires
with consideration also to the addition of online
access (via our cab-based computer systems), the need
for qualitative components by way of interviews and the
use of video footage or observers to objectively record
elements of handover.
Conclusion
These results suggest that the introduction of a low tech,
novel intervention is very acceptable to ambulance clinicians,
intuitive to use, requires little education on use
and positively supports their contemporaneous data recording
and information exchange processes. Although
there are some data to suggest the effectiveness of the
intervention in its ability to improve information sharing
during pre- alert and handover, this study was neither
designed nor powered to do this. However, the overall
positive results suggest that further well conducted studies
to test an updated intervention, based on feedback
provided, are worthwhile. Importantly, future studies
should carefully consider, in the absence of advanced
data sharing technology, how information required for
pre-alert and handover can be recorded contemporaneously
to minimise data loss. This will be essential from
both a patient safety perspective and to more objectively
measure the impact of any future handover intervention.