Background
Vascular leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is a kind of malignant
mesenchymal tumor that originates from the vascular
wall’s smooth muscle layer. Sixty percent of cases occur
in the great retroperitoneal veins, including the inferior vena cava (IVC), renal vein (RV), and adrenal vein
(AV); these cases are called retroperitoneal vascular
leiomyosarcoma (RVLMS). RVLMS is characterized by
smooth muscle cells extending beyond the blood vessel and spreading along the wall. Te tumor progresses
slowly and tends to invade surrounding tissues and
metastasize within the blood circulation, leading to a
worse prognosis [1]. Women are more susceptible to
these tumors (male: female=1: 4), especially those aged
40–70 [2, 3]. Because of unnoticeable symptoms in the
early stage, patients usually do not visit the hospital until
the presence of upper abdominal or lower back pain
due to the compression of other organs by the enlarged
tumor. Symptoms of venous obstruction, such as lower
limb edema and sensory abnormalities, may also occur.
Dyspnoea or Budd-Chiari syndrome can also occur
in some severe cases due to occlusion of the trachea or
hepatic vessels [4]. Moreover, confusing image presentations and complicated retroperitoneal structures contribute to the low accuracy of preoperative diagnosis.
Treatment decisions in clinical practice are challenging.
RVLMS is a rare disease, accounting for less than
1/100000 malignant tumors, and no more than 500 cases
have been reported in previous literature. Although there
are few guidelines, surgical removal to obtain a negative
margin has been indicated signifcantly improve tumorspecifc survival [5]. Artifcial blood vessel replacement
or autologous liver transplantation may be considered
during surgery, depending on the degree of tumor invasion. Since 2018, there have been four cases of RVLMS
from diferent blood vessels treated in our hospital. In
this article, we will review these cases and related publications to develop a better understanding of RVLMS, try
to establish a clinical decision map, and provide suggestions for diagnosis and treatment in future work.
Methods
Patient information
We continuously collected all patients in our hospital
who underwent surgical treatment with “retroperitoneal mass” and were confrmed to be RVLMS by pathological examination from August 2018 to February
2020.We retrospectively collected all RVLMS cases in
our hospital from August 2018 to February 2020. Four
patients were included: two males and two females,
with a median age of 56 (min–max=33–61) years. Te
main symptoms, past history, preoperative American
Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) grade and tumor
size and side are presented in Table  1. Preoperative
computed tomography urography (CTU) and renal and
adrenal hormone determination, including blood catecholamines, 24  h 3-methyl-4-hydroxymandelic acid
(VMA), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), plasma
cortisol rhythm and renin-angiotensin II-aldosterone
system (RAAS) function in standing and recumbent
positions, were conducted. Te preoperative contrastenhanced computed tomography (CECT) images are
shown in Fig.  1. A single round low-density mass was
found in three patients: two were located in the right
adrenal gland area (cases 1 and 3), and the other was
located in the right renal hilum area (case 2). In case 4,
the patient was found to have a sizeable lobular mass in
front of both the right kidney and adrenal gland. In two
cases, the tumor expanded into the IVC and formed
a tumor thrombus; in case 4, the tumor extended to
the lower edge of the second hilar region. All patients
whom paragangliomas cannot be excluded were given
phenoxybenzamine two weeks before the operation
to prevent possible blood pressure fuctuations Tree
patients underwent retroperitoneal laparoscopic tumor
resection; in case 2, the patient was converted to open
surgery. One patient underwent open surgery. Postoperative follow-up was conducted by outpatient revisits
and phone calls.
Multidisciplinary case discussion
Te diagnosis and treatment plan of soft tissue mass
needs to be decided by a multidisciplinary team (MDT)
meeting, which includes doctors of General Surgery,
Urology, Radiology, Oncology, and Pathology. In this
study, the tumor has a clear boundary, seems to have a
capsule, and no distant metastasis was detected. MDT
discussed and decided to choose surgery as the frst
choice.
Operation procedure
Te intestinal preparation was performed one day before
the operation. A total of 800–1200  ml of blood was
prepared.
Laparoscopic surgery
Tree patients underwent retroperitoneal laparoscopic
surgery. Te ports were set at the following points to
introduce the camera and tools (Fig.  2): the intersection of the twelfth rib and the edge of the psoas major,
the costal margin along the anterior axillary line, and
the iliac crest along the midaxillary line. Trocars of 12,
12, and 11 mm were placed. A 5 mm assisting port was
introduced 5 cm medial and superior to the superior iliac
spine when necessary. Te pneumoperitoneum pressure
was maintained at 12 mmHg.
First, the ureter and IVC were found at the lower pole
of the right kidney and carefully separated upwards along
the IVC. Te following steps were diferent among cases.
(1) In case 1, the IVC was dissociated from the upper
right renal pole because the mass was located in the adrenal area. Upon separating the dorsal and ventral sides of
the tumor, the adrenal gland was found to be signifcantly
compressed by the solid mass, while there was still space
between them. Ten, the right kidney was dissociated
and pressed down, and we found that the upper pole of
the right kidney had no contact with the lower tumor
boundary. However, the tumor was adhered to the adrenal gland so tightly that part of the adrenal gland was
excised after clipping the blood vessels with Hem-o-loks.
Further separation revealed that the tumor remarkably
invaded and compressed the IVC, indicating that the IVC
was the primary cancerous site. Terefore, the Satinsky
clamp was placed to partially block the bloodstream, and
the tumor was removed entirely. Te venous incision was
closed with 4–0 Prolene suture. (2) In case 2, the tumor
was located in the right renal hilum, and the ventral side
of the tumor could be identifed when the IVC was separated to the level of the RV. Te lower pole and the dorsal
and ventral sides of the kidney were fully dissociated, followed by lifting the lower renal pole to fully separate the
tumor on the ventral side. It was found that the tumor
partially invaded the RV wall, so a more extended segment of the IVC was dissociated lengthwise to prepare
for blocking, and then the surgery was converted to an
open approach. We made a Chevron incision to open
the abdominal cavity and blocked the RV with a bulldog
clamp. Te Satinsky clamp was used to partially block
the IVC at the renal level. Ten, we cut open the RV and
removed the mass entirely. After the defect of the RV
and IVC was closed with 4–0 Prolene suture, the bloodstreams of the IVC, renal artery, and RV were recovered.
(3) In case 3, the tumor was also located in the adrenal
area. During the operation, however, it was found that
the adrenal gland was normal in shape without cancerous
features, and the tumor was lobulated and inserted into
the IVC locally, suggesting that the solid mass invaded
the IVC directly to form a tumor thrombus without
extending through the central AV. Terefore, we blocked
the IVC at the site inferior to the tumor thrombus with
the method described in case 1, followed by increasing the pneumoperitoneum pressure to 20 cmH2O, and
tumor thrombectomy was performed.
Open surgery
One patient (case 4) underwent open surgery. We chose
the Chevron incision and extended it by 10  cm toward
the base of the xiphoid process. Kocher’s method was
used to expose the retroperitoneal cavity, which revealed
that the tumor was frmly adhered to the right kidney
and wrapped around the right renal artery. Terefore,
we decided to remove the tumor together with the right
kidney. Te liver-IVC and kidney-IVC gaps were dissociated, and the ureter was ligated and cut of 7 cm inferior
to the kidney. Multiple renal arteries adjacent to the dorsal side of the IVC were exposed, ligated, and cut of after
fipping up the tumor and the kidney. Te adrenal gland
was retained because no abnormalities were detected in
the adrenal area. It was found that the tumor thrombus
extended to the retrohepatic IVC. Terefore, the liver
was dissociated and fipped up to expose the IVC further by cutting of the surrounding ligaments. Blood vessels were blocked in the following order: the distal end of
the IVC below the RV, the left RV, the frst hepatic hilum
and, fnally, the proximal end of the IVC; the IVC was
then cut open to remove the tumor, right kidney, and
tumor thrombus. Te IVC incision was sutured with 4–0
Prolene. In the end, the bloodstream was recovered by
releasing the proximal end of the IVC, the left RV, and
the distal end of the IVC in order.
Follow‑up
Te patients were followed up for the frst time one
month after the operation, every three months in the frst
two years, every six months after two years. Follow-up
was carried out by outpatient revisit and phone call.
Results
As shown in Table  1, among the four patients studied,
one demonstrated local and systemic discomfort before
surgery, and the remaining patients were asymptomatic.
Te hormone tests of the kidney and adrenal gland
showed no abnormalities, and the preoperative ASA
evaluation demonstrated grade 2.
Te surgeries of the four patients were completed, and
no perioperative deaths occurred. Te median duration
of the operation was 314.5 (min–max=224–467) min.
Te tumors were entirely resected, with a median size of
7.45 (min–max=4.2–10.7) cm. Te median amount of
intraoperative bleeding was 550 (min–max=200–1500)
ml. In cases 1, 3, and 4, intraoperative transfusion of red
blood cells was 800 ml, 2000 ml, and 800 ml, respectively.
In addition, in case 3, 1400  ml of plasma transfusions
was received. Te median postoperative hospitalization ranged from 7 (min–max=6 -12) days. In case 1, a
Clavien-Dindo II complication was reported [6]: postoperative retroperitoneal bleeding with a decrease in
hemoglobin to 77  g/L on the third day after the operation. With the use of abdominal bandage compression
and the transfusion of 2 U of suspended red blood cells
and 400 ml of plasma, the hemoglobin level returned to
normal, and no further surgery was needed. One week
after the operation, the median serum creatinine level
was 85 (min–max=70–99) µmol/L.
Te pathological examination showed the all solid
tumors was irregular in shape with negative margins (Fig.  3A), the cut surface was greyish-white, and
the outer part of the mass was covered with a capsule
(Fig.  3B). Spindle-shaped cells with high mitotic activity and cytologic atypia were detected (Fig.  4A, B), and
immunochemical test showed SMA (+) and Desmin (+)
(Fig.  4C, D). We used the French Federation of Cancer
Centers (FNCLCC) system to evaluate the histological
performance of four cases [7], and showed Case 1 and 3
were classifed as grade G1, and case 2 and 4 were classifed as G2.
At the last follow-up, all patients were still alive, and
the median follow-up time was 16 (min–max=13–21)
months. In case 1, local recurrence without symptoms
was reported during the review 15 months after the operation. Te patient was recommended to receive radiotherapy but refused. Te remaining three patients had no
recurrence or metastasis.
Discussion and literature review
LMS is a common histological type of retroperitoneal
sarcoma, but only 5% of cases are reported to have a vascular origin, of which more than 70% arise from the IVC,
followed by the renal vein, central adrenal vein, iliac vein,
etc [8, 9]. Te disease is often diagnosed in middle-aged
and older adults, and 80% of patients are female [10].
Te etiology is still unclear and may be related to endocrine misregulation. Carvalho et  al. reported a 78-subject cross-sectional study and found that patients with
RVLMS were more likely to develop uterine fbroids or
endocrine tumors [11]. Te absence of critical manifestations and biomarkers as well as the difculty of imaging
diagnosis leads to a less accurate preoperative diagnosis.
Comprehensive preoperative evaluation and preparation
are necessary
No guidelines currently provide clear diagnostic criteria
for RVLMS. Preoperative diagnosis, which is still challenging, is based on the comprehensive evaluation of
clinical manifestations and imaging studies.
Te most common presentation of RVLMS is abdominal discomfort, edema of the lower extremities, or weight
loss, which is often caused by the obstruction of venous
return due to tumor compression. For RVLMS originating in the IVC, symptoms are related to the site invaded.
In many studies, the IVC is divided into upper, middle,
and lower segments according to the level of the renal
hilum and hepatic vein [4, 12, 13]. Lower RVLMS mainly
presents as edema or numbness of the lower extremities; middle RVLMS patients may sufer from right upper
quadrant abdominal or back pain. Ascites, Budd-Chiari
syndrome, or even right heart failure may be present
in upper RVLMS [4, 14]. Federico et  al. suggested that
most cases of RVLMS originate from the lower segment
(37–42%) or middle segment (43–50.8%) of the IVC [13].
However, due to the slow growth rate, the large IVC
lumen, and the possibility of growing in opposition to the
lumen, only a few patients have shown positive manifestations. In this study, case 1 was consistent with middle
and lower RVLMS, which was consistent with the imaging and intraoperative fndings.
In comparison, RVLMS originating in the renal vein is
much rarer. Aguilar et  al. conducted a literature review
and found only 29 cases, and nearly 60% of cases had
lesions in the left renal vein. Nonspecifc symptoms such
as abdominal or lower back pain will appear only when
the tumor infltrates into surrounding tissues or the
renal veins [15]. Physical examination usually shows no
positive signs, and renal percussive pain can occasionally
be found. Terefore, diagnosis based on clinical manifestations is very challenging. In this study, cases with this
presentation were scarce.
Imaging plays a critical role in RVLMS diagnosis. In
this study, the key fndings were as follows. (1) Te vessels involved (IVC or RV) were signifcantly dilated. (2)
Intra- or extraluminal tumors were unevenly enhanced
by CECT. (3) Massive collateral circulations were seen in
patients with blocked vessels. Tese fndings are consistent with the LMS imaging appearance described by Mu
et al. in 2011 [16]. Federico et al. found that the best view
was obtained during the portal venous phase, which provided sufcient details to evaluate the tumor growth pattern and infltration [9, 13]. It is of great importance for
diferential diagnosis.
Liposarcoma is the most common retroperitoneal
tumor with more insidious manifestations, and the tumor
composition are related to the histological diferentiation,
which is similar to the situation of RVLMS and easily
misdiagnosed [17]. It is not difcult to distinguish welldiferentiated liposarcoma from RVLMS by clear boundaries, large fat droplets, and few soft tissues. However, it
is a diferent story for high-grade, poorly diferentiated
liposarcoma because of the fuzzy edge and lack of fat [13,
17, 18]. Calcifcation may be present in 30% of lipomyosarcoma, which provides clues for identifcation [17].
Neurogenic tumors, which are common among teenagers, are another disease worthy of consideration. Neurofbroma has a clear boundary and uniform enhancement
in CECT, and target signs can occasionally be identifed. Schwannomas are generally located next to the spinal cord and do not invade blood vessels. However, as
tumors grow substantially, necrosis and uneven enhancement may occur, making identifcation difcult [19–22].
Notably, the diferential diagnosis of paraganglioma is
meaningful for treatment. Patients with paraganglioma
often show sympathetic symptoms, such as palpitation,
higher blood pressure and, sometimes, hypertensive
crisis due to a high level of catecholamines [16, 21, 23].
Tumor size, morphology, and central necrosis can simulate RVLMS [17]. Moreover, a recent report of silent
paraganglioma, which can be stimulated intraoperatively
and lead to uncontrollable hypertension, revealed that
the diferential diagnosis between RVLMS and paraganglioma is more urgent and difcult [23, 24]. Terefore,
in this study, except for in case 4 where the diagnosis of LMS was made preoperatively by biopsy, patients
were asked to take phenoxybenzamine for two weeks
before the operation to achieve relatively low blood pressure to prevent hypertensive crisis caused by potential
misdiagnosis.
Preoperative pathologic biopsy is one of the gold standards for the diagnosis of RVLMS, especially in cases diffcult to distinguish from unresectable tumors, such as
lymphoma [25]. Tis method is also recommended for
suspicion of metastasized tumors. However, many factors, including tumor location, adjacent organs, blood
vessels, and patients’ willingness, afect the feasibility
and accuracy of preoperative biopsy, so this study did not
include it as a routine examination.
MDT‑guided surgical resection regimen
Due to the particularity of retroperitoneal tumors in
terms of biological characteristics, pathological types,
occurrence locations, and lack of efective treatment
methods, multidisciplinary team (MDT) collaboration
focuses on individualized treatment is critical.
Although limited cases reported, en bloc resection
with a negative margin is still supposed to be the core of
treatment [26]. Gauzel et  al. pointed that patients who
undergo radical resection of RVLMS tend to have a better prognosis, while the positive margins imply a higher
recurrence rate, and more challenging to perform reoperation. Repeated recurrence signifcantly reduces the
long-term survival rate [27–29].
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy can exert a survival beneft
on most soft tissue sarcomas. However, the LMS is less
sensitive to it, so it is not routinely performed, except for
several situations: (1) Preoperative imaging shows extensive reaction areas around the tumor, suggesting that
the tumor is more aggressive and infltrating. (2) Biopsy
shows tumors cells has high malignant potential, such
as high mitotic activity, atypia, or high Ki-67 expression.
(3) Recurrent tumors. Chemotherapy has achieved a certain efect, but further rigorous clinical research is still
needed.
Te surgical plan should be individualized according
to the patient’s condition, tumor location, and adjacent
blood vessels and organs. Te four operations’ common points are (1) exposure of the retroperitoneum and
involved tissues and protection of the ureter; (2) identifcation of vital blood vessels in the surgical feld and
determination of the lesion; (3) careful dissociation of the
masses; (4) blockage of the bloodstream of the involved
vessels (IVC or renal pedicle) with vascular block forceps
or a Satinsky clamp; (5) complete removal of the tumor,
as well as afected organs and tumor thrombus, where the
milking method can be considered to decrease the level
of tumor thrombus [30, 31]; and (6) open blood fow after
vessel reconstruction.
Bloodstream blockage should be addressed during surgery, especially for IVC masses. Although the collateral
circulation may compensate for the reduction in venous
return, IVC blockage is still a challenge for the patient’s
cardiac function when using traditional vessel-blocking
forceps, which entirely block the bloodstream. Wachtel
et  al. conducted a 6-patient case series of IVC RVLMS
and proposed the use of venous-venous shunts, that is,
the establishment of shunts at both ends of the blocked
blood vessels by pumps to maintain stable cardiac blood
volume [5]. In our study, we innovatively used the Satinsky clamp to partially block the IVC that was invaded by
the tumor but did not completely block the blood fow,
followed by removing and reconstructing the afected
blood vessel wall. Te remaining IVC blood fow and
collateral circulation ensured that the return blood volume was relatively sufcient, which was more convenient than a veno-venous shunt. Tere is no research that
has compared the above two methods statistically, and
for patients whose tumors originate from shorter blood
vessels where the Satinsky clamp cannot be placed (for
example, the renal vessels in case 2), nephrectomy may
still be considered [5, 19].
Interestingly, for patients with contralateral renal insuffciency, solitary kidneys, and a strong willingness to
retain the kidneys, it is also possible to undergo conversion to open surgery to remove the tumor and perform
vascular reconstruction. Nevertheless, the scope is small, 
and the operation is hard to perform, making the risk of
recurrence and bleeding after surgery much higher than
that of radical nephrectomy [10, 32]. Terefore, it is necessary to integrate the patient’s condition and willingness
to communicate with the patients and their family members and to reasonably select the operation strategy.
RVLMS is highly malignant and has a poor prognosis. According to current literature reports, tumors
more than 3  cm in diameter, positive margins, and
kidney-sparing surgery are risk factors for local recurrence and distant metastasis. Aguilar et  al. analyzed 30
cases reported in the literature and found that 30% of
patients had no relapse or metastasis (mean follow-up
of 78 months), 23% of patients had local recurrence and
metastasis and were still alive, and 37% of patients died
after relapse (mean follow-up of 48 months) [15].
Postoperative adjuvant therapy
Te adjuvant chemotherapy of LMS is controversial.
Some randomized studies have shown that adjuvant
chemotherapy can improve disease-free survival (DFS).
For example, the Italian Sarcoma Collaborative Group
adopted the EI regimen for primary large adult soft tissue sarcoma, and showed that the chemotherapy group
obtained nearly 30 months of DFS and OS prolongation
compared with the non-chemotherapy group [33]. However, SMAC meta-analysis, which included four large
randomized controlled trials involving more than 1900
patients, showed no diference in OS between patients
receiving postoperative monotherapy and those without
chemotherapy [28, 34]. Terefore, the specifc population should be selected for adjuvant chemotherapy, and
the increase of dose and combined medication should be
considered. Te adjuvant chemotherapy is recommended
with the following conditions: (1) high grade and a large
volume of tumor; (2) Te operation did not reach the safe
surgical boundary; (3) Recurrent tumor operations.
At present, Doxorubicin combined with Ifosfamide is
still an ideal chemotherapy regimen. A clinical trial done
by Te European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) (No.62012, NCT00061984)
showed that the response rate (26 vs 14%), progressionfree survival (7.4 vs 4.6  months) and overall survival
(14.3 vs 12.8 months) of combined medication were better than those of Doxorubicin alone [35, 36]. However,
there is no recognized second-line regimens, and diferent drugs should be selected according to the histological
type.
Te application of adjuvant radiotherapy has not
reached a consensus, most clinical studies show optimistic prospects, but waiting for more rigorous clinical trials
to prove its efectiveness [37]. In this study, the follow-up
imaging examination of case 1 showed local recurrence.
Te recurrent tumor bed was located in the operation
area, and the patient refused to receive systemic chemotherapy, so local radiotherapy was recommended. No
progression was found in the following 2 months. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up and could not
be further evaluated.
Postoperative adjuvant targeted therapy is also worth
exploring in the future. In recent years, a number of clinical trials of targeted medications for LMS are ongoing
and showed optimistic results. In 2016, FDA accelerated
the approval of Olaratumab (PDGFRα antibody) is on the
market, becoming the frst frst-line drug for soft tissue
sarcoma [38, 39].
In terms of limitations, the nature of this case series
study in terms of the lack of a control group made the
results only a reference for clinical practice rather than
a guideline. Due to the low prevalence of RVLMS, there
remains no consensus on the standards for treatment of
the disease. Case-controlled or cohort studies should be
conducted to determine the potential cause and prognostic factors in future work.
Conclusion and perspective
Tis study summarizes the diagnosis and treatment experience of RVLMS in our center based on data from four
patients. RVLMS is complicated to diagnose preoperatively due to uncharacteristic manifestations and confusing imaging results. Most of the patients were diagnosed
by intraoperative and postoperative pathology. Completed preoperative evaluation and MDT collaboration
are essential, as well as careful designation of the surgical
plan to remove the mass and rebuild the blood vessels.
Te innovative use of the Satinsky clamp in our center
to block blood vessels reduced the difculty of surgery,
but we could not statistically compare this method with
the traditional blocking method or with veno-venous
shunting because of the small number of cases. In short,
to raise the concern of RVLMS and facilitate guideline
establishment, multicenter research is required to collect
enough cases and obtain more powerful and persuasive
conclusions to guide future treatment.