Cardiovascular complications are an important cause of
diabetes-related morbidity and excess mortality [1–3].
Various risk factors, such as obesity, and blood pressure
(BP) levels, lipids and glycaemic parameters predict the
development of cardiovascular disease (CVD). In the
past, a variety of risk scores has been developed to assist
in adequate disease prediction [4–7].
In the pathophysiology of diabetes-related complications,
the role of the accumulation of advanced glycation
endproducts (AGEs) has been well established. These
AGEs are formed in a complex biochemical process, by
glycation of proteins and lipids in the classic Maillard
‘browning’ reaction, but also by the interaction of amino
groups of proteins with α-dicarbonyl compounds like as
glyoxal, methylglyoxal and 3-deoxyglucosone [8–10].
Crosslinking of AGEs and tissue proteins in the body,
may cause for instance an increase of vascular stiffness,
elevated blood pressure and limited joint mobility [11,
12]. Binding of circulating AGEs to specific receptors
(i.e. the receptors for AGEs [RAGE]) and subsequent uptake
in arterial walls may play an important role in the
development and progression of atherosclerosis [13, 14].
The accumulation of AGEs can be evaluated by
measuring skin autofluorescence (SAF) [15]. This noninvasive
method has been described and validated
extensively, and it has been shown that SAF strongly
correlates with the levels of AGEs in skin biopsies [16].
Earlier studies have shown that SAF is higher in individuals
with type 2 diabetes compared with healthy individuals
[17, 18], and is associated with the development of
cardiovascular complications and mortality in these patients
[17, 19–21]. An earlier study by our group in the
general population has shown that SAF is a strong predictor
of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease, as
well as mortality, independent of several classic risk
factors [22].
The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether
SAF is able to predict the development of cardiovascular
disease and mortality in individuals with type 2 diabetes,
who participated in the Lifelines Cohort Study.
Methods
Participants
We evaluated participants with type 2 diabetes who participated
between 2007 and 2013 in the Lifelines Cohort
Study. Lifelines is a large population-based study of residents
living in the northern provinces of the Netherlands
[23]. At baseline evaluation, both extensive questionnaire
and physical examination data were collected [24]. The
study was approved by the Medical Ethics Review Committee
of the University Medical Center Groningen. All
participants provided written informed consent.
Presence of type 2 diabetes was self-reported or based
on the use of blood-glucose-lowering medication (oral
agents and/or insulin), or fasting blood glucose ≥7.0
mmol/l and/or HbA1c ≥ 6.5% (48 mmol/mol) at laboratory
evaluation. We did not include participants who, at
baseline, reported type 1 diabetes (n = 366) or MODY
(n = 9), or previously having gestational diabetes (n =
266). In 2554 out of 4992 people with type 2 diabetes,
validated baseline SAF measurement were available
(Supplemental Fig. 1). Participants with available SAF
measurements did not differ in sex ratio, age, glucose
and HbA1c from those without SAF measurements.
Follow-up data were available for 2349 individuals. Of
these, 1863 completed the follow-up questionnaires and
additional laboratory testing between 2014 and 2018. Of
the remaining 486 individuals only interim questionnaire
results were available. Duration of follow-up was 3.7
(range 0.5–10) years and comprised 8637 participantyears.
In the 1863 participants with complete questionnaire
and laboratory data, median follow-up was 4.0
years.
Clinical examination
Information on medical history, health status and lifestyle
including smoking habits were collected using selfadministered
questionnaires as published previously
(22). Smoking status was classified into never, former or
current smoking. The use of medication was verified
using the ATC (Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical)
Classification System by a research assistant at the baseline
investigation only. Weight, height and waist circumference
were measured while participants were wearing
light clothing and no shoes. Blood pressure and heart
rate were measured using an automated Dinamap monitor
(GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany), for a total of 10
measurements every 10 min, and BP and heart rate were
determined as the average of the last three readings.
Skin autofluorescence
At baseline, SAF, expressed in arbitrary units, was measured
at the forearm using an AGE Reader (Diagnoptics
Technologies, Groningen, the Netherlands), as described
previously [18, 22, 25]. We calculated SAF Z-scores (adjusted
for age) based on the total Lifelines population,
separately in men and women.
Biochemical measurements
Blood was drawn between 8 and 10 a.m. while participants
were in the fasting state. For the current study,
baseline biochemical measurements used for analysis
were performed the same day. HbA1c was measured in
EDTA-anticoagulated blood on a Cobas Integra 800
CTS analyser (Roche, The Netherlands) with a NGSP
(National Glycohemoglobin Standardized Program)
Boersma et al. BMC Endocrine Disorders (2021) 21:14 Page 2 of 8
certified turbidimetric immunoassay. Blood glucose was
measured with a hexokinase method. Serum concentrations
of creatinine and lipids (total-, HDL- and LDLcholesterol,
and triacylglycerol were measured on a
Roche Modular P chemistry analyser (Roche, Basel,
Switzerland) [22]. Estimated (e) GFR was calculated
using the CKD-EPI (Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology
Collaboration) formula [26].
Calculations, definitions and statistical analyses
Baseline as well as new events of cardiovascular disease
were defined as a previous or an incident of myocardial
infarction, transient ischaemic attack (TIA), cerebrovascular
accident (CVA), intermittent claudication or therapeutic
intervention including percutaneous transluminal
coronary angioplasty (PTCA) with or without stent, coronary
artery bypass grafting (CABG) or peripheral vascular
surgery. All clinical outcomes were self-reported.
Vital status was confirmed with the municipal administration.
This database does not contain information on
the cause of death. For all age groups, the incidence of
cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality was calculated
for all predefined age decades separately and as a
composite outcome.
Normally-distributed data are presented as mean ± SD,
otherwise median and interquartile range (IQR) was
used. The difference between groups were evaluated
with analysis of variance (ANOVA) or the Mann–Whitney
U test. The χ2 test was used to analyse categorical
variables. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression
analysis was used to evaluate the association between
SAF and the composite outcome of cardiovascular
disease and mortality, with adjustment for the most
important baseline variables. A second model was
constructed in which only significant variables were included.
We did this for the entire type 2 diabetes population,
and separately for those individuals with diabetes
without clinically manifest cardiovascular disease at
baseline. Analyses were conducted with PASW Statistics
(Version 23, IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). P-values < 0.05
were considered statistically significant.
Results
Baseline characteristics
At baseline, 1318 subjects reported a previous diagnosis
of type 2 diabetes (‘known type 2 diabetes’), and their estimated
duration of diabetes in these participants was 5
(IQR 2–9) years. In addition, 1031 participants were
found to have elevated fasting blood glucose and/or
HbA1c at laboratory evaluation, and those individuals
were considered as new type 2 diabetes. They were notified
of the findings and the laboratory results were reported
to the general practitioner. Only 11% of the
participants with known type 2 diabetes were treated
with diet, 83% was treated with oral glucose-lowering
agents, with or without insulin, while 6% was using insulin
alone. Individuals with known type 2 diabetes were
older than those with new type 2 diabetes (58.7 ± 10.8
years vs 55.0 ± 12.0 years, p < 0.001). They also had a
higher BMI and HbA1c (all p < 0.01, Table 1), and a larger
percentage of them were reporting the use of bloodpressure-
lowering medication and/or statins, and they
had lower total and LDL-cholesterol. Participants with
newly-detected type 2 diabetes had lower SAF levels
than those with known diabetes (SAF Z-score 0.34 ±
0.89 vs 0.56 ± 0.99 AU, p < 0.001, Table 1). In Fig. 1, we
show the age-corrected SAF levels for participants with
and without cardiovascular disease, in comparison with
Lifelines participants without diabetes. SAF Z-scores
were the highest in participants with both existing diabetes
and cardiovascular disease: 0.78 ± 1.10 AU (Fig. 1).
In total, 195 individuals (7.6%) had developed a new
CVD event at follow-up. Those with new CVD events
were significantly older at baseline (62 ± 11 vs 56 ± 12
yrs., p < 0.01), and had a lower eGFR (85 ± 16 vs 90 ± 16
ml/min/1.73m2, p < 0.001) compared to those without
new CVD events. Levels of blood pressure, serum lipids
and glycaemic parameters were not significantly different.
Incidence of cardiovascular disease was higher with
increasing age, and was between 9.7 and 33% in the
highest age groups (Suppl. Fig. 2). Mean SAF Z-score at
baseline was 0.70 ± 1.11 among the participants who developed
a new CVD event vs 0.44 ± 0.93 in those who
did not (p = 0.001).
Death occurred in 137 individuals (5.4%). As expected,
mortality was higher in older participants, and was between
5.5 and 52% in the highest age groups (Suppl.
Fig. 2). Participants who deceased were older at baseline
(67 ± 12 vs 56 ± 11 yrs., p < 0.001), had lower eGFR (79 ±
19 vs 90 ± 16 ml/min/1.73m2, p < 0.001), and more often
renal impairment (eGFR < 60 ml/min/1.73m2, 18.5% vs
4.1%, p < 0.001). They also had higher SAF levels than
individuals who remained alive: SAF Z-score was 0.81 ±
1.06 in those who died vs 0.44 ± 0.94 in those who
remained alive (p < 0.001).
Existing cardiovascular disease at baseline was strongly
associated with outcome: incidence of new CVD events
and death was significantly higher in participants with
diabetes and CVD at baseline vs those with diabetes
only, both in those with known and newly-detected diabetes
(Table 2). Similarly, incidence of cardiovascular
disease but not mortality was higher in those with
known diabetes compared to those whose diabetes was
detected at the baseline screening.
Association and prediction
Table 3 summarizes the univariable and multivariable
associations between SAF and clinical, biochemical and
lifestyle factors and the combined outcome of cardiovascular
disease and mortality. Univariable analysis showed
that SAF was significantly associated with combined outcome
(OR 2.59, 95% CI 2.10–3.20, p = 1.3 × 10− 18). Also,
age, male sex, waist circumference, diastolic BP, heart
rate, eGFR, as well as the use of BP-lowering medication
and statins, and baseline CVD showed a significant association
with the combined outcome. The association of
SAF with outcome remained significant after adjusting
for systolic BP, serum lipids, eGFR and glycaemic
variables (OR 1.41, 95% CI 1.10–1.82, p = 0.008). In the
multivariable model (Table 3), baseline cardiovascular
disease, age, current smoking, SAF and systolic BP
showed the strongest association with the combined
outcome.
In Supplemental Table 1 we report the association between
SAF and the individual outcomes. Univariable
analyses showed SAF was significantly associated with
mortality (OR 2.98, 95% CI 2.25–3.94, p = 2.6 × 10− 14),
as were age, sex, waist circumference, diastolic BP,
eGFR, as well as BP-lowering therapy and baseline cardiovascular
disease. This association remained significant
after adjusting for all other baseline variables (p = 0.013).
The multivariable model showed that SAF, age, systolic
BP, waist circumference, current smoking, statin use and
baseline cardiovascular disease were independently associated
with mortality. Comparable, SAF was also associated
with new CVD events. In addition to SAF and age,
other predictors for new CVD events were male sex,
eGFR, diastolic BP and heart rate, as well as the use of
statins, BP-lowering medication and baseline cardiovascular
disease. SAF was no longer significant with incident
cardiovascular disease in the multivariable models,
in which age, current smoking and baseline cardiovascular
disease showed the strongest association.
As baseline cardiovascular disease is a strong predictor
of future CVD events and mortality, we re-calculated
our models for the combined outcome of cardiovascular
disease and mortality in participants without baseline
cardiovascular disease. Again, SAF was strongly
associated with the combined outcome, even when adjusted
for the other variables age, systolic BP, waist
circumference, statin use and current smoking (Supplemental
Table 2).
Discussion
In a previous study in the general population, we have
shown that skin autofluorescence is strongly associated
with new-onset of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular
disease as well as mortality. This association was independent
of cardiovascular risk factors like age, sex, waist
circumference, smoking, and glycaemic parameters. In
the present study we show that SAF is also significantly
and independently associated with the combined outcome
of new CVD events and mortality in people with
type 2 diabetes.
It has long been known that the formation of AGEs is
increased in people with diabetes as a consequence of
high glucose levels and oxidative stress [8, 27]. Earlier,
we have shown that SAF levels are increased in people
with the metabolic syndrome, a cluster of risk factors
which is associated with an increased risk of both type 2
diabetes and cardiovascular disease [28]. However, when
adjusted for presence of the metabolic syndrome, SAF
levels were an independent predictor of new type 2 diabetes
in the general population [22]. Our current analyses
shows that individuals with newly-detected type 2
diabetes had lower SAF Z-scores than those with known
type 2 diabetes, indicating the longer period of exposure
to elevated glucose levels in people with longer-standing
diabetes. In addition, participants with cardiovascular
disease had higher SAF levels, both those with newlydetected
and those with known diabetes (Fig. 1). Existing
cardiovascular disease was the strongest predictor for future
CVD events and mortality. Nevertheless, SAF was
associated with this combined outcome independently of
factors like existing cardiovascular disease, age, smoking,
lipid or BP levels.
SAF was associated with a threefold increased mortality
risk, and this association remained highly significant
after adjusting for several confounding factors (Supplemental
Table 1). This confirms our earlier observations
in people without diabetes [22]. In that study a high
odds ratio for mortality was also obtained when modelling
with the linear method based on the entire population
without diabetes or cardiovascular disease.
Similarly, SAF was associated with an increased risk of
new CVD events. Several earlier reports have described
the cross-sectional relationship between SAF and the
presence and development of vascular complications in
type 2 diabetes. Prospective studies evaluating the predictive
value of SAF measurements were performed in
selected patient populations [17, 20, 21]. SAF did predict
cardiac mortality in people with diabetes [29] and in patients
on chronic haemodialysis [30–32], and predicted
the occurrence of cardiovascular events and mortality in
individuals with peripheral vascular disease [33]. In
addition, SAF predicted the subsequent need for limb
amputation, which was independent of disease status,
and proved to be additive to the predictive value of the
Fontaine classification [34].
Our findings support the clinical utility of SAF to support
risk assessment for cardiovascular disease and mortality,
both in the general population and in people with
type 2 diabetes. As suggested earlier [22], SAF measurement
is relatively fast and non-invasive, and can therefore
also be used outside a G.P. practice or hospital such
as in pharmacies as a first estimate of risk. The present
data also confirm that both current smoking and presence
of cardiovascular disease are strong predictors for
future CVD events and mortality, supporting aggressive
intervention for smoking cessation as well as optimizing
efforts to reduce cardiovascular disease burden. The fact
that in the current study only 63% of people with known
type 2 diabetes were using statins, and mean LDLcholesterol
was above the desired target suggests that
improvements in cardiovascular risk factor intervention
are desirable [35].
Strengths and limitations
We presented data from a population-based study that
included over 2300 participants with type 2 diabetes.
The Lifelines Cohort Study has no follow-up data available
on the use of new glucose-lowering or other medications
or changes in medications, which could be used
to confirm new CVD events and could influence the
subsequent clinical course. New diagnosis of type 2 diabetes
could only be based on a single blood glucose or
HbA1c measurement. The current dataset of lifelines
does not allow to perform survival analysis. The study
included mainly participants from Western European
background, and therefore our results may not be
generalizable to other ethnic populations. Data on the
exact cause of death may be helpful in further refining
the predictive power of SAF.

Conclusions
In conclusion, we showed that skin autofluorescence
measurements significantly predicted new CVD events
and mortality in people with type 2 diabetes independently
of conventional cardiovascular risk factors. The
Lifelines study is still ongoing, and a longer follow-up of
its participants will expand the current evaluations and
allow further validation.
