Background
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS, OMIM 176270) is a rare,
complex neurodevelopmental disorder with a reported incidence
of approximately 1 in 15,000–30,000 newborns
[1]. PWS is caused by a lack of expression of paternally
inherited genes in the q11-q13 region of chromosome 15,
most commonly caused by a paternal deletion or a maternal
disomy [1, 2]. PWS in adults is characterized by muscular
hypotonia, hyperphagia requiring restricted diet and
regular physical activity to prevent the development of severe
obesity [3]. Other features include a mild to moderate
intellectual disability, a distinct behavioral phenotype with
stubbornness, temper tantrums, obsessive and compulsive
behaviors and mood instability [4, 5].
Many of the symptoms in PWS are believed to be caused
by a dysfunction of the hypothalamus. Endocrine abnormalities
are common including deficiencies in growth hormone,
sex hormones and thyroid hormones. Concerning,
the function of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)
axis both normal function and partial central adrenal insufficiency
have been reported [6–11].
In previous studies, different tests were used to evaluate
the function of the HPA-axis. They were all based on
acute variations in adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
and/or cortisol, whereas information about cortisol concentrations
over a longer period is lacking. Due to the intellectual
disability and behavior problems in PWS it is
also of great value to find other approaches for evaluating
the HPA axis in PWS than the conventional tests. By
measuring cortisol in hair, the average cortisol concentrations
over longer periods can be assessable using an easy,
non-invasive and convenient procedure [12].
The aim of this study was to examine hair cortisol in a
group of adults with PWS in comparison to populationbased
controls. Self-reported clinical parameters from a
semi-structured questionnaire were included for further
evaluation.
Methods
Participants and procedures
Twenty-nine adults (older than 18 years of age) with
PWS were enrolled in 2015 and 2016 either during routine
visits to the Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, or after
responding to advertisements in the journal of the Swedish
PWS Association.
Data for controls were retrieved from the Lifelines Cohort
Study. Lifelines is a multi-disciplinary prospective
population-based cohort study examining the health and
health-related behaviors of 167,729 persons living in the
North of The Netherlands [13–15]. Lifelines comprises a
broad range of data, including hair cortisol which was
available for 266 individuals, who were used as controls
in the present study [15].
Hair processing and analysis
In summary, a hair sample (100–150 hairs) was cut from
the posterior vertex of the scalp, as close to the scalp as
possible. The hair sample was stored on a paper in an
envelope until analysis [13]. For the analysis of hair cortisol,
the proximal 3 cm of the hair (10 mg) was cut into
1 cm segments, which were washed in isopropanol, and
then left to dry [13]. Methanol was used to extract cortisol
and after purification, cortisol was quantified by liquid
chromatography − tandem mass spectrometry
(LC–MS/MS) (Waters, Milford, MA) [16]. Two standard
curves were identified from ten calibration standards on
each day of analysis and the functional sensitivity (lower
limit of quantification, LLoQ (pg/mg)) was calculated by
serial dilution from 40 mg/ml to 0.3125 mg/ml [16]. The
geometric mean of hair cortisol analyses in The Lifelines
Cohort study (N = 266) was 2.7 pg/mg [13].
Questionnaire
The participants with PWS and/or their caretakers, filled
out a questionnaire about their age, sex and anthropometric
measurements. This questionnaire was not developed
for this study, but has been used for multiple
studies in the past.
[15]. The stress was assessed by the question: did any
stressful events occur during the last 3 months? In case
there did, what happened?
In addition, the participants were asked in a standardized
manner whether they used any product containing
corticosteroids in the past 3 months and the route of administration
(i.e., oral, intravenous, nasal, topical, inhaled,
joint injections or others).
Data retrieved from the Lifelines Study for the controls
included information on the subjects’ age, sex, anthropometric
and stressful life events. Life events were evaluated
using the Dutch version of the List of Threatening
Experiences (LTE), including occurrence of twelve major
life events in the past 12 months [13].
Matching process and statistical analysis
The PWS patients were categorized into four age-groups
[(18–25 years), (26–35 years), (36–45 years) and (46–60
years)], resulting in a fairly balanced age-sex groups for
each of the approximately 10 years intervals. Subjects
from each group of PWS patients were matched for age
and sex to a total of 105 subjects from the corresponding
control groups, in a 1:5 ratio. However, due to low
number of controls for males in the 18–25 age-group (9
adults with PWS, 23 matched-controls) matching was
made in a ratio of 1:2.5 for this particular sex-age group.
The matching was programmed using the “seed” command
in STATA 15.0 to ensure a random selection of
subjects.
Results are presented as mean ± SD. For comparison
between the groups, Student’s t-test was used. Mean hair
cortisol was considered to best capture the clinical reality
with large variations in hair cortisol and a generalized
linear regression model was used to examine the association
of crude levels and levels adjusted for BMI and
stress as potential confounders. The Akaike Information
Criteria (AIC) test was used to confirm best fit model
where by both BMI and reported stress were retained in
the model, as they predicted the model well. Statistical
significance was set at p < 0.05.
Results
Twenty-nine adults (15 men and 14 women) with confirmed
PWS participated. Mean (SD) for age was 33.4
years (12.7) in the patients with PWS and 42.1 (11.6)
years in the controls. By virtue of the matching process
based on the sex-age groups, there were no significant
differences between the patients with PWS and controls
with respect to age and sex.
In the lifelines Cohort Study median BMI was 26 kg/
m2, 42% were overweight and 19% obese [15]. Twelve
percent reported use of steroids the past 3 months and
58% reported at least one life event during the past 12
months [15].
Individual hair cortisol levels in patients with PWS are
displayed in Table 1. Six patients with PWS had hair
cortisol levels > 10 pg/mg and all but two of them reported
occurrence of stressful situations. Seven reported
use of steroids without hair cortisol being suppressed
(hair cortisol 2.0 to 39.1 pg/mg) and all but one reported
stress.
Thirteen other adults with hair cortisol of 10 pg/mg
and below had not experienced any stress, and the
remaining ten adults reported different kinds of stress
that did not result in high levels of hair cortisol. Six patients
with hair cortisol < 1.3 pg/mg did not report any
stress or use of glucocorticoids. Figure 1 shows the hair
cortisol in patients with PWS with and without reported
stress.
There was a large variation in hair cortisol levels in
the patients with PWS. Mean hair cortisol in all patients
with PWS was 12.8 ± 25.4 pg/mg compared to 3.8 ± 7.3
pg/mg in the controls (p = 0.001). When the two high
readings were excluded mean hair cortisol in the PWS
group was 6.43 ± 9.66 pg/mg. In the crude regression
model, hair cortisol in patients with PWS was significantly
higher compared to the controls (β = 1.21; 95% CI
[0.44–1.98]) (p = 0.002) and remained higher after
adjusting for BMI and reported stress (β = 0.84; 95% CI
[0.11–1.56], p = 0.023) (Table 2).
Using the same linear regression model in patients
with PWS, hair cortisol increased with BMI (β = 0.05;
95% CI [0.02–0.09], p = 0.002, which remained after adjustment
for stress (β = 0.04; 95% CI [0.01–0.08], p =
0.012) (Table 2). Likewise, hair cortisol increased with
stress (β = 1.16; 95% CI [0.41–1.91], p = 0.002), which
remained after adjustment for BMI (β = 0.90 (95% CI
[0.19–1.60], p = 0.014) (Table 2).
Discussion
In this study of 29 adults with PWS, mean hair cortisol
levels were significantly higher than hair cortisol in 105
sex and age matched population-based controls. Hair
cortisol increased with BMI and reported stress in patients
with PWS.
The stress hormone cortisol, produced in the adrenals,
is important in maintaining body homeostasis by modulating
neuroendocrine functions, the sympathetic nervous
system and the immune function. Cortisol levels are regulated
by activity in the hypothalamus and pituitary and secreted
in a pulsatile circadian rhythm with increased
secretion in response to stress. Cortisol is commonly measured
in blood, and saliva, but these methods only reflect
the time point at which the sampling is done or when
measured in urine the past 24 h’ cortisol production. Multiple
samplings are often needed. However, during the
past decade, the measurement of hair cortisol has emerged
as a non-invasive method to estimate the cortisol concentrations
over months [6, 14, 17]. Hair grows at a relatively
stable rate of approximately 1 cm/month, and cortisol accumulates
in hair. Thus, cortisol in hair retrospectively
represents the average cortisol level over the corresponding
period. There is no discomfort associated with collection
of the hair sample and no special storage precautions
are required for the samples. This is an attractive procedure,
especially in a population such as PWS where the psychological
and behavioral features might complicate
advanced sampling procedures. We found that collection
of the hair samples worked out well in our PWS cohort,
although some men could not participate because of too
short hair for sufficient analyses. In addition, four patients
declined participation because they felt that even the small
hairless spot on the scalp after cutting the hair would
stigmatize them further, although the sampling spot at the
back of the scalp is usually too small to be visible afterwards.
In our cohort of patients with PWS, hair cortisol
levels were clearly increased in patients who had reported
significant stressful events. This is in accordance with several
studies showing that the content of cortisol in hair is
higher in individuals exposed to stress and stress-related
disorders [12, 17–24]. Some of the patients in the present
study with normal to low normal hair cortisol reported
nonspecific stressful situations, but the analysis of hair
cortisol was probably not sensitive enough to detect minor
or short-lived alterations of the HPA-axis [25].
Cortisol levels have been found to correlate positively
with waist to hip ratio, waist circumference and
BMI [19, 26–30] and to be higher in obese individuals
compared to normal-weight people [28, 29]. To
retain all patients with PWS in the statistical analyses,
matching for BMI between patients with PWS and
controls was not done since some severely obese patients
with PWS could not be matched with controls.
However, similar to previous studies, we found an increase
in hair cortisol with BMI in the patients with
PWS [30].
It is well known that some patients with PWS suffer
from diseases secondarily to obesity, such as diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases and
arthrosis [31], and PWS is associated with a decreased
life expectancy, with an annual death rate reported to
be as high as 3% [32, 33]. Nevertheless, a number of
reported deaths were unexpected and unexplained,
and it has been speculated if central adrenal insufficiency
might have been the cause of some of the
deaths [6]. While the ACTH stimulation test provides
information about the maximum response of the adrenal
gland under stress hair cortisol concentrations
provide information about average cortisol concentrations
over a longer period. Our results warrant for
larger and potentially randomized studies, but measurement
of hair cortisol in PWS is attractive due to
its non-invasive and simple performance. It is also an
advantage that hair cortisol gives information on
long-term cortisol exposure and might in the future
be a baseline test for evaluation of the adrenal function
and consideration for further evaluation.
Limitations
PWS is a rare disease, and the number of participants in
the present study was too small for more complex analyses
and comparisons with the control group. Furthermore,
detailed information on use of steroids was not
realistic to obtain and for robust information a prospective
study would be necessary. Hair cortisone was not analyzed,
but as hair cortisol and hair cortisone strongly
correlate [30], the added value of measuring cortisone
for the purpose of the present study would probably be
limited.
Another limitation in our study is the assessment of
stress, which in both groups was interpreted from reported
stress during different duration of time and different
questionnaires, which potentially might have
affected the results. Moreover, in the PWS group most
of the questionnaires were answered by the patients’
caretakers and not directly by themselves. The questions
on stress were not validated in patients with PWS but
they were adapted to the capacity of this group of patients
and therefore very simple to answer and the answers
were confirmed by the caregivers. However, this is
a pilot study and for the purpose of our study we were
interested in whether stressful situations at all would
elicit an increase in cortisol. Finally, patients with PWS
who were able and willing to participate, might represent
a selected group of quite healthy and well-functioning
adults with PWS.
Conclusion
In conclusion, in our adult patients with PWS the variation
in hair cortisol was large. The mean cortisol level
was higher than in the age and sex matched populationbased
controls. Increased BMI and reported stress were
both associated with increased hair cortisol levels. The
function of the HPA axis in PWS is an ongoing issue
and there is a need for further investigations. Among
these to study the long-term cortisol exposure and the
effect of stress. The present study is the first to analyze
hair cortisol in PWS, and our results suggest an adequate
long-term cortisol level and cortisol response to
chronic stress in PWS. Hair cortisol might become a
useful tool to guide the monitoring and management efforts
for adults with PWS, including follow-up of
comorbidities.