Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a metabolic disease characterized
by elevated blood glucose. All over the world, the
prevalence of diabetes is on the rise. According to a WHO
report, there have been more than 36 million deaths due
to chronic non-communicable diseases worldwide, and
diabetes ranked fourth, accounting for 3% in 2008 [1]. By
2014, the number of people with diabetes worldwide
reached 422 million, accounting for 8.5% of the total
population [2]. In recent years, the proportion of deaths
due to diabetes has gradually increased as a proportion of
all deaths due to chronic diseases. According to existing
diabetes data and trends, it is estimated that the number
of people with diabetes worldwide will reach 366 million
by 2030 [3]. At present, the proportion of the potential
population with diabetes in Chinese adults is as high as
15.5, and 60.7% of these individuals had not previously
received a diagnosis of prediabetes [4].
Diabetes is a chronic, lifelong disease. Diabetes is one of
the main chronic non-communicable diseases and can
cause various complications, such as hypertension, coronary
heart disease, diabetic nephropathy and diabetic foot
[5]. Diabetes has become one of the main sources of global
disease burden [6]. At present, diagnosis of diabetes is
mainly based on a doctor’s diagnosis and laboratory examination.
In some cases, diabetes complications can be
avoided when a person with diabetes is diagnosed early,
treated and maintains tight control of their blood sugar
levels. However, due to the lack of early diagnosis and
screening techniques, some diabetic patients develop into
advanced stages when they are diagnosed [4], which causes
serious consequences, and some have even died [7]. Diabetes
consumes a large amount of medical resources. How
to solve the contradiction between the uneven distribution
of medical resources and the rapid growth of medical
expenses is a problem.
Prevention-based control is needed for type 2 diabetes.
Studies have shown that community intervention is a costeffective
measure to reduce cardiovascular morbidity
throughout the world [8, 9] and the risk of diabetes in individuals.
An assessment can screen out high-risk groups
with diabetes and reduce the incidence and mortality of
diabetes by targeting intervention in high-risk groups.
Knowler et al. conducted a follow-up for an average of 2.8
years and concluded that lifestyle interventions reduced
the incidence of pre-diabetic patients by 58% [10]. The
Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study reported that obese
pre-diabetes patients with weight loss of more than 2.5%
within one year had an incidence of diabetes of approximately
2%, and patients with a 2.5% weight gain had an
incidence of diabetes of approximately 8%. Perreault et al.
reported that reverting to normal glucose levels can reduce
the risk of diabetes in the future by 56% in pre-diabetes
patients [11].
In recent years, most of the methods for performing a
disease risk assessment involve data mining technology.
Data mining is a new widely used method in the medical
field for disease diagnosis, prognosis, medical expense
management. Wang C. et al. used a neural network to
identify those at high risk of T2DM based on demographic,
lifestyle and anthropometric data [12]. Kang S.
et al. used a neural network to make a personalized prediction
of drug efficacy for diabetes treatment [13]. Kim
SY at al.(2011) used an artificial neural network to establish
a predictive model of pre-operative advanced prostate
cancer, providing a basis for clinical decision-making [14].
Hon-Yi Shi et al. used artificial neural network and logistic
regression models to predict in-hospital mortality after
traumatic brain injury surgery [15].
Logistic regression models are nonlinear probability
models that are typically used to identify disease risk factors
and predict the risk of occurrence. These models
are suitable for performing regression analyses of
dependent variables as categorical variables. The factors
that influence diabetes have been widely used in logistic
regression analyses in the past. The BP neural network
is a multi-layer, feedforward neural network trained by
an error back propagation algorithm. The BP neural network
is the most widely used neural network technique
and uses computing power to simulate the information
transmission process of an animal neural network. Perez
Acadia used an artificial neural network to establish a
predictive model of hyperglycaemia in diabetic patients
[16]; Zarkogianni K used an artificial neural network to
establish a query system for insulin injection in people
with diabetes [17]. A decision tree model is a tree-like
process in which each node is a split attribute that can
be intuitively seen from the decision tree. The decision
tree model has the advantages of being fast, easy to
understand, and able to process large amounts of data.
The decision tree model has been widely used in various
medical fields in recent years [18]
Data mining is widely used in the medical field, although
in recent years, studies have used using data
mining techniques to study predictive models, such as
logistic regression analysis, decision trees, artificial
neural network algorithms, and others. Most of the studies
use a single model and rarely use multiple models to
conduct comparative research [4, 12, 13]. Because each
method has its own advantages and disadvantages, it is
necessary to compare different models to identify the
optimal mathematical model for predicting type 2 diabetes.
This paper combines a logistic regression model, a
BP neural network model and a decision tree model to
analyse factors affecting diabetes and explore the most
suitable model for predicting the risk of type 2 diabetes
in the Chinese population. In addition, this study was
based on adults in Northeast China, inhabitants of this
area have unique life style than others, including higher
drinking rate and high salt and oil diet. Due to different
lifestyles, local residents may have different causes of
type 2 diabetes than other regions.
Methods
Participants
This study was conducted in 2018. Participants were
those who resided in the 5 monitoring areas of Jilin
Province for 6 months or more within 12 months prior
to the survey and were 18 years old or older. According
to the multi-stage stratified cluster sampling method, 5
counties (cities) were selected as monitoring points in
each stage, 4 towns (streets) were selected in each monitoring
point, and 3 villages (residential committees) were
selected in each township. Each village drew 50 families,
and each family drew a resident over 18 years old to include.
To control lost calls, this study adopted homologous
population replacement for lost participants and
controlled the replacement rate of the surveyed households
to not exceed 10.0%. The exclusion criteria were
(1) lack of diabetes-related laboratory tests data and
questionnaire data or (2) self-report of a type 2 diabetes
diagnosis on the questionnaire. A total of 4689 cases
were recovered, of which 4177 were valid.
Research methods
The survey included three parts: a questionnaire, physical
examinations, and laboratory tests.
Questionnaire survey
The questionnaire survey was conducted in accordance
with the China Chronic Disease Surveillance Questionnaire
Survey Procedure and was conducted face-to-face
by investigators with unified training [19]. The questionnaire
included smoking, alcohol, diet, and physical activity.
Smoking meant that at least one tobacco product
was consumed every day and there was a history of
smoking for ≥6 months consecutively. Drinking was
consumption of any type of alcohol at least once a week
and a history of drinking for ≥6 months.
Physical examination
Height, weight, waist circumference, and blood pressure
were measured by two uniformly trained surveyors, and
body mass index BMI = weight (kg) / height 2 (m2) [20].
The accuracy of the height measurement tools is 0.1 cm.
The accuracy of the weight measurement tools is 0.1 kg.
The accuracy of the waist measurement tools is 0.1 cm.
Blood pressure was measured using a HEM-7200 electronic
sphygmomanometer produced by Omron (Dalian)
Co Ltd. BMI < 27.9 kg/m2 was normal and overweight
and BMI ≥ 28.0 kg/m2 was obese [21]. A male waist
circumference > 90 cm and a female waist circumference
> 80 cm was indicative of abdominal obesity [22,
23]. Systolic blood pressure ≥ 140 mmHg (1 mmHg without
antihypertensive drug) =0.1333 kPa and diastolic
blood pressure ≥ 90 mmHg or having been diagnosed
with hypertension by a township hospitals in the past 2
weeks were considered high blood pressure [24].
Laboratory tests
The investigator took 4 ml of fasting venous blood from
the surveyed subjects, and after centrifugation and dispensing
at the survey site, the samples were stored and
transported to the Jilin University School of Basic Medicine
laboratory for determination of fasting blood glucose
and oral glucose after oral administration of 75 g of
anhydrous glucose for 2 h (OGTT-2 h), glycated haemoglobin
(HbA1c), cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), low
density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and high density
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and other indicators.
Diabetes mellitus was diagnosed if fasting blood glucose
was ≥7.0mmol / L, OGTT - 2 h blood glucose was ≥11.1
mmol / L or HbA1c was ≥6.5% [25]. The participants who
were not diagnosed with dyslipidemia and were not taking
lipid-lowering drugs. If TC was ≥5.2mmol / L, then TC
was considered increased. If TG was ≥1.17 mmol / L, then
TG was considered increased. If LDL - C was ≥3.4mmol /
L, then LDL-C was considered increased. If HDL-C was <
1.04 mmol/L, then HDL-C was considered reduced [26]. In
people who have been diagnosed with dyslipidemia in the
past, we asked them to answer the supplementary question
in the questionnaire, which one of the high triglycerides,
high cholesterol, high LDL-c or low HDL-c is diagnosed (If
there are multiple indicators of one sample diagnosed as
abnormal, it would be included in multiple variables).
Statistical analysis
We used Epi Data 3.1 software with double-entry data to
establish a database and complete a consistency test. IBM
SPSS 24.0 statistical software was used for general descriptive
analysis, chi-square tests and establishing the logistic
regression model, the BP neural network model and the
decision tree model. Of the 4177 participants in this study,
70% of subjects (n1 = 2924) were randomly selected to
provide a training data set and 30% of subjects (n2 = 1253)
were selected to provide a validation data set for the logistic
regression model and the decision tree model, 274
(9.37%) and 115(9.18%) people with type 2 diabetes fell in
each set. For BP neural network model, we extract 1/3
from the training set as the testing set, 193 (9.47%) and 81
(9.24%) people with type 2 diabetes fell in training set and
testing set. We used cross validation to verify the model.
The logistic regression model required considering the
collinearity problem when incorporating variables. We
used tolerance values and the variance inflation factor
(VIF) to examine collinearity. The criteria values for tolerance
and VIF (≤0.10 and ≥ 10, respectively) were sufficient
to identify co-linearity and thus be excluded when entering
the model. The analysis results were statistically
significant at P < 0.05.
Results
Demographic characteristics
Comparing the prevalence of diabetes in people with different
demographic characteristics, the results showed
that the prevalence of type 2 diabetes was significantly
different among subjects of different genders and ages,
and the significance level was set at 0.05. The results are
shown in Table 1.
Comparing the prevalence of diabetes in people with
different lifestyles, the results showed that the prevalence
of type 2 diabetes was statistically significant among subjects
with different smoking and drinking statuses, and
the significance level was set at 0.05. The results are
shown in Table 2
Comparing the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in people
with different health statuses, the results showed that
the prevalence of type 2 diabetes was statistically significant
among subjects with different BMI, abdominal
obesity, hypertension, and stroke, and the significance
level was set at 0.05. The results are shown in Table 3
Comparing the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in people
with different health statuses, the results showed that
the prevalence of type 2 diabetes was statistically significant
among subjects with different TC, TG, LDL-C, and
HDL-C, and the significance level was set at 0.05. The
results are shown in Table 4
Logistic regression model
Inclusion of meaningful variables from the univariate analysis
in the multivariate logistic analysis showed that 7 variables
were statistically significantly associated with the
onset of type 2 diabetes: drinking (P < 0.001, OR = 1.674),
age (P < 0.001, OR = 1.734), waist circumference (P = 0.006,
OR = 1.448), blood pressure (P < 0.001, OR = 1.703), TC
(P = 0.003, OR = 1.463), BMI (P = 0.047, OR = 1.321), and
TG (P < 0.001, OR = 2.233). See the table for details. As a
predictor of the logistic model, the predictive model is: P =
1 / (1+e (3.569–0.515 × drinking - 0.550 × age - 0.370 ×
abdominal obesity - 0.533 × hypertension - 0.381 × TC -
0.297 × BMI -0.803 × TG)). Among them, P is the predicted
probability of the logistic regression model. Between
0 and 1, the closer P is to 1, the greater the probability of
developing type 2 diabetes. Substituting the prediction
model into the testing data set, with a critical value of 0.5,
the results show that the prediction accuracy of the model
was 90.8% and the area under the ROC curve was 0.711
(95% Cl: 0.697–0.724). The sensitivity of the ROC curve
was 67.8%, and its specificity was 64.7%. The results are
shown in Table 5
BP neural network model
The 13 variables that were significant by the chi-square
test were included in the neural network model. That is,
13 units were established in the input layer. The number
of hidden layers can be 1 or 2. The hidden layer activation
function is a hyperbolic tangent, the input layer activation
function is the softmax, and the output layer has two
units. First, when the hidden layer was 1, the area under
the ROC curve of the model with a different number of
hidden layer nodes was discussed. The results are shown
in Table 6. When the number of hidden layer nodes was
5, the area under the ROC curve was the largest, 0.780
(95% Cl: 0.767–0.792); the sensitivity was 72.94%; and the
specificity was 72.42%. The results are shown in Table 6
The area under the ROC curve of different hidden
layer nodes with two hidden layers in the BP neural network
model is shown in Table 7
Finally, the BP neural network with 1 hidden layer and
5 hidden layer nodes was taken as the final prediction
model. The BP neural network ranks the importance of
predictor variables for different predictors, and the details
are shown in Table 8
Dividing the predictor importance indicator by the maximum
indicator value yields a normalized predictor importance
order. The results showed that the top five
variables were TG (100.0%), alcohol consumption (91.4%),
age (74.9%), hypertension (58.8%), and TC (50.4%). Using
the BP neural network model for prediction, with 0.5 as
the predicted quasi-probability boundary value, the prediction
accuracy of the model was 91.3% and the area
under the ROC curve was 0.781 (95% Cl: 0.768–0.794).
The results are shown in Table 7
Decision tree model
The decision tree for factors affecting the prevalence of
type 2 diabetes is shown in Fig. 1. It can be seen from
the figure that the first layer is TG, indicating that TG
had the strongest correlation with type 2 diabetes and
that the risk of type 2 diabetes was higher in people with
higher TG than normal. The remaining variables were
hypertension, age, smoking, and abdominal obesity. The
accuracy of the prediction model was 90.7%, and the
area under the ROC curve was 0.698 (95% CI: 0.684–
0.712). The sensitivity of the curve was 64.5%, and the
specificity was 65.7%. The results are shown in Fig. 1
Model comparison
The prediction accuracy of the three models and the area
under the ROC curves are shown in Table 8. The area
under the ROC curve is ranked from BP neural network
model (0.780) to logistic regression model (0.711) to decision
tree model (0.698). Three models’ AIC are 293.178,
281.895, 343.877. The results are shown in Table 9
The areas under the ROC of different models are shown
in Table 10. The results showed that the difference between
the ROC area values of the BP neural network
model and the logistic regression model was statistically
significant (P < 0.001), the difference between the ROC
area values of the BP neural network model and the decision
tree model was statistically significant (P < 0.001), but
the difference between the ROC area values of the logistic
regression model and the decision tree model was not statistically
significant (P = 0.0711 ≥ 0.05).
Figure 2 shows the ROC curves of the three models.
The ordinate is sensitivity, reflecting the ability of the
100-specific, reflecting the ability of the model to
misjudge a patient. The larger the ordinate of the
model, the smaller the abscissa. That is, the larger the
area under the ROC curve and the closer to 1, the
better the diagnostic effect of the model. As shown in
Fig. 2, the BP neural network model has the largest
area under the ROC curve, indicating that it has the
best diagnostic value compared with the other two
models
Discussion
Analysis of factors influencing type 2 diabetes
Multivariate logistic regression model, BP neural network
model, and decision tree model predictions
showed that the main risk factors for type 2 diabetes
included TG, age, blood pressure, drinking, TC, waist
circumference, and BMI. Among them, the most influential
factors associated with the onset of type 2
diabetes were TG (OR = 2.233), age (OR = 1.734),
hypertension (OR = 1.703), alcohol consumption (OR =
1.674), and TC (OR = 1.463).
Hypertension, high triglycerides, and high total cholesterol
were risk factors for diabetes and cardiovascular
disease that have been previously confirmed [27]. This
study showed that people aged 70 years and older were
more susceptible to type 2 diabetes than those below 70.
Most studies have presented the same result [28]. As age
increases, collagen and elastin in blood vessels gradually
decreases, the blood vessel wall becomes hard and brittle,
blood pressure and blood lipids rise, and high density
lipoprotein cholesterol decreases. The hardening and
aging of blood vessels and the change in the normal
function of the vascular wall caused by inflammatory reactions
and adipose tissue can also affect the expression
of intracellular protein kinases, regulating the expression
of inflammatory genes [29–31], affecting the normal
function of islet β cells and reducing insulin secretion. 
Hypertension often coexists with diabetes [32], which
may have a common risk factor, such as obesity.
This study suggests drinking is a risk factor for type 2
diabetes. Studies have shown that [33] moderate drinking
can improve insulin sensitivity, increase high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol and adiponectin levels, and reduce inflammation,
but heavy drinking increases energy intake
and causes obesity, impairs liver function, and increases
the pancreatic burden, which accelerate the progression of
diabetes. Therefore, to control the prevalence of diabetes
and its complications, smoking and drinking should be an
important target for prevention and control.
Abdominal obesity and BMI > 28 are both considered
obese and have been proven to be important risk factors
for many chronic, non-communicable diseases. Adipose tissue
can release a large number of inflammatory cytokines
and biologically active regulatory factors that aggravate the
body’s oxidation. The agonistic reaction produces an inflammatory
reaction, affects the secretion and regulation of insulin, and causes the body to produce insulin resistance,
which affects the stability of blood sugar levels.
Diabetes risk prediction
BP neural network model
The results of this study showed that when predicting the risk
of type 2 diabetes, the prediction accuracy of the BP neural
network model was 91.2% and the area under the ROC curve
was 0.780. The BP neural network model was better than the
logistic regression model and the decision tree model both in
accuracy and the area under the ROC curve, and the difference
between them was statistically significant (P<0.05).
Compared with the logistic regression model, the BP
neural network model is not affected by the interactions between
variables and has nonlinear mapping abilities, selflearning
and self-adaptive abilities, generalization abilities,
and fault tolerance. It can handle complexities better than
other models. The data have been widely used in the medical
field. There have been many studies on BP neural networks
in the past. In Shi HY et al. [15], artificial neural
network and logistic regression models were used together
to predict in-hospital mortality after traumatic brain injury
surgery. The results showed that the artificial neural network
was a better prediction model in terms of accuracy
and area under the ROC curve. Li Lixia et al. [34] used a logistic
regression model and a BP neural network model to
predict liver cancer and also concluded that the BP neural
network model was superior to the logistic regression
model. When the BP neural network model was established
in this paper, the area under the ROC curve with 1 layer
and 2 layers of hidden layers and different hidden layer
nodes was selected. The comparison result was that when
the hidden layer was set to 1, the number of hidden layer
nodes was 5. The area under the ROC curve was the largest,
and the prediction ability was the best. Previous studies
have shown that BP neural networks with a hidden layer
of 1 better predict ischemic stroke [35]. However, the BP neural network model also has many shortcomings, such as
an (1) “overfitting” phenomenon. If the BP neural network
is too detailed from the training sample, the learned model
does not correctly reflect the law applied in the sample.
Therefore, grasping the degree of learning and the correct
generation of rules is essential. (2) Determination of the
number of hidden layers is also a shortcoming. There is no
theoretical guidance for the choice of the number of layers
and the number of cells in the hidden layer of the network,
which are generally determined by experience or after repeated
experiments. Most of the existing research results
show that a hidden BP neural network can reflect the data
rules and characteristics well. When the BP neural network
model was established in this paper, the area under the
ROC curve when the number of hidden nodes was 1 or 2
was compared. The results showed that the prediction was
better when the number of hidden layers was 1. (3) The BP
neural network cannot judge whether the variable is a protective
factor or a risk factor. (4) The model cannot perform
hypothesis testing or medical interpretation of the
weighted coefficients.
Decision tree model
The decision tree model had a short computation time, and
the results were simple and intuitive to display in a tree.
The classification power of the results was more accurate
However, when the classification increased, it affected the
prediction results [36]. The decision tree model can only
process categorical variables. Continuous variables cannot
be included. Moreover, a common shortcoming of the BP
neural network model and decision tree model is that the
direction of the variable cannot be explained. The research
factor cannot be judged to be a risk factor or a protective
factor, whereas the logistic regression model can explain
the direction of the variable well. The area under the ROC
curve of the decision tree model in this paper was the smallest
of the three prediction models, and the difference between
the BP neural network model and the logistic
regression model was statistically significant. Some scholars
have compared decision trees with other statistical models.
Li Xianwen et al. [37] found that the prediction of a logistic
regression model was better than that of a decision tree
model in a study of health literacy in hypertensive patients,
in agreement with the results of this paper.
Rapid and effective prediction of the risk of type 2 diabetes
can allow for preventative actions to be taken by
members of high-risk groups. The results of this study
showed that the BP neural network model was a good
predictive model for type 2 diabetes, but for practical
applications, the logistic regression model can explain
the variables and results more intuitively. The BP neural
network model and the decision tree model lack the
ability to interpret results. Therefore, for practical applications,
it is necessary to combine the advantages and
disadvantages of each model and select the appropriate
model to obtain the highest value in practice.
Conclusions
BP neural networks have a higher predictive power for
identifying the associated risk factors of type 2 diabetes
than Logistic regression model and decision tree model,
but it is necessary to select a suitable model for specific
situations.