The clinical state of hypothyroidism (then known as
myxoedema) was described around 1870, and 10 years
later it was recognised as being due to loss of function
of the thyroid gland [1–4]. While the Chinese may have
been treating goitre in cretins with sheep’s thyroid in the
sixth century BCE [5], initial attempts at treating
hypothyroidism were made by transplantation of animal
thyroid tissue, followed by injectable and oral formulations
[5–7]. In 1914, Kendall [8] was the first to purify
the hormone thyroxine at Mayo Laboratories, which was
synthesised as levothyroxine (LT4) in 1926 [9]. Despite
this early chemical breakthrough in drug manufacturing,
desiccated animal thyroid extract remained widely used,
and even at this time some patients still regard it as the
most satisfactory treatment of hypothyroidism for them
[10, 11]. A policy was adopted by endocrinologists in the
1960s to replace thyroid extract with synthetic levothyroxine
as the latter was then more consistent in its content
[12–15]. More recently, thyroid extracts have been
standardized by modern high pressure liquid chromatography
(HPLC) techniques to maintain their content of
thyroid hormones in different batches within USP specifications.
Few clinical trials have been performed to
compare the efficacy of the two products [15], and an
exploratory RCT was conducted only in 2013 [16]. From
its very beginnings replacement therapy was individualised
and guided by the measurement of basal metabolic
rate, a peripheral marker of the adequacy of thyroid hormone
action [17]. Such a test was cumbersome and
operator-dependent and was supplanted by biochemical
tests such as protein-bound iodine measurements
initially in the 1950s, followed in the early 1970s by
radioimmunoassay methods for measuring serum concentrations
of T3, T4 and TSH [18–21].
Despite a historically late start in its recognition as a
disease entity, hypothyroidism has remarkably become
one of the most frequently diagnosed diseases in the
Western world, and levothyroxine one of the most frequently
used drugs worldwide [22–24].
How could a condition that had been overlooked
throughout the centuries of human culture rise to such
prominence in such a short time period? Clearly, this was
related to the convenient and sensitive measurement of
serum TSH [25], which has achieved a pre-eminent position
in defining primary hypothyroidism [26]. Consequently,
a new disease class of subclinical hypothyroidism
was introduced, which is solely based on the presence of
an elevated TSH while the thyroid hormones FT3 and
FT4 remain within their respective reference ranges [26].
This strategy has not remained unchallenged and the deficiencies
of this diagnostic approach have been reviewed
elsewhere [27]. In an attempt to scale back on the avalanche
of purported thyroid diseases created by this
strategy, the TSH threshold for treatment was raised in recent
guidelines [26]. In doing so, another problem was
created by dissociating the TSH-based diagnosis of the
disease from the requirement of therapeutic intervention.
However, doctors and patients find it incomprehensible
that a thyroid condition labelled as a disease would not
therefore require suitable intervention. This questions the
practical value of designation and appropriateness of the
current diagnostic entity of subclinical hypothyroidism.
Main text
In this article, we take a closer look how these technical
changes may have impacted on patient care. A transition
occurred from the era of low metabolic rate regarded as
synonymous with hypothyroidism to a purely biochemically
based definition [28]. Hence, TSH measurement
became the new determinant of hypothyroidism [26].
Consequently, treatment habits changed over the last
decade and were more related to laboratory records than
subjective patient experience. In particular, LT4 replacement
doses tended to decrease, as a suppressed TSH
was viewed as evidence of overtreatment [24, 26]. However,
for two reasons this is an area of considerable uncertainty.
Firstly, thyroid-related patient complaints
overlap with a plethora of non-specific symptoms caused
by other conditions and diseases [29–36]. Thyroid tests
are also more likely to be obtained in patients with unspecific
symptoms [37–39]. In these conditions, LT4
treatment may not be superior to placebo in symptom
alleviation [40–42]. Secondly, TSH is increasingly recognised
to be less reliable as a definitive diagnostic tool
than previously assumed [27]. Not only is its reference
interval not universally agreed on or adjusted for various
influences, such as ethnicity, iodine supply, age, but the
univariate statistical derivation of a TSH reference range
is inherently ill-defined owing to its nature as a controlling
element [43]. Physiologically, stimulation by TSH
raises thyroid hormones to a level appropriate to the
optimal well-being of a person. Because TSH, FT4
and FT3 are interrelated through the operation of
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid feedback regulation, integrated
pairs of TSH and FT4 values define the
so-called individual set points [43, 44]. Unlike a
population-based univariate reference interval, set
points are subject to multivariate normality and narrow
homeostatic ranges [43]. When plotting TSH
against FT4 concentrations the resulting distribution
in a healthy population does not describe the familiar
rectangle, but a kite-shaped area [43]. Accordingly, a
TSH value can be indicative of true euthyroidism in
an individual despite it slightly exceeding the upper
reference limit, while a TSH measurement within that
reference interval may represent a truly hypothyroid
subject [43]. Isolated TSH interpretation thereby
becomes ambiguous, resulting in unacceptable diagnostic
and therapeutic uncertainty surrounding a
given TSH measurement when it approaches the TSH
euthyroid range [43, 44]. As a consequence, this strategy
divorces diagnostic disease definitions from treatment
targets. Rationally therefore, the triple roles of
TSH as a screening test, diagnostic tool and therapeutic
target require separate assessment. Diagnostic
reliability for patients may be improved by reconstructing
personal TSH-FT4 set points, depending on
whether this novel approach can be confirmed in
clinical trials [45].
Both the non-specific nature of complaints and inherent
deficiencies in the diagnostic process raise an unsettling
dilemma for patients and thyroid specialists alike.
The issues are exemplified and particularly pertinent to
an etiological disease entity whose consequences are paralleled
in similar outcomes: primary hypothyroidism due
to total thyroidectomy in patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer. Treatment requirements and dosing of
the drug LT4 changed when guidelines relaxed the need
for TSH-suppressive treatment targets for these patients
[46, 47]. The reason for this shift was not primarily motivated
by any improvement in the replacement strategy
but by a revision of the long-held tenet that TSH may
act as a thyroid growth stimulating hormone. Even when
only present at a low level in the circulation it was believed
that it could potentially stimulate the growth of
remaining tumour cells and thereby promote the relapse
of the thyroid cancer in the long-term [48]. This view
has recently been revised, and TSH suppression is now
deemed unnecessary for many thyroid cancer patients
[49]. However, this remarkable strategy change has presented
a unique opportunity to study the implications
for patient complaints of such a far-reaching decision to
abandon TSH-suppressive LT4 treatment in low-risk
thyroid cancer [47]. Although this could not be done in
a prospective study, careful retrospective analysis revealed
some interesting trends [50]. Over the years when
replacement therapy aimed at complete TSH suppression
a relatively low rate of persistent hypothyroid complaints
was reported by patients followed at a single
institution, much lower than in the subsequent years
when the relaxed TSH policy came into effect (Fig. 1).
The reverse was true for hyperthyroid complaints reported
by patients, which were relatively higher in the
first and much lower in the second time period (Fig. 1).
The symptom reporting by these patients indicates a historical
shift in the trend from a lack of hypothyroid
symptoms on LT4 towards an increased awareness of
the persisting symptomatology. While the nature, reliability
and accuracy of freely communicated symptoms
may be questionable it appears that the opposing trends
in these rates in the same patients are well documented
in this cohort, and they occurred in association with an
important change in the treatment policy during
follow-up [46–50]. We are not aware of any prospective
studies that followed this historic shift in the pattern of
patient complaints during the last decade. The changing
pattern in patient complaints observed in this cohort
[50] and associated with the low-dose policy promoted
by recent guidelines is mirrored in a recent prospective
study [51] and by a dramatic increase in patients worldwide
expressing their concerns and dissatisfaction with
the standard treatment in various ways including over
the internet and through patient advocacies [52]. This
sentiment was confirmed by a large online survey of
12,146 hypothyroid patients conducted by the American
Thyroid Association [11].
The expression of dissatisfaction may be partly explained
by raised awareness of the problem, based on
unspecific subjective criteria, and the possible contribution
of a lack in certainty of the diagnostic process
discussed above [11, 29–45]. Patient expectations
introduce a confounding influence on perceived outcomes
[11, 53, 54]. This is difficult to address, particularly
since expectation bias extends to RCTs,
regarded as the highest class of evidence in
Evidenced-Based Medicine [53]. A conflict arises between
Evidenced-Based Medicine and FDA regulations,
the latter mandating that drug evaluation is
strictly done under conditions of actual use [53, 55].
A statistical remedy (R2R) has been proposed to adjust
for expectation bias, but we are not aware of any
thyroid-related analysis following such a rigorous
protocol [53].
A question may be asked as to why such a renunciation
of a previous protocol has not been accompanied
by the initiation of appropriate trials to monitor the consequences
of the new recommendations and the transition
period in a suitable way. We strongly believe that
this should become a priority from a public health perspective
and an important joint task of the stakeholders
advocating for change in the best interest of patients.
This would make any discussion surrounding this important
topic better grounded in evidence. As most of
our patients were otherwise healthy and free of comorbidity
it does not seem to be plausible or fair to blame a
host of other possible influences for their complaints
[50]. Similarly, in patients with autoimmune thyroiditis,
LT4 treatment did not restore quality of life assessed
with a validated state-of-the-art and thyroid-specific instrument
to that of the healthy population in a large
Danish open label study [51]. It remains however questionable
whether these patients received optimum treatment,
since some patients did not have their TSH
“normalised” and the pituitary hormone may also be an
unreliable marker in this particular setting [51].
Using the observed historical narrower therapeutic
range for an individual patient we note that the treatment
targets may overlap for patients in a group. If that
is true the general assumption that maintaining TSH
anywhere within its broad reference limits to routinely
achieve a satisfactory outcome for each and every patient
may be ill advised. We have refuted the applicability of
treatment targets based on the consideration of the
reference ranges in the healthy population, by demonstrating
dissociations between FT3 and FT4, and FT3
and TSH in LT4-treated athyreotic patients, and documenting
altered equilibria between the hormones on
LT4, compared to the healthy state [27, 56]. Others have
arrived at similar conclusions [57]. In laboratory diagnostics,
the high individuality of TSH and thyroid hormones
has long been recognised since the pioneering
work of Andersen and colleagues [58]. However, this applies
equally to the statistical analysis of associations involving
thyroid parameters. Data clustering, be it in
groups with similar properties or in subjects where multiple
measurements are obtained over time, potentially
masks the true relationship, abolishing the strong associations
at the group level when the data are combined for
analysis. This phenomenon, known as Simpson’s paradox,
is readily demonstrated with a fictitious random
sample of two groups with a slightly shifted centre
showing the same strong inverse correlation. Unlike the
correct analysis by individual groups, a combined analysis
of the total cohort artificially weakens the correlation
(Fig. 2). The analytical distinction between the
averaged versus the typical outcome is clinically relevant
for all thyroid drug trials, independently of evidence
class and study design, because doctors are naturally
more interested in the latter.
In a large retrospective longitudinal study, relying on a
multilevel model and accounting for both within-subject
and between-subject variation, symptomatic outcomes
were associated with serum FT3 concentrations, and differed
according to the placement of biochemical parameters
within the reference range or noticeably beyond its
limits in the case of TSH and FT4 [50]. Treatment-related
displacement of the equilibria between thyroid parameters,
wide variations in the biochemical treatment response,
and individually adjusted dose requirement pose
particular challenges for thyroid trials [27, 45, 59, 60].
Demonstration of averaged equivalency cannot therefore
be a satisfactory analytical goal [61].
Accordingly, the value of statistical evidence derived
from historical meta-analyses [62–66] and RCTs on the
acceptability of T3/T4 combination therapy is severely
weakened and requires careful reconsideration [60].
Many RCTs were conducted with inferior quality of life
instruments available at the time and relied on statistical
techniques both less suited for highly individual parameters
and in addition susceptible to Simpson’s paradox.
Using the overall preference expressed by patients at
the end of double-blind studies as a proxy, patients
mostly favoured T3/T4 combination therapy [52]. A
thyroid-specific QoL has only recently been developed
and validated [51]. Simpson’s paradox (also known as
amalgamation bias or collider stratification bias) may
explain, at least in part, why otherwise well-performed
studies failed to provide a convincing relationship between
symptoms and thyroid function tests [27, 54, 59–
61]. The paradox is a relevant factor for the relationship
of patient complaints, biochemical markers and treatment
response to LT4 [60]. This bias - unless properly
accounted for statistically - dissociates the personal
treatment responses from the statistical group effect,
thereby masking individual treatment success or failure
in an unchanged grouped outcome. A lack of group to
individual generalizability has been increasingly recognized
in other fields, requiring explicit testing for
equivalence of processes both at the individual and
group level [61].
Trials purporting to relate TSH and thyroid hormone
levels to the incidence of osteoporosis and atrial fibrillation
fall under the same fundamental caveats [24, 27]. In
particular, the Rotterdam study has shown that within
the euthyroid range the prognostic implications of
thyroid hormones and TSH differ, and, that TSH measurements
therefore cannot substitute for FT4 concentrations
in predicting the risk of atrial fibrillation [67].
The cause of atrial fibrillation poses a complex problem,
as its occurrence has been physiologically and statistically
associated with both high and low FT3 concentrations
[68]. Thyrotoxicosis due to exogenous thyroid
hormone intake and endogenous hyperthyroidism have
different physiological roots. This traditional distinction
should be noted because the interrelationships between
TSH and thyroid hormones differ on LT4 treatment
from those in thyroid health [24, 56, 57, 59, 69]. This
may explain why a prospective study measuring surrogate
markers of thyroid tissue effects in athyreotic patients
found a slightly suppressed TSH to be
optimum for these patients rather than constituting
overtreatment [57]. This problem is paralleled in FT4
measurements, which also overlap significantly at the
hypothyroid-euthyroid borderline, both in untreated
states and even more so in LT4-treated patients [24,
26, 59, 67]. However, this neither implies that TSH
suppression is universally desirable, nor that a suppressed
TSH is without risk [24]. Rather TSH by itself,
unaccompanied by measurements of FT4 and
FT3, is an unsuitable risk measure in LT4-treated patients,
displaying considerable inherent uncertainty in
an individual about the risk - benefit ratio for TSH
values close to the lower reference limit [27, 69].
Taken together, a combination of nonspecific complaints,
statistical group-to-individual bias and limited
diagnostic performance of TSH testing obfuscates the
transition between diseased and healthy state and fosters
disagreement of interpretation depending on the
respective focal points.
Serious correction of scientific evidence is not unprecedented
in medicine. Notably, some cholesterol trials
have undergone re-interpretation, reversing previous
conclusions, following re-analysis of recovered crude
data with improved statistical methods [70]. Market retraction
of the antidiabetic drug rosiglitazone is just one
noteworthy example of an initially overlooked effect reversion
due to Simpson’s paradox [71]. New studies
could be performed in the light of changes in the treatment
habits, consequential shifts in symptom reporting
and the complaint spectrum as well as recent developments
in statistical analysis which favour greater stratification
of disease aetiology and individual outcome
before commencing suitable analytic procedures. Emphasis
should be more strongly concentrated on personalised
treatment strategies, reflected by appropriate
protocols and statistical instruments favouring multilevel
analysis or latent class hierarchical models. Range-based
use of biochemical thyroid parameters, though having
an essential role in diagnosis, should not automatically
dominate patient presentation and surrogate markers for
tissue T3 effects [26, 57, 60, 72, 73].
When rejecting patient preference as an objective criterion,
standard LT4 and combination therapy performed
equally on average on QoL measures in several metanalyses
[62–66]. However, heterogeneity of the observed treatment
response and collider stratification bias require
targeting homogenous subgroups and performing statistical
latent class analysis [60, 61]. This may identify patients
that preferentially benefit from the two modalities
[60]. TSH and FT3 dissociate under LT4 treatment, particularly
in athyreotic patients where equilibria are formed
between TSH and FT4/FT3 different from the healthy
state [56, 57, 59]. Poor T3 converters with persisting
symptoms may thus be the most suitable candidates for
trials of T3/T4 combinations. T3 addition may also avoid
LT4 dose escalation resulting in T4 excess, as T4 has been
implicated in non-genomic actions, not mediated via T3,
such as actin-related cell migration [74].
Following the timeless wise words of Paracelsus “Dosis
solum facit venenum” (“Only the dose makes the poison”).
and in keeping with the historic practice to adjust LT4
dose based on a metabolic marker, individual dosing regimens
and personalised treatment targets have to be reconsidered
[27]. This is another area where current TSH
based LT4 dosing guidelines fall short, as carefully
conducted experiments in rodents, which cannot be performed
in humans, have shown [72, 73]. LT4 monotherapy
was unable to restore euthyroidism at the level of
various tissues in the animals despite bringing TSH within
its reference range [72, 73].
Conclusions
Until the situation is clarified all currently available
treatment options should remain on the table and the
focus should remain on facilitating the free choice of
prescriptible treatment options rather than imposing
new restrictions. The biochemically based reason for the
rise in patient complaints has to be addressed, not a shift
on to them of blame and burden of proof.
This invites a resume of the current state of affairs.
It appears that what we are witnessing constitutes an
unprecedented historic change in the diagnosis and
treatment of thyroid disease, driven by over-reliance on
a single laboratory parameter TSH and supported by
persuasive guidelines. This has resulted in a mass experiment
in disease definition and a massive swing of the
pendulum from a fear of drug-induced thyrotoxicosis to
the new actuality of unresolved designation of
hypothyroidism. All of this has occurred in a relatively
short period of time without any epidemiological monitoring
of the situation. Evidence has become ephemeral
and many recommendations lag behind the changing
demographic patterns addressing issues that are no longer
of high priority as the pendulum has already moved
in the opposite direction. In a rapidly changing medical
environment, guidelines have emerged as a novel though
often over-promoted driver of unprecedented influence
and change. Treatment choices no longer rest primarily
on the personal interaction between patient and doctor
but have become a mass commodity, based on the increasing
use of guidelines not as advisory but obligatory
for result interpretation and subsequent treatment. Contrary
to all proclaimed efforts towards a more personalised
medicine, this has become a regulated consumer
mass market as with many other situations. This is of little
benefit to patients who will continue to complain,
and with some justification, that the medical profession
is not listening, thereby abandoning one of its primary
functions in the doctor-patient relationship.