Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a leading cause for cardiovascular
disease (CVD), death and disability in sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA). Prevalence of DM in SSA is 7.1% [1], while awareness,
treatment and control rates are low [2], with 75% of
diabetes related deaths in SSA occurring before the age of
60, a significant blow to a productive population [3]. These
dire statistics reflect a sub-optimal infrastructure for DM
care in SSA, which needs to be urgently strengthened, particularly
given estimates that the prevalence of DM in SSA
is expected to more than double by 2045 [3].
Effective diabetes care requires reliable access to recommended
diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring for
hyperglycemia. There is limited availability of recommended
tests for hyperglycemia such as fasting blood
glucose [3] measurement, while simpler less, accurate
methods for diagnosis such as point-of-care capillary
testing are hampered by low availability of glucose strips
[2]. Availability of the basic drugs for treatment of
diabetes such as metformin, sulfonylureas, and insulin is
reportedly low, while treatment monitoring is sub-optimal
given the low access to fasting glucose testing and
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) testing. Additionally,
there are potential inaccuracies associated with HbA1C
testing in SSA populations. While emphasis on the rapid
growth and high mortality burden of diabetes has
focused on densely populated urban areas where prevalence
is highest [4], these inadequacies are likely compounded
in rural SSA populations where even less
human and supply chain resources exist [2, 5, 6]. For instance,
insulin is available less than 8% of the time in
many SSA rural regions. Clinical outcomes are therefore
worse, as exemplified by reports of an average life expectancy
in rural areas of less than 1 year for children diagnosed
with type 1 diabetes [4, 7, 8]. With 61% of the
SSA population residing in rural areas, there is an urgent
need to rapidly scale up access to high quality diabetes
care in these settings. [6, 8–10]
The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) has provided
global guidelines for diabetes care which include a
set of minimum standards of care that recognise the
dearth of resources available in low resource settings
[11]. This guideline provides recommendations for the
minimal, basic, and comprehensive standards of care
which programs should strive for when developing responsive
and effective diabetes care programs. These domains
include screening, care delivery, education,
psychological care, lifestyle management, glucose control
targets, clinical monitoring, glucose control with oral
therapy, glucose control with insulin therapy, blood
pressure control, cardiovascular risk protection, eye
screening, kidney damage, foot care, nerve damage,
pregnancy, children, and in-patient care. Additional details
can be found in the Additional file 1: Figure S1.
In order to respond to these comprehensive diabetes
care needs, stakeholders have collaborated to
improve diabetes care in rural western Kenya. The
Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare
(AMPATH) has established a comprehensive care
model for diabetes and other non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) that leverages robust existing human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) care infrastructure
developed in collaboration with The United States
Agency for International Development (USAID).
AMPATH is a partnership between Moi University,
Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital (Eldoret, Western
Kenya) and a consortium of North American universities
led by the Indiana University School of Medicine
[12]. In collaboration with the Kenyan Ministry
of Health (MOH) and Moi Teaching and Referral
Hospital, AMPATH has addressed fundamental supply
chain and human resource barriers to access for diabetes
care in rural Western Kenya [5, 13].
We established a diabetes clinic in Western Kenya,
with care standardized in accordance to the IDF global
guidelines, and adapted for rural diabetes care through
protocols aimed at achieving the minimum recommended
standards of care [11]. The aim of this article is
to determine the quality of diabetes care by describing
relevant clinical, process, and structural outcomes in a
rural diabetes clinic in SSA.
Methods
Study design, and setting
We conducted a retrospective study in the diabetes
clinic of Webuye District Hospital (WDH), a secondary
care hospital in rural Western Kenya. The clinic was
established in 2009 and serves a low-income population
that primarily relies on an agriculture-based economy
and job market. The clinic is regularly staffed by clinical
officers (diploma level providers equivalent to physician
assistants in other settings), nutrition counselors, and a
social work team. Clinical officers manage stable patients,
defined as patients with well controlled diabetes
and low risk for complications, while family medicine
residents and consultant physicians review newly enrolled
patients. In addition, the physicians, family medicine
residents and clinical pharmacists provide care
decision support for complicated cases. Patients are
scheduled for follow up anytime between one week and
three months depending on the patient’s clinical needs.
The clinic is able to provide both insulin therapy, oral
hypoglycemic agents (sulfonylureas), and metformin, as
well as routine tests such as point-of-care blood glucose
(Abbott Optimum Xceed®), and glycated hemoglobin
(HbA1C, Siemens DCA Vantage®) at the clinic. The hospital
lab provides urea, creatinine, electrolyte measurements,
urinalysis, and complete blood count testing,
when needed. Insulin dependent patients and/or those
at increased risk of diabetes related complications are
eligible for inclusion within an intensive self-monitored
blood glucose (SMBG) program where patients are provided
with glucose monitoring devices and test strips for
twice daily SMBG checks and relay them to the clinic
once a week via phone calls for dose adjustments by the
clinic staff [14]. Patients with additional diagnostic tests
or treatment requirements beyond the hospital’s capacity
are referred to higher levels of care or private facilities.
Clinic and phone based patient encounters are recorded
using paper based forms that are transcribed into an
electronic database. [11].
This study was approved by the Moi Teaching and Referral
Hospital/Moi University School of Medicine Institutional
Research and Ethics Committee and the
Institutional Review Board of the Indiana University
Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI). A waiver of informed
consent was obtained from both of the institutions
as all data being assessed was collected through routine
clinical care and was de-identified before being retrospectively
assessed.
Participants and data collection
We included data from all patients with type 1 or type 2
diabetes who received care in the WDH diabetes clinic
between July 2009 and September 2011. Data was abstracted
from the clinic’s electronic database using a predesigned
data collection tool by a trained data manager
who also checked the information for completeness and
discrepancies by periodically comparing the information
to the paper-based records.
Baseline data collected for all patients included demographic
and socio-economic data. We collected the following
information available for each clinical encounter:
random blood sugar (RBS), HbA1C, body mass index
(BMI), systolic and diastolic blood pressure, self-reported
signs and symptoms of hyperglycemia or
hypoglycemia (polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, change
in vision, loss of consciousness, confusion, diaphoresis,
weakness, shaking, dizziness, and headache), self-reported
symptoms of peripheral neuropathy (skin numbness,
tingling, hot/cold or burning sensation) or
peripheral neuropathy detected by use of a 10 g monofilament
test on each foot, ocular problems (blurred or
cloudy vision, eye itchiness, myopia, and hypermetropia),
and prescribed medications. For male patients, data on
symptoms of impotence were also collected. Where
available, data points were collected for each 3-month
clinic visit, up to a period of 18 months after enrollment
for each individual patient.
Outcomes
We considered clinical outcomes, process, and structure
metrics when assessing the quality of diabetes care
at WDH. The primary clinical outcome of interest was
change in HbA1C from baseline to 18months. Secondary
clinical outcomes included the change in HbA1c,
blood glucose, BMI, blood pressure, and the frequency
of diabetes complications at quarterly intervals. Diabetes
complications specifically tracked within routine
clinical care included symptomatic hypoglycemia/
hyperglycemia, presence of peripheral neuropathy, and
ocular complications.
The primary process metric of interest was loss-to-follow
up, defined as absence of clinical encounter data for more
than six consecutive months, for an individual patient. Secondary
process metrics included patterns of medication use
and frequency of documentation of recommended diabetes
care services. In addition, we compared service delivery at
WDH against 19 different domains in the minimal, standard,
and comprehensive care recommendations from the
IDF Global Guideline for diabetes care [11].
Statistical analysis
Results were presented descriptively as percentages,
means, and medians, with corresponding standard deviation
and range, where appropriate. Means and standard
deviations were presented for normally distributed data
while medians and interquartile ranges were utilized for
data with a skewed distribution. Comparison between
baseline clinical data and subsequent data was made
using the paired t-test, with statistical significance being
set to a p value < 0.05. STATA 13.1(College Station, TX,
USA) was used for all analyses.
Results
524 patients were enrolled in the WDH diabetes clinic
between July 2009 and September 2011. Median age was
58 years (IQR = 19) with only 14 patients (3% of the
population) having an age ≤ 20 years and 56% being female.
The median diabetes duration prior to enrolment
was 4 years. Baseline mean BMI of the male and female
participants were 26.0 kg/m2 (SD = 9.0) and 27.6 (SD =
6.5) kg/m2, respectively. 27% (n = 95) of the evaluable
population were obese (BMI ≥30 kg/m2) with significantly
more women (31%, n = 63) being obese than men
(21%, n = 32). Of these 524 patients, 85 were enrolled
into the SMBG program for intensive follow-up. Additional
baseline characteristics are shown in Table 1 with
more detailed descriptions available in a prior publication
[15]. Within the 18-month period of database evaluation,
60% of the patients had follow up data for at least
6 months while 31% of patients had follow up data for at
least 18 months (Table 2).
Clinical outcomes
Mean HbA1c decreased from a baseline of 10.2% by 10%
for each subsequent clinic visit compared to the enrolment
HbA1c. This reduction was statistically significant
for each interval comparison for the SMBG group, the
non-SMBG group (usual clinic care), and for the overall
group. Significance was primarily driven by patients with
higher baseline HbA1c (> 10%) who showed a statistically
significant mean decrease of 31.6% at 12 months,
while patients with an HbA1c between 7 and 10%
showed a modest and non-significant mean decrease in
HbA1c of 2.7%. Participants in the SMBG group had the
highest baseline HbA1C at 12.4% and showed the largest
drop after 3 months of care to 9.6% (Table 3).
Mean blood sugar (based on random blood sugar obtained
during the clinic visit) decreased from a baseline
value of 10.7 mmol/l by ≥10% for each subsequent clinic
visit compared to enrolment RBS. This trend, however,
was only statistically significant when comparing months
3, 6, and 12 to the baseline RBS (Table 4).
Statistically significant reductions were not seen with
systolic or diastolic blood pressure from the baseline
mean blood pressure of 134/83 mmHg. Minimal and
non-significant changes in the mean BMI were seen
throughout the periods of evaluation. Among individuals
with a baseline BMI < 18.5 kg/m2, BMI increased over
time to a mean BMI of 20 kg/m2 by month 18 (Table 5).
In terms of diabetes complications, participants in
both the SMBG and regular care groups demonstrated
high initial frequencies at enrolment of peripheral neuropathy
manifested primarily through foot symptoms,
ocular complications, hypoglycemia, and hyperglycemia,
which declined over time as illustrated in Table 6.
Process outcomes
38 (7.3%) patients in the overall clinical population were
lost to follow-up, with their distribution being 6 (7.1%)
patients in the SMBG program and 32 patients (7.3%) in
usual clinic care. In terms of documentation of recommended
diabetes care procedures, assessment for
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia, blood pressure, ophthalmological
symptoms, and symptoms of foot disorders
were documented for more than 90% of the clinic
visits. 85.1% of the evaluable population had an HbA1c
result documented twice per year, 2.7% documented
having their serum lipids checked at any time point,
1.5% had a creatinine result documented, and nobody
had a documented microalbumin test.
A total of 284 patients (58%) were on oral medication,
95 (19%) were only taking insulin, 88 (18%) were taking
oral medications and insulin, 16 (3%) were taking mostly
oral medication but also insulin at some point in their
care, and 6 (1%) were taking mostly insulin but also received
trials of oral medications. Patients with diabetes
and hypertension were started on various hypertension
medications with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
(enalapril) being prescribed for 73% of diabetes
patients, followed by thiazide-type diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide)
for 58% of patients, calcium channel blockers
(nifedipine 30.5% and amlodipine 1%), angiotensin receptor
blockers (11%), beta blockers (atenolol 11%, carvedilol
2%, and metoprolol 1.3%), loop diuretics
(furosemide 7.4%), and aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone
1.1%). Low dose aspirin (75–100 mg) was prescribed
for 30% of the clinic population for primary and
secondary prevention of cardiovascular events.
In comparing the services available at WDH to the
IDF global guideline recommendations, the WDH diabetes
clinic provided care that was below the minimal
recommendations for care in 5 domains, met the minimal
care recommendations in 7 domains, met the
standard care recommendations in 7 domains, and
didn’t meet the comprehensive care recommendations
in any of the domains (Table 7). For the domains where
the clinic did not meet minimal recommendations, the
primary limitations were related to limited lab infrastructure
within the hospital where laboratory tests were
infrequently available to patients.
Discussion
This multifaceted evaluation of the quality of care within
the WDH rural diabetes clinic provides insight into the
unique aspects of implementing diabetes care in rural
SSA. Our investigation revealed a statistically significant
10% decrease in HbA1c among enrolled diabetes patients,
reflecting improved glycemic control. In addition, we
noted a high adherence to recommended diabetes care
procedures in this resource constrained setting.
HbA1c is a good marker for glycemic control over 3
months and is recommended regularly for patients with
DM because of its unique ability to predict complications
[16–18]. HbA1c fell significantly over time for the
overall clinic population and in particular, among patients
with higher baseline HbA1cs. This may have been
a result of their preferential enrolment into the intensive
SMBG program. While access to SMBG programs are
largely unavailable in the public sector in SSA, this service
demonstrated a dramatic reduction in HbA1c for
enrollees and is a feasible strategy to stave off costly and
difficult to manage diabetes complications in high risk
patients [19].
Statistically significant reductions were not seen with
BMI in the overall population, an unsurprising finding
considering the initial baseline BMI of the diabetes
population revealed a lower frequency of obesity in our
population than seen in resource-rich settings [15]. In
contrast, patients with BMI < 18.5 kg/m2 showed a statistically
significant increase in BMI over the course of care, a
reflection of the unique pathophysiologic presentation of
diabetes in this rural setting [20]. With the atypical low
BMI presentation exhibited by these patients, providers
were generally more inclined to initiate insulin therapy or
insulin secretagogues over metformin therapy as the primary
mechanism of action and weight loss associated with
metformin would not be desirable amongst these patients
[21]. Both insulin and insulin secretagogues are known to
trigger weight gain and thus may have contributed to the
increase among the patients with a low BMI [22].
Use of standardized encounter forms and point of
care glucose and HbA1c testing ensured regular assessments
of recommended diabetes tests and services,
with more than 85% of patients receiving regular
HbA1c testing. In contrast, services which could not be
performed within the clinic were frequently not provided
due to lack of availability of reagents and nonfunctioning
equipment in the hospital lab. These findings
highlight a frequently observed trend seen with
diabetes care in low-resource settings where logistical
challenges have a dramatic negative impact on the care
of diabetes patients [2, 23–25].
Our investigation has several limitations which are important
to highlight. First, multiple points of documentation
were required during clinic visits in a somewhat
fragmented process that involved documentation in a
MOH diary and a MOH prescription form, in addition
to the standardized encounter form. These cumbersome
and time-consuming requirements anecdotally led to
documentation fatigue among providers and potentially
incomplete documentation in the electronic data
collection tool. Despite the challenges associated with
documentation, the standardized clinical encounter form
was crucial to ensuring that the clinic met many of the
recommended minimum standards set forth in the IDF
guidelines. Second, use of a retrospective assessment
over a fixed time period led to varying periods of
follow-up for the evaluated patients. 60% of the patients
had follow up data for at least 6 months while only 31%
of patients had follow up data for at least 18 months.
While this approach had multiple challenges with missing
data, this approach gives readers a realistic view of
the initial observations seen when establishing a specialty
diabetes clinic in a rural setting. While it would
have been ideal to have 18 months of data on all patients,
we were only able to follow a small subset of patients
for the entire duration because of the varying
dates of enrollment of participants. It is also possible
that this follow-up approach could have introduced selection
bias as patients who remained engaged in care
for 18 months might be more likely to have better outcomes
than patients who contributed data over a shorter
duration of time. Fortunately, this limitation is mitigated
by the low rates of patients lost to follow-up. The clinic
was not structured to track the reasons for patients being
lost to follow up. Third, the WDH clinic received
philanthropic support from several sources which was
used to offset the costs of vital laboratory tests and expensive
medications such as HbA1c and insulin. This
limits generalizability to diabetes clinics where patients
shoulder all costs of care and medicines. Nevertheless,
our findings suggest that logistical considerations can be
effectively addressed if many of the financial barriers are
overcome or partially subsidized. Another limitation is
that patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes were
analysed together in the same cohort. This analysis strategy
was utilized to ensure that the process measures
analysed in this study reflected the entire population receiving
care in the clinic and were representative of the
patient population typically seen in SSA. This decision
to analyse patients in a combined fashion was influenced
by several of the limitations we have observed within
this population and the limited infrastructure in this setting.
This includes the frequent observation that patients
with type 1 diabetes in SSA tend to have delayed onset
of type 1 diabetes compared to other settings and have a
relatively higher presence of atypical variants of diabetes
which require unique treatment regimens incorporating
intermittent insulin [20, 26–28]. Furthermore, the WDH
clinic, like most public sector diabetes clinics in SSA, does
not have the capacity to perform C-peptide or antibody
testing to help confirm the presence of type 1 diabetes [19].
These factors make it difficult to appropriately categorize
patients as having type 1 or type 2 diabetes. While this represents
a limitation of this study, it is worth noting that only
3% of the population was < 20 years of age at the time of
enrollment.
Despite these limitations, our comprehensive analysis
provides an in-depth assessment of the unique aspects
of providing care in rural resource-limited settings in
SSA. The improvements in the glucose control of the
population, highlights how barriers to care can be overcome
through collaborative partnerships including local
providers, international funders, and academic institutions.
This analysis has also provided our overarching
diabetes clinic operations team with considerable guidance
on how to promote continuous quality improvement
within our service delivery. In order to address the
domains in which the WDH clinic failed to meet the
recommended IDF criteria standards for quality care, we
have specifically addressed many of the limitations of
the clinic by including programs which have studied the
ideal methods for assessing gestational diabetes [29],
assessed the reliability of point of care lipid testing [30],
incorporated point of care testing for creatinine and potassium,
tested various screening approaches [31], incorporated
additional medications such as statins within the
clinic pharmacy [13, 32, 33], implemented community
based diabetes care delivery alongside microfinance services
[34], and included a mobile point of care electronic
medical record system eliminating the need for duplicative
data entry [35–37].
Conclusion
This comprehensive analysis highlights many unique
attributes found in a rural diabetes clinic in western
Kenya. With the projected increases in diabetes prevalence
across SSA, it is essential that lessons are
learned from this analysis and responsive, contextualized
infrastructure is created to continue expanding
access to high quality diabetes services across the region.
The many gaps in care and unique attributes
found amongst this patient population create a rich
platform for future research efforts geared towards addressing
the many pressing challenges patients with
diabetes in SSA face. A combined approach which
simultaneously focuses on the creation of much
needed clinical infrastructure for comprehensive diabetes
care with contextualized research will help stave
off the many anticipated health and economic consequences
associated with diabetes in SSA.