Background
Beyond lifestyle and pharmacological treatment options,
bariatric surgery has become one of the most common
therapeutic interventions for treating obesity. Due to the
nature of the surgery, patients can develop significant
postoperative micronutrient and vitamin deficiencies
[1]. Of interest, calcium and vitamin D deficiencies could
lead to secondary hyperparathyroidism and metabolic
bone disease. As these surgeries are being performed on
younger and broader cohorts, it is pertinent to elucidate
these outcomes. This observational study evaluates baseline,
and medium-term serum corrected calcium, vitamin
D and parathyroid hormone levels following Roux-en-Y
Gastric Bypass (RYBP) and Sleeve Gastrectomy (SG).
Method
A retrospective analysis was conducted on prospectively
collected data of 370 participants from the ages 17 to 71
who underwent RYBP or SG between January 2015 and
December 2016 inclusive, with at least 2 years followup.
All patients were assessed and prepared for surgery
by a single multidisciplinary team consisting of a surgeon,
endocrinologist, dietician, psychologist, and clinical
nurse educator within a single-centre group practice
in Melbourne, Australia. Preparation included education
around the importance of nutritional supplementation
guided by the specialist dietitian. Patients underwent
either RYBP or SG depending on appropriate indications
performed by two surgeons with a standardised technique.
The same single-centre team delivered postoperative
care and follow-up. Follow-up appointments were
routinely scheduled at 3, 6, 12, 24 months and yearly after
that. Further appointments were offered as required by
individual circumstance as determined by the treating
professional.
Laboratory results were collected preoperatively and
subsequently at 6, 12 and 24 months postoperatively.
Collected data includes demographic parameters, body
mass index (BMI) and laboratory values (serum 25-OH
vitamin D, corrected serum calcium levels, estimated
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), Haemoglobin A1C
(HbA1c) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels. Our
laboratory’s normal reference ranges are: 25-OH vitamin
D > 50 nmol/L, corrected serum calcium 2.15–
2.65 mmol/L, PTH 1.5–7 pmol/L. Follow-up rates were
estimated as per adherence to vitamin D laboratory tests
counts. Compliance to supplementation was recorded as
‘poor’ and ‘full’ following discussions with the patient by
the specialist dietician or treating surgeon.
During the follow-up period, participants underwent
a standard calcium and vitamin D supplementation
protocol as described here. All bariatric patients were
recommended 3000–5000 IU of vitamin D per day and
600–900 mg of calcium citrate per day. Further 600–
900 mg of calcium through dietary intake was encouraged.
Throughout the follow-up period, if vitamin D
levels remained over 75 nmol/L, patients were advised
to continue 1000 IU of vitamin D per day. For vitamin D
levels between 50 and 70 nmol/L, patients were advised
a further 2000–3000 IU per day. For vitamin D levels
between 30 and 50 nmol/L, patients were advised a further
3000–5000 IU per day. If vitamin D levels dropped
below 30 nmol/L, patients were given 5000 IU per day
oral supplementation or a 600,000 IU intramuscular
injection. Patients who were deficient before surgery
were given appropriate supplementation.
Pregnant patients were excluded due to inconsistent
weights and physiological fluctuations. Primary and
revision bariatric surgeries were collected and noted separately
to account for heterogeneous medical and nutrition
status. However, statistical analyses were simplified
into either RYBP or SG.
Operative technique
Sleeve gastrectomy was performed over a 36 Fr Bougie
and included antral resection after complete mobilisation
of the stomach from gastro-oesophageal junction to the
pylorus. Any hiatal hernia evident was repaired.
RYGB was performed, creating a gastric pouch of
approximately 6 cm × 2 cm, incorporating complete
exclusion of the fundus. The Biliopancreatic limb was
routinely 100 cm, and the alimentary limb 90–100 cm.
The anastomotic technique was standardised between the
two surgeons, with the gastroenterostomy being 2/0 vicryl
handsewn over a 36 Fr bougie and the entero-enterostomy
being a side-to-side stapled anastomosis completed
with 2/0 vicryl handsewn closure of enterotomies.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 26 (SPSS
Inc Chicago). A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. As per Shapiro–Wilk criteria, normally
distributed data are reported as mean ± standard deviation.
Nonparametric data are reported as median (interquartile
range). Student’s t-tests, with equal variances
assumed, are used to compare the difference of normally
distributed data (calcium levels) between the two surgical
procedures. Likewise, Mann–Whitney tests are used
to compare nonparametric variables (i.e., vitamin D and
PTH levels). Preoperative data were compared with postoperative
data using repeat measures ANOVA for normally
distributed data and Wilcoxon-signed rank test
for nonparametric data. Multivariable linear regression
models were undertaken with key preoperative and postoperative
variables to account for confounding variables.
Common co-variates included were age, gender, BMI,
eGFR, type of surgery and appropriate baseline measures.
The patient count number over the same period
may vary; the lowest number count was always taken to
minimise errors.
Results
We performed a total of 370 bariatric procedures, including
281 (76%) SG and 89 (24%) RYBP. The average age of
the patients was 46.2 ± 0.7 years and 52.4 ± 1.1 years in
the SG and RYBP group, respectively. The majority of
patients were female; 75% and 87% within the SG and
RYBP group, respectively. We noted no significant differences
in weight loss (p = 0.845), renal function (p = 0.431)
or glycaemic control (p = 0.809) between the two surgical
procedures. Average preoperative BMI was 41.7 kg and
41.2 kg within the SG and RYBP cohorts, respectively.
Table 1 (see Additional file 1): Outcome measures
following RYBP and SG at Baseline and 6, 12, 24 and
36 months postoperatively.
Serum calcium levels: RYBP and SG (Fig. 1)
Preoperative mean serum corrected calcium levels
were 2.31 ± 0.01 mmol/L and 2.32 ± 0.01 mmol/L
within the SG and RYBP cohorts, respectively. By
24 months postoperatively, serum calcium levels rose
to 2.37 ± 0.10 mmol/L and 2.36 ± 0.07 mmol/L after SG
and RYBP, respectively (Fig. 1). Compared to preoperative
levels, calcium levels at 24 months were significantly
higher following RYBP (p = 0.013) and SG (p = 0.001).
There were no statistical differences in calcium levels
between the two procedures across all time points
(Table 1).
Serum vitamin D levels: RYBP and SG (Fig. 2)
Median preoperative vitamin D levels were 48 (IQR
35–61) nmol/L and 46 (IQR 36–60) nmol/L within the
SG and RYBP cohorts, respectively. Vitamin D levels following
RYBP and SG were significantly greater than preoperative
levels across all follow-up time points (p < 0.01
at 6, 12 and 24 months). Vitamin D levels peaked at 6
months; 77 (IQR 64–89) nmol/L following SG and 74
(IQR 63–85) nmol/L following RYBP. Following the peak
at 6 months, vitamin D levels had a significant fall by
24 months to 68 (IQR 54–79, p = 0.001) following SG and
64 (IQR 51–75, p = 0.005) following RYBP. Nonetheless,
these levels at 24 months were significantly higher than
those preoperatively (p = 001). (Fig. 2). Across all followup
periods, there appear to be no significant differences
in vitamin D levels between the two surgical groups.
Parathyroid hormone (Fig. 3)
One of the most pertinent findings throughout the study
period is that those who had undergone RYBP had significantly
higher serum PTH levels than their SG counterparts
(p < 0.01) consistently across all time points,
including preoperative (Table 1). The difference in PTH
levels between the two groups remains true even when
adjusted for age, gender, baseline BMI, preoperative vitamin
D and preoperative PTH levels.
Preoperative parathyroid hormone levels were 5.7 (IQR
4.2–7.5) pmol/L and 6.1 (IQR 4.7–8.7) pmol/L within the
SG and RYBP groups, respectively. Postoperatively, these
values significantly dropped to 4.5 (IQR 3.3–5.8) pmol/L
and 5.4 (IQR 4.2–7.2) pmol/L at 6 months (p < 0.001),
respectively (Fig. 3). By 24 months, PTH levels within the
SG group remained significantly lower than preoperative
levels at 5.00 (IQR 4.1–6.5) pmol/L, p < 0.05. However, by
24 months, PTH levels within the RYBP group rose back
to preoperative levels 6.4 (IQR 4.9–8.1), p = 0.459.
It appears that by 24 months, those with high PTH
levels (> 7.0 pmol/L) preoperatively improve following
SG (from 8.9 (IQR 7.7–11.6) pmol/L to 6.55 IQR
(5.3–9.23) pmol/L, p < 0.05). However, this significant
improvement was not observed following RYBP as they
remain at high PTH levels at 24 months; (from 8.9 IQR
(8.2–9.23) pmol/L to 8.20 IQR (5.90–10.05) pmol/L,
p = 0.399). Nonetheless, amongst those with high PTH
levels, vitamin D levels increased significantly to acceptable
levels (> 50 nmol/L) by 24 months following both
surgeries (SG: from 37 IQR (28–51.5) to 64.5 IQR (54–
78) nmol/L p < 0.05 and RYBP: from 42 IQR (30–59.5)
nmol/L to 60 IQR (49.3–69.5) nmol/L p = 0.21). Preoperatively,
the mean age of those with high PTH levels were
48.2 ± 1.1 years, whereas those with normal PTH levels
(1.5–7 pmol/L) were 46.9 ± 0.8 years (t (359) = 0.97,
p = 0.33) (see Additional file 2).
Compliance
Follow-up rates were 71%, 61% and 47%, at 6, 12 and
24 months, respectively. Of the 174 participants reviewed
at 24 months, compliance to vitamin and mineral supplementation
was recorded in 152 cases. 84% of these
reported participants were fully compliant with taking
supplementation (127 of 152 cases).
Discussion
This study comprises one of the largest cohorts to date,
evaluating the impact of commonly performed bariatric
surgeries on bone metabolism over a medium-term follow-
up period of 24 months.
Serum calcium levels: RYBP and SG
This study not only investigates differences in serum calcium
levels over time but also the difference between
RYBP and SG. Following both surgeries, mean serum
calcium levels significantly rise compared to baseline
measurements by 24 months. This improvement may
be due to the robust mineral supplementation protocol
and the transient rise in vitamin D levels seen postoperatively.
Nonetheless, these values remain within normal
homeostatic levels (2.15–2.65 mmol/L) [2]. We find no
significant differences in calcium levels between the two
procedures.
Serum vitamin D levels: RYBP and SG
Obesity appears to be associated with vitamin D deficiency
[3]. Many observational studies have illustrated
an inverse relationship between body mass index (BMI)
and vitamin D status [4]. The exact pathogenesis is not
clear. Mechanisms proposed include inadequate food and
supplement intake, lower sunlight exposure due to lack
of physical activity/body image insecurities, increased
metabolic clearance and volumetric dilution vitamins
(i.e. vitamin D) in the expanded fat mass [4, 5]. We did
not measure the effect of solar UVB exposure or dietary
intake. However, a large cohort from a single centre
would experience a similar solar exposure; geographically
and culturally. All patients were counsel by the same
dietitian and advised according to set a protocol, with no
drastic changes to a balanced diet.
This study finds that serum vitamin D levels tend to
transiently rise around 6 months and subsequently drop
to a steady-state level by 24 months that is greater than
baseline measurements following both surgical procedures.
This transient rise in vitamin D levels at 6 months
is reflected in several other studies [6, 7]. A plausible
explanation for this may be due to the release of sequestered
vitamin D from adipose tissue with weight loss.
This release may temporarily overcome the impairment
in vitamin D absorption postoperatively. However, there
appear to be no significant differences in vitamin D levels
between the two cohorts.
The improvement in vitamin D status we observe following
RYBP is contrary to many studies. A hallmark
paper by Johnson et al. (2006) found a fall in vitamin D
levels following RYBP [8]. This is one of the few studies
on this matter with follow-up data over 12 months and
well into 72 months. As vitamin D levels tend to fluctuate
immediately following surgery, perhaps we may require
more extended follow-up periods for these changes to
become apparent.
Our findings following SG are similar to other studies
which have found improvements in vitamin D levels [3,
4, 9–11]. The majority of these studies have short followup
periods of less than 12 months. Nonetheless, we have
found that this improvement is maintained even after
24 months of follow-up.
Serum parathyroid hormone levels: RYBP and SG
In response to low calcium levels, serum parathyroid
hormone levels rise to increase serum calcium—through
bone resorption, increased calcitriol production and
calcium reabsorption from the kidney. For this reason,
PTH may be a more significant overall indicator of bone
health.
Given the clinical significance of PTH, our results are
surprising and may be clinically relevant. We find that
PTH levels are significantly higher within the RYBP
group when compared to the SG group across all time
points, including baseline. However, these differences
increase with time and may have more significant implications
for long-term bone health. It is essential to consider
the significance of the preoperative differences
in PTH levels between the two cohorts. This difference
may be due to disparities in co-morbidities or medications
before surgery. We did not document proton-pump
inhibitor (PPI) use in our patients; however, a common
indication of RYGB over SG is the presence of reflux
requiring PPI use. PPI’s are known to inhibit calcium
absorption [12] thereby encouraging increased PTH.
Many studies postulate that PTH levels rise with age and
may explain our findings within the RYBP group [13]. In
our study, those with high PTH levels (> 7 pmol/L) were
on average 1.3 years older than those with normal PTH
levels (1.5–7 pmol/L). However, we have little to no evidence
to show that age is significantly greater in those
with high PTH levels when compared to those with normal
PTH levels in our study (p = 0.33).
Following a transient fall in PTH levels at 6 months
after RYBP, these levels rise back to preoperative levels
by 24 months. This fall in PTH levels may be due to the
heavy supplementation protocol employed and the rise
in vitamin D levels among our patients. Most studies also
find higher PTH levels following RYBP [3, 4, 14–19] but
not all [20–22]. Studies with stable or lower PTH post-
RYBP often has low follow-up periods (< 12 months) or
more robust supplementation. Despite a similar fall in
PTH levels following SG at 6 months, these levels continue
to remain below preoperative concentrations. Studies
regarding PTH levels following SG are sparse and
inconclusive, ranging from no effect [10, 23, 24] to elevated
PTH levels [4, 25, 26].
We found that those with high PTH levels (greater
than 7 pmol/L) preoperatively, significantly improved
to normal levels by 24 months following SG but not
RYBP. Nonetheless, with the standard supplement protocol
employed here, vitamin D levels among this subgroup
improved significantly following both surgeries
by 24 months. Perhaps, the improvements in vitamin D
levels seen in both high-risk groups may be attributed to
the excellent compliance to supplementation of 84% we
have observed at 24 months. However, the lack of significant
improvement seen in PTH levels in the RYBP group
with high preoperative levels, from 8.9 to 8.2 pmol/L,
is concerning. This may be attributable to the duodenal
bypass in RYGP, which circumvents most of the active
calcium reabsorption seen in the duodenum and upper
jejunum [27]. Perhaps we are undertreating these highrisk
patients, despite their excellent compliance with supplementation,
which is evident in their vitamin D levels
(from 42 to 60 nmol/L). Perhaps higher PTH levels are
required following RYBP to maintain the adequate calcium
and vitamin D levels we have observed. RYBP may
lead to a more malabsorptive state than SG and would
ultimately require a tailored supplementation protocol.
Limitations
Significant limitations in our study include the influence
of incomplete data in medical records and losses to follow
up. These limitations may overestimate the strength
of the results as it may be the most compliant patients
who attend follow-up meetings at 24 months. Compliance
with nutritional supplementation proved challenging
to identify; however, it strongly influences the
outcomes measured. Despite these limitations, this is one
of the few studies that compare SG and RYBP with a large
sample size over a medium-term follow-up period. Additionally,
the frequency of use of proton-pump inhibitors
within the two surgical groups may have assisted in discerning
the differences seen in outcomes.
It appears that the nutritional protocol from this single-
centre group practice was able to overcome nutritional
deficiency among the measured outcomes. There
continues to be a lack of consensus regarding adequate
supplementation to optimise postoperative nutritional
requirements. A 2013 update from the American Association
of Clinical endocrinologists (AACE), the American
Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery (ASMBS) and
The Obesity Society (TOS) recommend an initial dosage
of 3000 IU vitamin D (titrated to therapeutic levels) and
1200–1500 mg of calcium for RYBP and SG patients [28].
There are no studies that discriminate the differences in
nutritional requirements between different bariatric surgeries.
As per guidelines, both RYBP and SG receive the
same supplementation dosage. Despite apparent physiological
differences between the two different surgeries,
supplementation does not reflect this [28]. Future
research should incorporate the influence of nutritional
supplementation for different bariatric procedures.
Future studies
Further studies examining long-term postoperative outcomes
regarding bone health and its relationship to
appropriate supplementation would be most helpful.
Using serum calcium and PTH as a marker of overall calcium
status is unreliable as it is subject to several physiological
feedback mechanisms. Gletsu-miller et al. points
out that bone is a significant storage reservoir for calcium
[29]. Although a costly alternative, measuring bone density
via Dual-ray absorptiometry may yield a more robust
understanding of the significance of vitamin D, PTH and
calcium levels post-surgery [29].
Conclusions
With adequate supplementation, postoperative mean
serum calcium and vitamin D levels tend to significantly
rise but remain within the normal homeostatic range,
with no statistical difference between Roux-en-Y-Gastric
bypass and Sleeve Gastrectomy. Serum parathyroid
hormones levels are statistically different between the
two surgical procedures across all time points. Higher
parathyroid hormone levels following Roux-en-Y Gastric
Bypass may be of significance to poor long-term bone
health and the need for a more robust micronutrient supplementation
protocol.