Background
In response to the negative impact of high burn-out
numbers, healthcare organizations and policymakers are
increasingly showing interest in professional well-being,
particularly in primary care [1–6]. Accordingly, research
into professional well-being has surged. Whereas earlier
scholarship focused on job dissatisfaction and burn-out,
studies now mostly focus on such concepts as job satisfaction,
joy in practice, and job enjoyment [4, 7, 8]. This
article will focus on job satisfaction, as this term is used
most in the research literature.
Positive Health (PH) is a prominent, upcoming health
concept comprising six dimensions relevant to experienced
health (Fig. 1) [10]. PH operationalizes the new
description of health proposed by Huber and colleagues
in 2011 [11, 12]. According to this description, health is
“the ability to adapt and self-manage in the face of social,
physical, and emotional challenges” ([12], p1). In the last
decade, Huber and others have worked towards developing
tools for the concept’s implementation, most notably
through the institute for Positive Health established
in 2015 [9, 11, 13]. The most prominent application is a
dialogue tool (‘the spiderweb’) intended to guide interactions
between health professionals and patients.
Recently, several Dutch policymakers, professionals,
and organizations have adopted PH as a promising
way to tackle several issues in healthcare. The concept
is praised for its promise to support patient autonomy,
incorporate aspects of life beyond bodily functions in
patient care, and promote cooperation between different
fields, such as healthcare and welfare. Additionally,
proponents emphasize PH’s potential to increase
professionals’ job satisfaction [14–16]. This is linked
to the concept’s purported effect on their autonomy
and work-related meaningfulness. Opponents have
criticized the concept for its vague boundaries, limited
added value to the profession, and potential to increase
health inequalities [17–20].
Meanwhile, the dearth of studies exploring the implementation
of PH in practice makes it difficult to grasp
the concept’s impact on job satisfaction. At present, there
are a number of anecdotal reports by Dutch primary care
professionals (PCPs) on PH’s positive effect in this regard
[13, 14, 21]. In the context of a general practice, one
recent study showed that working with PH, in combination
with longer consultations and less patients per general
practitioner (GP), led to more job satisfaction [22].
The present article aims to help fill this hiatus. Drawing
on an ethnographic case study into the experiences of
PCPs who work with PH in a general practice, it provides
further insight into the concept’s effect on PCPs’ job satisfaction.
Before we detail our methodology and discuss
our results, it is prudent to first offer an overview of primary
care in the Netherlands and of the literature on job
satisfaction.
Primary care in the Netherlands
General practices play a central role in Dutch primary
care and healthcare in general because of their gatekeeping
function [23, 24]. These practices have seen major
reforms in the last 15 years. In 2006 a system of managed
competition was introduced for curative care, which
means that health insurers contract general practices for
the provision of care. Moreover, general practices have
received more responsibilities, including provision of
certain specialist care tasks, mental health support, and
coordination of community care [22, 23, 25]. As most
Dutch general practices are owned by a partnership of
GPs which employs other PCPs, these changes emphasized
the role of GPs as both physicians and entrepreneurs
[23–25].
These changes have had a major impact on PCPs’ work.
Firstly, business thinking and practices, such as efficiency
indicators and standardization through protocols, have
entered primary care [26–28]. Professionals have been
resisting these changes, as they challenge professional
autonomy and occupational control of work that defines
professionalism [26–30]. Additionally, multidisciplinary
collaboration within and beyond the general practice has
become increasingly important to cope with the additional
care tasks [23, 24, 31]. This has also led to a shift in
responsibilities from the GP to other PCPs. For instance,
general practice-based nurse specialists have taken over
tasks such as care for chronic conditions and mental
health support [24, 25, 32]. Therefore, PH’s promise to
integrate different fields (and thus ease collaboration
between PCPs) and to increase professional autonomy
corresponds with challenges in the changing primary
care environment [15].
Job satisfaction
Research into job satisfaction is heavily influenced by
Herzberg’s two factor theory. Herzberg and colleagues
hypothesized that factors intrinsic to the content of the
job, such as received recognition, autonomy, and personal
growth have a positive influence on job satisfaction.
By contrast, a deficiency in factors extrinsic to the actual
work, such as interpersonal relationships, working conditions,
salary, organization policy, and administration
are assumed to decrease job satisfaction [33, 34]. Several
studies into job satisfaction of PCPs confirmed these
hypotheses [4, 35–38].
The divide between intrinsic and extrinsic factors can
also be seen in the literature on physician well-being
interventions. Examples of extrinsic interventions are
workflow improvements, individual resilience courses,
or communication training [39–41]. Interventions
focusing on intrinsic factors aim to create joy through
meaning-making, defining joy as a “feeling of success
and fulfilment that results from meaningful work” ([8]
p608). To engage professionals, authors propose helping
them reflect on their professional identity via questions
such as: ‘why did you choose this profession?’ or: ‘what
calls you to practice?’ [35, 42–44]. Consequently, part of
PH’s appeal is that it explicitly includes meaning-making
as one of its six dimensions for both patients and professionals.
Several healthcare providers reported that
PH helped them find meaning in their work [15, 42, 45],
however the impact of PH on meaning-making by professionals
has not yet been empirically studied.
Methods
Research aim, design, and setting
This article is based on an ethnographic case study into
how the adoption of Positive Health affected primary
care professionals’ job satisfaction. The present study
focused on one general practice that was implementing
PH. All twelve staff members were asked to participate
in the study to explore how PH affects the various
professions, interprofessional relationships, and practice
as a whole. In order to gain an in-depth understanding
of PCPs’ experiences, the first author collected archival
material and conducted qualitative online interviews
with PCPs.
Data collection
Archival materials collected included documents associated
with the implementation of PH in the general
practice, the general practice itself, and the history and
development of PH. These documents included, among
others: minutes from team meetings, internal management
documents, communication between the practice
and the health insurer, the website of the general practice,
and newsletters. Documents selected for inclusion were
written either in Dutch or English.
Interviews took place in April and May 2020 and
the researchers employed a semi-structured approach.
This allowed for flexibility in pursuing an interviewee’s
experiences, while ensuring that all topics were
addressed [43]. To this end, the researchers constructed
an interview guide to cover the implementation of
PH, job satisfaction, and professionalism (Additional
file 1) [43]. Before the start of the interviews, the first
and second author met with the practice manager and
GPs to ensure transparency and align mutual expectations.
Interviews were carried out via a licensed version
of Zoom Video Communications, Inc. and once by
phone, considering safety measures taken in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic. All interviews were audio
recorded. To increase the reliability and validity of the
study, the researchers made use of member checks by
offering the participants a summary of their interview
[44]. Written informed consent for publication was
obtained from all participants.
The interviews were carried out by the first author.
At the time of the study she held a Bachelor of Science
degree and was a master’s student at Maastricht University,
as well as a medical student at Utrecht University.
She had limited experience with respect to interviewing.
To ensure the quality of the project, the entire process
was supervised and guided by the second author, a
senior researcher at the department of Health Services
Research of Maastricht University. She is an experienced
qualitative researcher with expertise in healthcare
humanities and science & technology studies.
In total, approximately 270 pages of material on this
general practice, and 250 pages on the history and
development of Positive Health were analyzed. Eleven
out of the total of twelve primary care professionals
were able to participate in the interviews (Table 1). One
employee declined because of personal circumstances
and upon request the personal data of one respondent
will not be disclosed. The interviews lasted on average
58 min. Each participant was interviewed once. Ten
participants were present in the workplace during the
interviews, one participated from home. The interviewer
was based at her home. No non-participants
were present during the interviews. The interviewer
took notes during and after the interview. Interviews
ended when all participants were included.
Data analysis
Analysis was conducted iteratively by the first, second
and third author. In analyzing interviews and documents,
the researchers followed an inductive approach using the
thematic analysis guide of Braun and Clarke [46]. NVivo
12, a qualitative analysis software program, was used to
keep track of the analysis. Thematic analysis consisted of
an iteration of three phases of coding, namely open, axial,
and selective coding [46]. During the coding process, the
first and second author regularly discussed the proposed
codes and themes to reach consensus. The third author
aided the first and second author in establishing themes
and subthemes. The COREQ checklist was used when
writing this report (Additional file 2) [47]. The results
were presented to the participants, who recognized
themselves in the analysis.
Results: Positive Health as an adaptable frame
for change
Thematic analysis identified three themes regarding the
adoption of Positive Health and primary care professionals’
job satisfaction, namely [1] adopting and adapting
Positive Health, [2] giving substance to Positive Health
in practice and [3] changing financial and organizational
structures. Theme 1 describes how the adoption of PH
in this practice was the result of ideology, strategy, and
favorable circumstances. It also discusses the multi-interpretability
and malleability of PH. Adopting PH enabled
PCP’s to better express, legitimize, and promote their
values of holism and autonomy. These values were not
only prominent in patient care, but also in the attitude
of professionals towards each other, which is addressed
in theme 2. This supported them to align everyday conduct
with how they envisioned their profession, which
increased their job satisfaction. Next, theme 3 depicts
how the practice changed its financial and organizational
structures upon adopting PH. Consequently, PCPs could
invest more time in their patients and in their own wellbeing.
They, were, thus, able to further their vision in
practice. These changes contributed to their job satisfaction.
In this way, PH functioned as an adaptable frame for
change in the general practice. The following pages will
unpack this conclusion. An additional data table with
quotes is provided in Additional file 3.
Adopting and adapting Positive Health
Most respondents considered the adoption of Positive
Health to be a minor change from former ways of working,
since PH fit the vision of the practice well. However,
several respondents explained that precisely this match
made the adoption of the concept possible. In addition,
PH provided the practice with a new frame to express
and legitimize its comprehensive approach to healthcare.
At the same time, the respondents offered different interpretations
on what the concept entailed and the practice
adapted the concept to its needs in several ways. This section
will further unpack how the practice adapted itself to
adopt PH, and adapted the concept while adopting it.
It’s a match!
Document and interview analysis showed that the introduction
of PH in this practice was the result of ideology,
strategic considerations, and fortunate circumstances.
The current practice owners dissociated from another
general practitioner in 2015 due to a personal conflict,
different ideas about the role of the GP, and other styles
of practicing. The newly emerged practice aimed to interact
with patients on a more personal level, to approach
them holistically, stimulate their self-reliance, and to be
part of the community. One GP described the role the
practice aspires to fulfill in the community:
I would also like it if [the villagers] just say: ‘it’s a
place where I like to go (…) that general practice, you
can do everything there (…) you should go there to
talk about your stairlift or about your cleaning service,
or depressed spouse’, and that we don’t immediately
say: (…) ‘that’s not the job of the GP’, but that
we say: ‘come let’s look at it together’ and of course
immediately involving (…) [our] network. (R11, GP)
In pursuing this vision, the practice made several
changes. For instance, they created a volunteer-run vegetable
garden and raised the minimal consultation time
from 10 to 15 min to create more time for the patients.
With this, the practice owners aimed to create more joy1
in their work, as this nurse specialist explained:
They made the choice a couple of years ago themselves,
also because of their job enjoyment, to do
things differently. So they conscientiously chose to
spend more GP hours than they formally could
according to the guidelines, in order to have more
job enjoyment and more time for the patient. (R4,
nurse specialist)
The practice’s alternative way of working was met
with interest from a health insurer that was looking to
experiment with Positive Health as a new health concept.
Conversations between the practice and health insurer
started in 2017, followed by the practice adopting the
concept of PH. This helped the practice to express and
legitimize its new approach to care work:
[Y]ou can say ‘we’re working in conformity with Positive
Health.’ ‘Oh right, I have quite a good picture
of what that entails at yours then.’ Plus, it can be
an argument to partners and financiers to get done
what you want. (R10, nurse specialist)
In 2019 a pilot project under the flag of PH started
between the practice, the insurer, and the municipality.
One of the goals of the pilot project was to improve job
satisfaction, which prompted this study. Theme 2 and
3 will provide further detail on how the practice implemented
the concept.
Interestingly, some participants pointed out that this
match between a general practice and PH is not self-evident.
One of the GPs explained why the concept is not a
fit for everyone:
There are also a lot of people who would not like
this at all. They say, that’s just drivel, that’s not at
all family medicine. But well, I have noticed that I
do like it. I don’t feel like I’m being less of a doctor.
Instead I get more to the core. (R11, GP)
Explaining this, he said, that some GPs would consider
this approach not medical enough; talking about the person
rather than the complaints.
Positive Health as a malleable concept
Despite the small size of this practice, the PCPs offered
different interpretations of PH during the interviews.
Some respondents struggled to describe what the concept
meant:
I still find it hard to give it something tangible, like
what is it really? In fact it is a little bit of everything
in your work. (R2, practice nurse)
Two new employees reported that they had not
received information on what PH entailed or how it
should be implemented when they started working in the
practice. However, professional values that hang together
with PH (e.g. collegiality, the importance of self-care),
were discussed more elaborately. Interestingly, the practice’s
policy documents lack a clear-cut description of
how the practice owners interpreted PH or envisioned
the concept’s implementation. This could explain the
conceptual confusion amongst the employees.
Analysis of interviews and archival material reveals
four different descriptions of the essence of PH. Most
commonly, working according to PH was described as
taking a holistic or person-centered approach. The second
most mentioned interpretation of PH was focusing
on patient autonomy and resilience. The third interpretation
of PH saw it as focusing on health and possibilities
instead of illness and limitations. A fourth interpretation
of PH found in the data described it as a way to achieve
professional well-being
i think it’s a way of working within your team (…)
focused on living as healthily as possible (…) and
also extending that to your patient care. (R7, X).
How the PCPs applied these interpretations in their
work will be discussed in theme 2 and 3.
Notably, employees mentioned lifestyle-related
issues in relation to all four different interpretations
of PH, illustrating the importance of lifestyle
in the general practice. This focus on lifestyle is seen
in publications by and about the practice; however,
other organizations adopting PH, did not put such a
marked emphasis on lifestyle. This variance suggests
PH is a malleable concept, offering room for multiple
interpretations and allowing for context-specific
customization.
Giving substance to Positive Health in practice
In line with difficulties in interpreting PH, some participants
struggled to describe how they gave substance
to the concept in practice. Several participants
considered the practice’s public story to be changed
the most. This included how the practice promoted
its vision and how PCPs now stimulated each other to
adhere to a healthy lifestyle. But upon taking a closer
look, more implicit changes appeared to have occurred
as well. The concept’s focus on holism and autonomy,
towards both patients and professionals, strengthened
the PCPs’ commitment to these values. In fact,
PH served as legitimization for the distinct approach
of the practice: PCPs felt supported to align their everyday
conduct with their vision, which, as many said,
contributed to their job satisfaction (Additional file 3).
How the participants gave substance to their profession
and to PH in practice will be described in the following
paragraphs.
Consolidating the practice’s vision
Notably, when asked what changed most when the
practice adopted PH, several respondents suggested it
was the way the practice presented its vision and values.
Indeed, the practice abundantly communicated its
unique approach to family medicine in newsletters and
on the website. PH and the 6-dimensional PH model took
a prominent place in all these communications, thereby
becoming absorbed in the practice’s public story. As the
following quote illustrates, PH offered the practice a
frame to express and promote its vision:
Something that I’ve been personally working with,
now (…) becomes embedded. ‘Ah right, that’s what
it’s called!’ And that (…) provides a frame to relay it
to others. (R1, practice manager).
A majority of participants explained that the changed
public image included setting the right example with
respect to their own well-being. For instance, the
participants had healthy lunches together or went on
walks in the village during lunchtime. Most enjoyed this
way of working.
Symbolizing the practice’s vision, the vegetable garden
appeared in nearly all publications by and about the practice.
Apparently in this way the garden functioned as a
visual reminder of the importance of lifestyle and community-
outreach in their vision:
We have been working for a long time on propagating
and demonstrating a healthy lifestyle and have
done this up and until now mostly in 1 on 1 patient
consultations, in our offices. In the vegetable garden
project we want to step outside and play a part ourselves
by making the garden/ grounds available and
making the first move. (Internal document; Project
Proposal Vegetable Garden)
In the interviews, too, several respondents mentioned
the garden in relation to the practice’s vision and adoption
of PH.
By adopting PH, the practice saw itself as part of a
movement in the healthcare field. Document analysis
showed that the practice hoped to become an inspiration
for other organizations and contribute to a positive
change in the healthcare field. This aspiration also came
to the fore during a few interviews:
I think that it [Positive Health] will grow. I think that
considering society wants to go there, we’re on the
right track. And by then we will become an example
for multiple practices that will come and ask us:
‘Gosh, how are you doing that? How do you tackle
that?’ (R9, practice nurse)
Through these various communications the practice
positions itself as being on the cutting edge of innovation.
Towards a holistic approach
Even though several participants initially referred to the
practice’s changed public story as the main effect of PH,
during the analysis it became clear that more implicit
changes had occurred as well. The adoption of PH
increased the PCPs’ commitment to approaching patients
and themselves holistically, to stimulating the autonomy
of both, as well as to giving substance to this in practice:
Embracing the concept of Positive Health creates
space in the practice for (…) egalitarian relationships,
the autonomy you get as a professional, possibilities
to tune in, giving substance to consultations
and office hours how you think is nicest. I think that
within this practice they would have done this without
a concept like Positive Health. But, it is nice that
Positive Health as an idea exists, so that you can
use it as a frame for what the practice was doing
already. (R10, nurse specialist)
As this quote shows, PH created space for the PCPs to
better align their daily practice with how they envisioned
their work. It also supported them in legitimizing this
approach to others, some PCPs explained. Especially GPs
and nurse specialists pointed out that this increased their
job satisfaction.
All participants expressed the importance of a person-
centered and holistic instead of a provider-centered
and problem-oriented approach in patient care, which
was also stressed in the practice’s policy documents and
external communication. During patient consultations,
GPs and nurse specialists strove towards having an open
conversation and addressing issues beyond bodily complaints
if needed:
I don’t ask a patient: ‘So, I see you are coming with
knee complaints. What’s going on with your knee?’
Instead, I ask a patient: ‘How are you?’ Or: ‘Tell me?’
Or: ’How are you doing?’ So you start much more
broad. (R6, GP)
They aimed to be open to all kinds of problems and
to have eyes for the broader context of the patient. For
example, one GP points out that she called the Dutch
employee insurance agency, because she was worried
that the lack of financial stability affected a patient’s
health. The practice’s holistic approach expanded the
borders of the consultation room and involved the whole
team. The practice nurses checked in with every patient
that returned home from a hospital admission, and the
GPs regularly visited the elderly in the neighborhood to
see how they were doing.
To strengthen their holistic approach, the PCPs participated
in a PH training. The evaluation report of this training
showed that the GPs were unsure how and when to
embed the 6-dimensional PH model as a dialogue tool in
their consultations, which they confirmed during the interviews.
Instead, the GPs viewed PH primarily as a foundational
attitude to facilitate an open exchange with patients:
But the idea [behind PH] is that you get to know the
person behind the patient (…) What makes them
tick, if you go searching for that, well that can bring
a lot, because then you just have a different conversation
(…) less medical and more human or something
(R11, GP).
In fact, they rarely use the PH dialogue tool in consultations.
Rather, they choose to reserve it for situations
in which they feel the patient could benefit from more
insight regarding the issue at hand.
As some respondents pointed out, this approach contrasts
sharply with the conventional provider-centered
conversation, in which PCPs ask steering questions.
However, this approach was not new for all participants.
The nurse specialist for mental health, for instance,
argued that this type of conversation was already commonplace
in mental healthcare. In addition, some
assistants concluded that their patient interactions
had always been more personal and less medical when
compared to that of the GPs, and, in fact, had not been
changed by PH:
It’s more the physicians who use it [Positive Health]
the most. And how it really shapes us assistants, I
cannot specifically say. It’s more like we already did
before, giving attention to the patient. (R2, assistant)
Towards more autonomy for both patients and professionals
In conversations with patients, the GPs and nurse specialists
tried to stimulate patient autonomy by exploring
patients’ wishes and values, as well as by supporting
them on how to realize these. To illustrate this, the practice
manager discussed the case of an elderly woman just
diagnosed with metastasized cancer:
[The GP] was immediately told by the hospital these
[are] the treatment options. And in the conversation
with that woman, whom he has known already for
a while and he knows her partner, she decided (…) I
want quality of life that’s more important to me now
than that I might live a half year extra. (R1, practice
manager)
As this quote illustrates, the GP in question focused on
the patient’s preference rather than the available treatment
options. Some other respondents also described
how they addressed lifestyle-related issues but left it to
the patient to make a follow-up appointment or decide
on the treatment plan. This indicates a move towards
more egalitarianism in the relationship between patient
and professional, including a more directive role for
patients in shaping the care process.
As shown previously, supporting patient autonomy was
a significant part of the respondents’ understanding of
what PH entails. For example, one GP sometimes used
the 6-dimensional model as an instrument and asked
patients to fill it in at home:
If you have the idea that people could use more
insight, more control over their own health or over
their own life in a broader sense, then I think it’s a
convenient instrument to bring forward. (R5, GP)
This approach contrasted from the other GPs in the
practice, who underscored the importance of stimulating
self-reliance, but did not use the 6-dimensional model for
this.
Most respondents expressed how stimulating patient
autonomy and taking a holistic approach increased their
job satisfaction:
What contributes a lot to my job enjoyment is that
(…) it’s a unique patient who sits in front of me
every time. (…) I always say to people like ‘you are
unique, so this is the protocol, but we have to check
with you together what constitutes tailor-made care
here. ‘What can you do? What do you want? What’s
not possible? What is possible?’ To figure that out
together. I like that very much. (R4, nurse specialist)
As this quote illustrates, working like this allowed the
PCPs to focus more on the person than on the conventional
biomedical protocol. This increased the space
they experienced to provide what they consider good
care and figure this out together with the patient. They
themselves indicated this was challenging, but increased
their professional autonomy. In addition, some PCPs
also explained that this way of working allowed them to
connect better with patients, which positively affected
their job satisfaction. However, it was unclear to most
PCPs what the exact influence of PH was on their patient
relationships.
Changing financial and organizational structures
Upon adopting PH, the practice also altered financial and
organizational structures through the aforementioned
pilot project with the health insurer and municipality, as
was described in the project plan, the minutes of project
meetings, and communication with the health insurer.
The changes resulted in extra time for PCPs to spend on
patients and on themselves. Several PCPs also expressed
that the additional time increased their autonomy. Both
the additional time and increased autonomy contributed
to the job satisfaction of the participants under study
(Additional file 3).
Money is time
An important part of the pilot project were new financial
agreements made between the practice and health
insurer: financing changed from activity-based contracts
to capitation financing, and the practice received a higher
staffing budget. As a result, the practice owners could lay
aside income-related concerns:
Well, [the contract with the insurance company]
gives us peace and comfort to fully focus on what we
think is good GP care in all its aspects. (R5, GP).
Some PCPs reported that as a result of these new financial
arrangements they felt less pressured in their daily
work to perform activities that generate income.
The new way of financing supported the practice in
their decision to hire more staff so as to prolong consultation
times and lower the pace of their daily work.
All assistants reported that reduced work pressure and
more time for patient interactions increased their job
satisfaction:
The freedom you have to really be there for the
patients. Because I think that’s wat makes it most
fun. That you don’t have to rush a patient. (R2, practice
nurse)
Moreover, the additional time and lower work pace
supported the practice in its endeavor to promote PH by
setting a healthy example and investing in professional
well-being, as described in theme 2.
The GPs and nurse specialists indicated that it was
important for them to have sufficient time in order to
carry out consultations in line with how they envisioned
them. This enabled them to help patients how they
thought was best. This includes taking the time to listen
to the patient, discussing all domains of life, thinking
along with a patient to find fitting solutions, and giving
room for emotions. All of them explained that the feeling
that they had helped patients was an important contributor
to their job satisfaction:
When they [the patients] enter with their head hung
down, I want them to leave with their head held
high. If possible I would like to add something to
that. And I think that works best if you understand
someone better. And then you will have to reserve a
bit more time to figure that out. (R11, GP)
Several PCPs explained that they not only enjoyed
these interactions more, but also felt more autonomous.
Both had a positive effect on their job satisfaction.
Easing collaboration
Secondly, as part of the pilot project the practice joined a
regional project group working according to PH that consisted
of the health insurer, municipality, welfare organizations,
local associations, and volunteers. The goal was
to create a network of various organizations around
the general practice that could aid them in carrying out
their community-focused and holistic approach. A GP
summed up who is needed for this:
In principle anyone that you can use to help the
patient to get going. It can be someone from the
social housing corporation, it can be a care path
counselor, that can be the gardener. (R11, GP)
With the project partners the practice carried out several
initiatives to increase the health and well-being of
the villagers. For instance, together they set out walking
routes in the region with the practice as a starting
point. With this, the practice and project group aimed
to stimulate villagers to exercise. The practice organized
lifestyle workshops for the entire village to help them
adopt a healthy lifestyle. In addition, together with the
municipality and social housing corporation the practice
planned to build volunteer-supported living facilities
for the elderly, inspired by PH.
The practice also sought collaboration within the
healthcare field, for example with the home care organization
or physiotherapists. Another example of this, was
the start of multidisciplinary consultations with welfare
and specialized mental healthcare professionals. However,
only few participants explicitly stated that this eased
collaboration contributed to their job satisfaction. One of
them was this practice nurse:
It’s nice that you’re also supported by other organizations
so to say. That you’re not in it on your own.
(…) I think eventually if you see that you’re a bit successful
that gives joy in work. That you know what
you’re doing it for. (R8, practice nurse)
Discussion
This study set out to explore how adopting Positive
Health in a general practice affected the job satisfaction
of primary care professionals. Firstly, the results
show that the adoption of PH was the result of a carefully
crafted match between the practice and the concept.
Next, PH was shown to be a multi-interpretable and malleable
concept. Secondly, PH supported PCPs to express,
legitimize, and promote their distinctive approach to care
work and its value. This created space to align everyday
conduct with their vision, notably on the importance of
holism and autonomy, which supported their job satisfaction.
Thirdly, the concept enabled PCPs to change their
financial and organizational structures allowing them to
enact their vision, and improving their working conditions.
These changes also increased the job satisfaction of
the PCPs. In conclusion, PH acted as an adaptable frame
for change, and in doing so contributed to the job satisfaction
of the PCPs.
The changes positively affecting job satisfaction in the
general practice resonate with the literature on job satisfaction
and physician well-being interventions, which
underscores that both intrinsic (e.g. meaning-making,
values) and extrinsic factors (e.g. more time, context)
play a significant role in this regard [4, 8, 35, 40]. Namely,
sources of job satisfaction in this study were a decrease
in financial and time pressures, allowing PCPs to invest
time in their patients and in their own well-being. Furthermore,
PCPs felt more autonomous in their profession
and were able to act upon their own professional values
of holism and autonomy. Additionally, previous research
reported that taking a person-centered approach
increased the job satisfaction of healthcare workers [36].
As several changes in the practice were initiated before
the adoption of PH (e.g. prolonging consultation times,
taking a person-centered approach) this raises the question
how the concept contributed to the job satisfaction
of the participants. Especially, as some of the respondents
struggled to describe what the concept meant.
Indeed, tracing the contribution of PH to various
changes within the practice, and understanding how
each affected job satisfaction has proven a Sisyphean
task during our analysis of the data. The concept’s multiinterpretability
and malleability complicated this issue
further, as they introduced ambiguity regarding PH’s
content and application. For example, the PCPs under
study rarely used the PH ‘spiderweb’ as a dialogue tool
during consultations, even though the institute for Positive
Health promotes such usage. Also the practice chose
to give lifestyle a prominent place in its adaptation of PH,
which contrasts how other organizations give substance
to the new health concept. This ambiguity of PH has
been noted previously by other organizations implementing
the health concept [15, 19, 47]. Ambiguity can be a
potential source of confusion and lead to a lack of uniformity
in implementation.
However, our analysis indicates that the malleability of
PH is a strength as well. Successful application of PH, in
the case of the practice under study, hinged on a carefully
crafted match between the concept and the organization.
In fact, customization of PH permitted by the concept’s
malleability, played an important part in the making of
the match. The individual PCPs, as well, could develop
their own way of adopting the concept. As described in
theme 2, PH contributed to consolidating the practice’s
vision, while allowing for individual variations in practice.
Thus, the PH frame helped align PCPs with the
organization’s vision and values without heavily infringing
on the professionals’ autonomy. In this way, it contributed
to PCPs’ job satisfaction [35, 40, 48].
Over the past years, PH’s popularity has been soaring
in the Dutch health landscape. The comprehensive health
concept appears in publications by the national government,
the association of GPs, and many municipalities,
for instance [13]. Thus, PH’s recognizability and legitimacy
in the Netherlands allowed the practice to use the
concept as a frame for change to express, legitimize, and
promote its vision. The adoption of this frame enabled
the emergence of an experimental project with the health
insurer and municipality. As such, PH helped secure the
material (most importantly financial) conditions needed
for the practice’s preferred way of working, namely for
PCPs to invest more time in their patients and in their
own well-being. The legitimacy of the frame also supported
PCPs to give substance to their vision in practice.
As discussed, these changes positively affected the PCPs’
job satisfaction. Arguably, PH fulfills a similar framing
function in comparable experiments in the healthcare
field [15, 21, 22, 48].
Moreover, we argue that the framing function of PH
contributed to the meaning-making of individual PCPs.
A frame strengthens the coherency and value of one’s
identity or ideas, for instance, on professionalism, which
according to narrative identity theory makes individuals
feel validated and authentic [49–52]. Put more concretely,
a frame helps conveying what someone stands
for, what makes them proud, and how they imagine the
future. As theme 2 demonstrates, PH endorsed the PCPs
in this regard. Due to the malleability of PH, each PCP
could adopt and adapt it in such a way that the frame fit
their professional identity. Thus, we argue that PH furthered
the PCPs’ job satisfaction by supporting them to
find meaning and a sense of purpose in their profession
[4, 35]. Anecdotal accounts by healthcare professionals
suggest that PH has contributed to their meaning-making
[15, 16, 42, 45]. So far, however, the influence of PH
on meaning-making in practice has not been addressed
in the research literature, nor sufficiently by the current
study. Therefore, future research should explore the role
of PH on meaning-making and how this relates to job
satisfaction.
Our results suggest that each organization that seeks
to introduce PH as an intervention to improve job satisfaction
will need to invest significant effort in making
the match. Therefore, we recommend that other organizations
first explore whether they are willing and able
to do so. Nevertheless, adopting PH can be taken as an
opportunity for professionals and the organization to
start discussing relevant topics relating to the concept
and to job satisfaction. These include the meaning of
professionality, values such as holism or autonomy, and
the organization’s place in the community. All the while,
organizations should facilitate concrete changes that
resonate with the vision developed (e.g. financial rearrangements,
lunchtime walks). This case report shows
that investing in PH can help legitimizing and giving substance
to these changes, thereby potentially improving
job satisfaction. Recently, the institute for Positive Health
published guidelines on how to implement PH in a general
practice [53]. In line with our recommendations, the
authors stress the importance of reflecting on how PH
can contribute to a practice’s vision and values, before
making changes in the organization.
This study has several strengths and limitations. Since
it is a case study, only a limited number of professionals
were interviewed in a specific setting. Indeed, the
discussed match is not possible in each and every setting.
This minimizes the generalizability of the results.
Additionally, the study population has an outspoken
positive attitude towards PH, which might have introduced
confirmation bias. Moreover, the participants
are stakeholders in this research, as this study was used
to evaluate the effects of PH on PCP well-being in the
general practice. Therefore, the results may have an
impact on the continuation of the pilot project with
the municipality and health insurer. As this could have
led to a conflict of interest, all stakeholders, including
the researchers, met to discuss expectations and stakes
at the start of the study. Consequently, agreements on
transparent communication were made. The strong
cooperation with the practice also meant a multitude
of in-depth data and insights could be gathered, which
increased the validity of the study [44]. Finally, the study
forms a unique addition to the scarce academic research
on PH implementations and professionals’ meaningmaking
in healthcare.
Conclusions
Positive Health contributed to the job satisfaction of the
primary care professionals of the general practice by
functioning as an adaptable frame for change. Firstly, the
frame aided them in expressing, legitimizing, and promoting
their vision on good healthcare and professionalism,
and its value. This supported the PCPs to align
everyday conduct with their values. Secondly, PH served
as a frame to secure material conditions that were needed
to enact this vision, notably freeing time to spend on
patients and invest in PCP’s own well-being. However, it
is important to take into account that the practice’s vision
and circumstances fit well with the concept of PH, and
vice versa. It is not self-evident that such a match is possible
in any given context. Additionally, PH’s malleability
introduces ambiguity in what the concept entails, but also
allows for context-specific customization. In that regard,
PH is not a readily implementable intervention. We recommend
that other organizations seeking to adopt PH to
increase job satisfaction carefully consider whether they
are willing and able to make the match and explore how
PH can contribute to substantiating the vision and values
of the professionals involved. Future studies should
explore the role of PH on meaning-making and how this
relates to job satisfaction.
