Background
Within-consultation ‘hot’ recruitment of patients with
incident conditions is significantly more challenging
than ‘cold’ recruitment of patients with prevalent conditions,
who can be contacted electronically or by letter
[1]. The extra workload and time needed both to set up
and to recruit within a normal consultation are major
barriers to participation by GPs and practices [1–3].
Participation can be increased where there is perceived
clinical value and / or benefit to patients, adequate
remuneration for time and streamlined recruitment
processes that minimize workload [1–4].
One approach to minimizing the workload and cost
is to make use of data routinely collected with electronic
health records (EHR) to identify eligible patients
and collect outcome data [1]. ‘TRANSFoRm’ (Translational
Research and Patient Safety in Europe) is an
electronic trial data collection platform that integrates
with the EHR to: perform automatic eligibility checking
of entered Read/Snomed codes of patients upon
presentation; capture electronic Case Report Form
data part-filled from the EHR at pre-defined points in
the study workflow; and use mobile and web portals to
collect Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs)
[5]. TRANSFoRm was developed as part of a 5-year EU
FP7 Programme. Following a successful pilot study in
Poland [6], TRANSFoRm was used in the UK-based
REST study, a 3-arm pragmatic trial of treatment for
acute otitis media with discharge in children comparing
topical, ‘immediate’ oral and ‘delayed’ antibiotic treatment
options [7].
Otitis media with discharge (AOMd) is a painful and
distressing condition and most children are treated in
primary care with ‘immediate’ oral antibiotics [8, 9].
However, the use of systemic antibiotics risks side effects
and antibiotic resistance [10, 11]. While responsible for
a significant proportion of antibiotic prescribing, AOMd
is not as common as infections such as tonsillitis and
acute bronchitis, meaning individual GP practices would
expect to recruit relatively small numbers of children. The
infrequency of recruitment opportunities makes it more
likely that potentially eligible children would be missed
because clinicians will find it difficult to keep it in mind
and to remember the process for recruitment. TRANSFoRm
provided an automatic alert for potentially eligible
children, guided and recorded recruitment procedure
and auto-populated patient data. The Runny Ear STudy
(REST) randomised controlled trial therefore aimed to
recruit 175 GP practices across the United Kingdom and
use TRANSFoRm to support efficient trial processes [7].
The results of the REST study will be reported elsewhere
[12].
We conducted a nested qualitative study to describe
the experience of primary care practice staff of REST trial
processes. This paper reports the views and experiences
of primary care staff deploying and/or using the TRANSFoRm
trial software, within the context of UK primary
care.
Methods
Purposive sampling was used to select participants in
order to capture maximum variation in views and experiences
[13]. Primary care staff involved in trial processes
were purposively sampled in relation to site, role
and whether the practice was able to successfully recruit
patients. Views were sought from recruiting clinicians,
practice research staff, and those primary care staff
involved in installing and supporting the TRANSFoRm
software, which included staff in management and IT
support roles.
In-depth interviews with primary care staff were conducted
using a flexible topic guide to ensure that the
primary issues are covered across all interviews, but enabled
participants to introduce unanticipated issues [14].
The topic guide was revised to include new topic areas
identified from earlier interviews, particularly around
the barriers to implementing TRANSFoRm (supplementary
file 1). The researcher used open-ended questioning
techniques to elicit participants’ experiences and
views of key events and participants were asked to provide
examples. The interviews were conducted over the
phone, lasted 20–45 min and were recorded using a digital
voice recorder. Audio recordings were transcribed and
anonymised to protect confidentiality.
Interview transcripts were imported into NVIVO
12 qualitative data analysis software. Analysis began
shortly after data collection and was ongoing and iterative,
informing further data collection and identifying
changes needed to the topic guide. Thematic analysis
[15], utilising a data-driven inductive approach, was used
to identify and analyse patterns and themes of particular
salience for participants and across the dataset using
constant comparison techniques [16, 17]. A subset of
transcripts was independently double coded by members
of the team (CC and JH) and discussed to achieve coding
consensus and maximal rigour. Sample size was informed
by the concept of ‘information power’ [18], with analysis
and sampling conducted in parallel and continuous
assessment of the suitability of the information within
the sample with regard to study objectives.
Results
Sixteen primary care staff were interviewed: 9 GPs and
7 other staff, from recruiting and non-recruiting practices
(including 1 practice that withdrew from the study)
(Table 1). Some of the GPs had experience of recruiting to
the trial and some had experience of getting the TRANSFoRm
software working. Staff from recruiting practices
had each recruited at least 1 child. All of the GPs were
partners and their practice’s research leads, with years
in practice ranging from 4 to 33. The non-clinical staff
included practice managers, practice IT leads, a research
coordinator and a research nurse (with no clinical role)
who had experience of installing the TRANSFoRm software
and the processes involved in getting it to work.
The findings are organised below into three thematic
areas: views of automated data capture software; experiences
of implementing new software; and the challenges
to software implementation from the limited, varied and
changing IT context in UK primary care.
“It puts the details in which is time saving”: views
of automated data capture
Participants were keen on the idea of a system that would
automatically capture data on recruited patients. They
faced considerable workload pressure, and this means
there is little time for additional work, which sometimes
was a barrier to participation in research studies.
Research leads liked the idea of an automated system
because they thought it could reduce the time taken for
the research and therefore make it more possible for
practices to participate.
“I think as an idea it’s brilliant. … it means you
haven’t got piles and piles of paperwork … that
you’ve then got to somehow get scanned to email
through. … it self-populates. … it puts the details in
which is time saving. Cos time is one of the big things
in general practice” (GP09)
“there’s not a spare minute in primary care at the
moment. … Research in primary care, I think we’re, I
think we’re struggling a bit. … There’s such a burden
on, on GP time for major problems that research …
the GPs would look at the studies and say, ‘Yeah, I
don’t have time to do this’.” (Research Nurse, ITA03)
“It has taken an awful lot of time”: experiences of software
Participants felt that the software was not sufficiently
developed for deployment in UK practices. GPs and
non-clinical staff involved in installing TRANSFoRm
and getting it to work described a long and frustrating
process of trouble shooting and multiple reinstallations.
Part of the software had to be installed individually on
each recruiting clinician’s computer and limited access
to these computers led to delays.
“to be brutally honest with it was quite a nightmare
… I’ve probably spent about 10 h in total trying
to install the piece of software on one computer.
Um, quite often there would be loads of errors with
it installing, with it not working. Um, I’d then have
to send emails to the people that were dealing with
it. … it’s definitely taken so much longer than what
we thought it was going to take.” (Practice Operations
Manager, ITA02)
“the major problem, um, of the installation is actually
getting time to get into the GP’s room. … we’re
really limited on space so if that GP isn’t in there’ll
be a locum in their room … from eight in the morning
‘til 6.30 or seven o’clock at night. So actually
trying to get in to have… 2 h… is virtually impossible.
(Research Nurse, ITA03)
The biggest impact was the time taken to get TRANSFoRm
installed and working in the already very time
pressured context of primary care. This impacted on
the GP practices other work, including preparing data
for the Quality Outcomes Framework (QOF) – NHS
performance management and payment of general
practitioners. When the time commitment started to
impede essential work, then practices started to consider
withdrawing from the study.
“I’ve spent literally hours on this trying to install
the software, hours. I think our clinicians have said
that, you know, enough’s enough. They don’t want
me to spend any more time on it. … they [GP partners]
just [got] cross ‘cause I wasn’t doing other
things …. I do all the QOF stuff so all the quality
registers and things and all the statistics, all the
claims. … all that sort of was a bit on hold really.”
(Data Manager, IT01)
“I started to refuse to install stuff because we were
having so many problems with what it was doing
to our computers … it was probably towards the
end of the QOF year … I said I wasn’t prepared to
put it back on until after we finished the QOF year
because I couldn’t risk the machines not working.
(GP09)
Some participants reported financial costs to the practice
as a result of participating in the study. At least one
had paid for extra hours for their IT support person to
try to get TRANSFoRm to work. Several participants felt
that financial support to practices did not compensate for
time spent on research activities for this study, with the
relatively low number of expected recruits per practice
and the high start-up demands of installation.
actually paid me extra to come in and do the REST
software so I think that’s sort of annoyed them a little
bit.” (Data Manager, IT01)
“We’re not all IT proficient”: variations in primary care IT
provision and skills
The limited, varied and changing IT capacity across the
primary care practices presented many challenges to
installing and getting the new software to work.
At the practice level, there was limited staff with IT
capacity and expertise. There were issues with varying
versions of Windows and internet browsers and with the
way in which GPs had individually adjusted settings on
the EHR. There was the varied IT expertise and capacity
in individual practices with many reliant on a GP, manager
or administrator with only modest knowledge of IT.
Windows admin rights (needed to install any software)
were usually restricted to a small number of staff and not
necessarily those with time or responsibility for setting
up research studies. This meant that in many practices
the person tasked with doing the work to get TRANSFoRm
to function often struggled with the tasks and with
understanding the various problems encountered.
“we are a fairly small practice … it was pretty much
… me on my own … just trying to go through the
installation step by step to work out where it wasn’t
working and then trying to work out why so, trial
and error” (GP06)
“we didn’t locally have full admin rights. Well the
Practice Manager did but you know, to get her to sit
down for a couple of hours and set it all up was very
difficult, she didn’t have a couple of hours.” (Research
Co-ordinator, ITA05)
There were issues with obtaining help from outsourced
IT support. Practices all had some IT support provided
by an external body, sometimes a private provider and
sometimes a Commissioning Support Unit (CSU) or
other NHS provider. CCGs commission local health services
and NHS England the national services. Five different
providers were mentioned by our relatively small
number of participants. IT support arrangements varied
with respect to whether the external body held exclusive
admin rights for practice computers or supported
research IT. Several practices reported that their external
IT support provider would not assist because the software
was not on the CCG approved list. When they were
asked to provide support, these external bodies often
raised concerns about the unknown TRANSFoRm software,
were usually unfamiliar with software for research
projects and slow in providing support due to limited
capacity. In one very research active practice, the dedicated
research co-ordinator described using her established
good relationship with the external IT provider to
obtain the support needed.
“we’re not sort of in charge of our own IT, the IT goes
out to another company … our IT people who are
[name A], they’re not really supposed to give admin
rights to anybody in a practice … [company name
A]will not get involved with other people’s software.
…they have a list of software that’s allowed on the
system and if we’re going to put some other software
onto it they will not support us installing that software”
(Practice Data Manager, ITA01)
“we do have [name C] but I didn’t get them involved
in it…’cause … [name C] wouldn’t help with it anyway.
… because it hadn’t been signed off by our CCG
so we shouldn’t be installing it on our computers.”
(Operations Manager, ITA02)
“[name E] are our … IT support … they were much
more obliging than I thought they’d be to be honest
but we have worked with them before on other studies
with software that downloads onto the PC so they
were fine about it … we had a very good relationship
with you know one particular person on the IT team,
willing to help us” (Research Co-ordinator, ITA05)
Some practices reported that they had to obtain permission
from their CCG before installing software on
their practice computers. The transition to Windows
10 during the trial was linked to the loss of practice
level admin rights over computers in some CCG areas.
Whether or not practices retained some admin rights
over their computers (and therefore ability to install software)
varied across recruited practices. When practices
had to obtain permission from their CCG to install software,
this could be a lengthy process. CCGs raised questions
about the risk of this unknown software in terms of
cybersecurity. The centralisation of management to the
CCG was seen as supporting initiatives such as the single
domain, which allows better sharing of patient notes
between different types of practitioners in primary care.
However, it also had the unintended consequence of
restricting the installation of study specific software.
“we had a big change at our practice erm, something
called single domain which basically means
that they’ve taken a lot of admin rights away from
a lot of the users including me… cause I think it
was becoming problematic across the practices
that you know, we had free rein really. And that’s
going to cause a problem with things like REST
because we can’t install it, so you give us a set of
instructions and we won’t be able to do it because
they’re okay with it first.” (Assistant Practice Manager,
ITA04)
“the CCG took it upon themselves to be responsible
for all of our hardware and software, so when Windows
10 came for the whole of the CCG, they then
took charge of everything really, which in a way
makes sense because they paid for it and therefore
they should control it and the flow of information
that’s available and try to link it all up with other
bits of the NHS, but as a result things … fell by the
wayside, unfortunately.” (GP05)
“because of the way that the NHS is set up we had
to get firewalls opened, … to enable the software to
contact [trial database] and then also for them to
contact back through to our software so basically
you had to go through the firewall through a different
port. … so that was quite complicated at the
beginning, having to go through these firewalls by
logging it with our IT and then our IT doing it and
that took a while.” (Data Manager, ITA01)
“[I] installed the software once I had permission
from the CCG and that took [from] July/August
… until December … it’s just checking the security
side of things, just make sure we’re not going to get
any viruses... it’s about data protection, you know
they want to make sure that no patient identifiable
data is going to be sent over for the studies.” (IT
Support Manager, IT07)
CCG’s having control over practice software installation
was reported by most practices but was not universal.
A GP from one practice reported being able to
install software freely. A GP from another practice, who
had a role within the CCG, was able to use their influence
to get the software installed in his practice.
“I think [the CCG] are quite – lax might be the
wrong word, but we can install software and we
do install software. So we’ve installed software for
other research studies with no problems.” (GP09)
“[we] needed to change our operating system … [to]
Windows 10 … we couldn’t [install] ourselves any
more, we had to get the CCG computer boffins in to
do it for us, they didn’t want to do it because they
said its software may corrupt the NHS software
and they wanted more assurance from higher levels
than me that it was all safe to go, soooo… I got
cross … told them it was all, it had been approved
at high level, … co-ordinated at committee level
and approved and was being used elsewhere and
they shouldn’t be so silly … so they then did come
and put it on for me, so it’s now up and running”
(GP05)
Discussion
Summary
Research leads in participating practices supported the
idea of software that would streamline and automate
study processes. However, it was very time consuming
to deploy TRANSFoRm software and configuring PCs
at practice level to allow the software to run as intended,
involving clinical and non-clinical staff, and sometimes
outsourced IT support. Some practices reported multiple
problems with software deployment, in a few cases
leading to practices withdrawing from the trial before
recruiting a single patient. Primary care staff described
multiple challenges that derived from the limited, varied
and changing IT capacity within primary care practices.
Strengths and limitations
The qualitative interviews captured a range of views from
clinicians and other primary care staff involved in the
study. It was possible to purposively sample for clinicians
and non-clinicians from recruiting and non-recruiting
practices, which captured a good range of views and
experiences with respect to the trial. The primary care
staff also described considerable variety in terms of the
IT arrangements for practices, although it seems likely
that this study does not capture the full range of variation
in UK general practice IT arrangements. Recruitment
was cut short by the Covid-19 pandemic. However, sufficient
information power [18] was reached for the core
themes presented.
Comparison with existing literature
Implementing new technology in health services is inherently
challenging [19]. Issues such insufficiently tested
software and organisations that are inadequately set
up for installing and validating new software, are common
barriers to new technologies in health care [19,
20]. Complex and varied settings also make it difficult
to adequately test software, because settings can affect
function in unpredictable ways [21]. The more complex
a setting into which new technology is introduced, the
less likely it is to be adopted and sustained [22, 23]. The
findings of this study unpacked some of this complexity
and identified contributing issues at practice level, in the
interaction between practices and CCG, and from NHS
level policies on IT infrastructure. These are key issues
that need to be considered when developing software
designed to facilitate efficient and pragmatic trials in primary
care.
At a practice level, the internal and external IT support
was not sufficient for the challenges posed by the
introduction of this new trial data collection software.
This resulted in the considerable workload of installation
and troubleshooting falling on individual practices.
The limited IT support resulted from a combination of
practice level decisions about resourcing and the NHS
Primary Care Digital Services Operating Model that
specifies CCG provided IT support and makes no mention
of research studies [24]. This type of organisational
complexity, where decisions are made at different levels
by autonomous but interrelated bodies (here GP practices,
CCGs and sometimes external IT support providers),
poses a substantial challenge to the implementation
of innovative software [23, 25]. Considerable technical
support is needed to implement new software across the
varied contexts of multiple practices and CCGs, this is
not available at practice or CCG level and is unlikely to
be affordable for an individual research study.
Changes in practice software and support arrangements,
driven by NHS IT service improvement initiatives,
were another key barrier to the implementation
of new research software on practice computers. Health
systems are complex and constantly changing in response
to internal and external drivers and the pace of change
is yet another challenge faced when implementing new
software [19, 22, 26]. At the time of this study there was
no national guidance for CCGs from NHS X or NHS
Digital as to what assessment was required and national
assurance process for new software. During the REST
trial, many practices updated their operating systems and
administrative rights over software installation transferred
from individual practices to CCGs,. These changes
were driven by NHS initiatives to improve IT service provision
and align GP IT operating arrangements, which
include adherence to GDPR and measures to protect
from ransomware attacks [24]. However, these changes
had the unintended consequence of forming additional
barriers to the implementation of software that had to be
installed at a practice level and was designed to extract
and export (anonymised) patient data from EHR and to a
secure server outside the NHS. Primary care IT systems
are not solely under the control of individual practices
or CCGs or the NHS. Rather they are part of a complex
adaptive system that spans all three and includes other
stakeholders, such as the EHR software providers, all
of which may drive different types of change. Any new
software needs to be able to operate within this complex
adaptive system and successful implementation requires
engagement with all the key stakeholders.
Conclusions
Pragmatic trials, which need to recruit within consultations,
are essential for the production of high-quality evidence
about what works under normal clinical care [1].
Primary care is a busy and time pressured environment
[2, 3]. Software that links to EHR and automates some
of the trial processes and data collection could support
greater participation and more efficient trial designs [1,
5]. In order for that to become a reality, there is need for:
1) higher priority placed on research IT by all the stakeholders
who influence primary care IT provision; 2) provision
of substantial technical support to GP practices to
get any new software functioning smoothly without adding
to practice workload; and 3) development and testing
of software like TRANSFoRm as a platform service to
ensure that it is deployed and running smoothly before it
can be used with live clinical trials. The UK NHS recently
announced the GP IT Futures framework [27], from the
new Digital Care Services model, to supply IT systems
and services to GP practices and this may offer better
opportunities for engagement by developers of health
research software. Although individual projects may be
able to work towards this objective [1, 5, 7], the scale of
the challenge may require structural changes in NHS IT
provision to support efficient data collection initiatives as
part of the core digital services provision, not as an adhoc
bolt on.