Digital consultation with primary care physicians via mobile
telephone apps has spread rapidly in Sweden since 2014.
The development was initiated by private health care companies,
but the service has been taken up by many of the 21
publicly funded regions responsible for providing health
care in Sweden. Three of the private companies (Kry, Min
Doktor and Doktor.se) have about 90% of the digital consultation
market in Sweden [1]. In 2019, approximately 1
million digital consultations with physicians took place in
Sweden, representing 5% of all consultation sessions with
physicians in primary care. The number of digital consultation
sessions increased by 67% in 2019 from the
previous year, suggesting a fast expansion in the popularity
of this service [1]. Since the start of the coronavirus
pandemic, digital consultations with physicians in
Sweden have increased by approximately 60% between
February and March 2020 for the largest private health
companies. The publicly funded health care system also
experienced a rapid increase in digital consultations
during the same period [2, 3].
The Swedish government has set an ambitious eHealth
goal of becoming the best in the world at using the opportunities
offered by digitalization to make it easier for
people to achieve good and equal health and welfare,
and to develop and strengthen their own resources for
increased independence and participation in the life of
society [4, 5]. The European Commission also aims to
achieve more efficient health care by means of eHealth,
emphasizing the importance of user-friendly, accessible,
and safe care for patients throughout the European
Union [6]. The development of the digital health care
system can also be explained in relation to numerous
developments, such as increased patient involvement in
their own health care and higher expectations for access
to health care in general [4, 7, 8].
The new digital consultation allows remote working
because primary care physicians can work from home,
outside their traditional primary care environment [9, 10].
Research on remote working has established that there
can be problems concerning social isolation, lack of
progress in career opportunities and not being visible in
the organization as well as physical disadvantages in the
work environment [11, 12]. However, despite the spread
of digital consultations in primary care, there is a lack of
knowledge concerning how the new service affects physicians’
psychosocial work environment, including their perceived
work demands (e.g., perceived time pressure and
role conflict between work and family), control over working
processes (e.g., decisional latitude and skill discretion),
and social support (e.g., interaction with co-workers and
supervisors), which has been investigated among remote
workers in other populations [13–15]. We have not been
able to identify any studies in Sweden or internationally
that have investigated how digital consultation is perceived
with regard to psychological well-being and psychosocial
work environment. Such knowledge is
important considering the research demonstrating many
problems associated with physicians’ mental health and
working conditions [16–19]. Studies in many countries in
Europe and the United States have shown high and increasing
perceived stress and burnout among physicians
[16–20]. Furthermore, primary care physicians’ workload
seems to have increased due to an increase in demand for
health care among citizens as well as an increase in bureaucratic
paperwork and tasks viewed as illegitimate by
physicians [7, 20–22].
Previous research on digital consultation with physicians
has primarily focused on the patients’ point of view
and experiences of such meetings [23–27]. Studies have
also investigated the cost-effectiveness of digital consultation
[28, 29]. Hence, there is a paucity of studies concerning
digital patient consultation conducted from the
perspective of physicians and focusing on their psychosocial
work environment. Addressing an important
knowledge gap, the aim of this study was to investigate
primary care physicians’ perceived work demands, control
over working processes, and social support when
providing digital consultation to primary care patients.
Methods
Study design and setting
The study has a qualitative design, using semi-structured,
individual interviews. A qualitative approach was chosen
because little is known about the psychosocial working
conditions of primary care physicians in digital consultations
with patients. Individual interviews were considered
the most relevant method for gaining a deeper understanding
of the physicians’ working conditions allowing
participants to speak freely and not be affected by other
participants’ experiences and opinions of the topic.
The Swedish health care system consists of 21 regions
(previously known as county councils), which provide
health care for the population, mainly funded by taxes.
All residents are insured by the state with equal access
to health care for the whole population. Fees are low
and regulated by law. Primary care (both traditional and
digital consultation) is provided by both public and private
actors, with the private providers representing 43%
of the total number of primary care units in Sweden
2018 [28]. Private health care companies dominate the
market with regard to digital health care services (90%),
but regions are increasingly launching their own digital
consultation services [1, 30, 31]. The private health care
companies included in our study are contracted to regions;
the out-of-pocket fees for their patients are equal
to that of publicly funded health care [32].
Recruitment of participants
We used a purposeful sampling strategy to achieve a
heterogeneous sample [33] with regard to (1) involving
physicians working with digital consultation in both
publicly funded primary care units and in private health
companies; (2) the geographic location; (3) different experiences
of working as a physician, i.e., both specialists
and residents. The objective of this sampling strategy
was to recruit physicians who represented a broad
spectrum of experiences and perceptions.
To recruit participants working in public care, we contacted
all 21 regions in Sweden by examining the regions’
websites to identify the person who seemed to be
responsible for digital consultation in the region. We
sent an e-mail to this person, briefly informing them
about our study and asking for physicians from the region
to participate. We did not receive any response
from 8 regions, whereas 4 regions agreed to participate
and provided contact information to key persons in the
organization to enable us to establish contact with physicians
who had worked with digital consultation. The
remaining 9 regions responded that they did not offer
digital consultation and/or declined participation. We
approached 29 primary care physicians from the 4 regions,
of which 17 agreed to participate.
To recruit participants working in private health care,
we approached 7 private companies. Of these, 5 agreed
to participate in our study. We approached 12 physicians
from these companies, of which 11 agreed to participate.
All the participants had some experience of employment
in publicly funded health care. Thus, in total we recruited
28 physicians for the study (Table 1).
Before the interviews were conducted, the participants
signed informed consent stating that their confidentiality
was guaranteed and that no one other than the interviewer
would know their identity. To the other researchers,
the participant was known only by initials and
other demographic, non-identifying data. No participant
withdrew participation during or after the interviews.
The study was approved by the Ethics Review Board in
Region Östergötland (2019–01910). Transcripts are
stored in the authors’ password-protected computers
with no access for anyone other than the authors.
Data collection
The authors developed a semi-structured interview guide
to capture the physicians’ perceptions and experiences
concerning the psychosocial work environment of digital
consultation. The interview guide was assembled by the
research team behind the study, based on the existing
literature on psychosocial work environment [14].
We pilot tested the interview guide in 2 interviews, which
indicated that further questions regarding the digital work
environment needed to be incorporated into the interview
guide. Despite this, the first 2 interviews included relevant
information and were therefore included in the analysis.
The interviews were conducted by all authors except PN
and JS. Each interview lasted between 24 and 84 min and
was digitally audio recorded. No field notes were taken
during or after the interviews. The interviews were conducted
in by video meeting, telephone, or a personal
meeting, depending on what suited the participant best.
During the interviews, only the participant and interviewer
were present to allow the participant to speak freely. Except
for the 2 participants in the pilot interviews and additionally
one participant who was known to HF, none of
the participants had any relationship with the researchers.
The first 3 interviews were transcribed verbatim by HF
and the remaining interviews were transcribed by a professional
transcription agency. All transcripts were carefully
examined by HF to ensure accuracy. The interviews
took place between April and October 2019. Saturation of
data was discussed by the research team, and according to
earlier research, the major themes and codes are derived
from data after 12 interviews. This gives our study with 28
participants a convincing strength.
Theoretical framework
The interview questions were informed by the Job
Demand-Control-Support (JDCS) model [14, 34]. The
model was also used as a framework to analyze the data
by means of categorizing the physicians’ perceptions and
experiences concerning digital consultation into the 3
categories of the model, i.e., Demand, Control, and Support,
in the deductive analysis of the data.
The Job-Demands model was originally developed by
Karasek [35]. Job demands may involve time pressures
and role conflicts, whereas job control refers to employees’
ability to control their work situation [13, 14]. Combining
the 2 dimensions of job demands and job control, Karasek
[14] stated that jobs high on demands and low on control
(“high strain jobs”) carry a high risk of development of adverse
psychological symptoms such as anxiety and depression,
but also cardiovascular disease [34]. By contrast, in
jobs that are low on demands and high on control (“lowstrain
jobs”), adverse reactions are unlikely.
The Job-Demands model was later extended by Johnson
and Hall [34] who added the dimension of Support at the
workplace as a third dimension. The support dimension
was introduced to represent a “buffering” effect on perceived
stress, mental health, and job strain by moderating
the negative impact of high strain. The JDCS model predicts
that work situations characterized by high demands,
low control, and low social support are the most harmful
for workers’ well-being [34]. The JDCS model has been
used worldwide in research on psychosocial work environment
and occupational stress [13, 14, 34, 36].
Data analysis
Participants’ responses were analyzed using directed content
analysis according to Hsieh and Shannon [37]. As a
first step, all authors read all transcripts to obtain an understanding
of the whole. HF then coded the transcripts
by identifying key concepts as initial coding categories.
Thereafter, HF and JS met several times and discussed the
coding process as well as developed tentative operational
definitions for each category, in this case according to the
JDCS model. Then, all the authors read and discussed the
findings. After discussion in the group there were some
suggestions regarding reorganization of some of the categories.
Eventually, consensus was reached on the categories
and labels for the categories. Representative quotations
from participants were proposed by HF and were discussed
with the rest of the team before the final quotations
were agreed upon. Quotations are marked from physician
#1 to physician #28 in the Results.
Results
The 28 participants displayed different characteristics
(Table 1). Seventeen were employed by publicly funded
primary care units in 4 regions and 11 worked in 4 different
private companies. Of the 4 private companies, 3
work predominantly with digital consultation although
they also offer traditional consultation to a limited extent,
and the fourth company offers digital consultation
as an option besides their regular primary care. The
public regions offered digital consultations as a minor
part of their regular primary care. The publicly
employed physicians either performed digital consultations
as part of their regular employment or as an additional,
reimbursed task. Participating regions and
companies were located in urban areas in central and
southern Sweden. However, the patients could be expected
to live in both rural and urban areas since the
service is available to patients from the whole of Sweden,
i.e. without geographical restrictions. Thirteen of the
participants had received their medical training in
Sweden, and 15 had undergone medical education
abroad. Digital consultation was carried out both during
office hours as well as in the evenings and at weekends.
The analysis of the data yielded 9 subcategories, which
were mapped onto the 3 categories of the JDCS model
(Table 2). The results of the analysis for each category
and subcategory are presented in the following sections.
Control over job situation
Control over job situation concerns employees’ ability to
organize their work, adopt their own initiatives, and have
latitude about decisions. This category consists of 3 subcategories:
autonomy, competence, and technology.
Autonomy
Participants experienced a great deal of decisional latitude
concerning their work situation. The digital consultation
allowed for high levels of flexibility in terms of deciding
working hours and choosing where to work, including
having the ability to work from home. Several participants
saw the opportunity to determine the location of work as
very positive. They stated that they had more time to
spare and could spend valuable time with their family
when they did not have to travel to and from work. However,
some shortcomings were also expressed, e.g., not
having scheduled coffee breaks and uncertainty about
whether they could take breaks as usual or not.
You’re at home. The advantage of this [digital consultation]
is that I don’t have to travel to and from work. I
start at 8 a.m. and I sit down at my computer at 8 and
when I quit at 5 p.m. I’m already at home. It’s an incredible
benefit.
Concern regarding loss of clinical competence when working
exclusively with digital consultation was expressed by
participants. They underscored the importance of combining
traditional clinical consultation and digital consultation
to maintain and develop their medical proficiency. There
was agreeance among the participants as regards the concern
about the lack of improvement in their medical skills
because they experienced that digital consultation consisted
mostly of relatively simple medical issues. Lower urinary
tract infections in women, upper airway infections, allergies,
prescription renewals, and certification of sick leave were
common issues.
Digital consultation, that’s something else, it’s an easier
approach to work. It’s some sort of symptomatic
treatment for, most commonly, one condition, which
means you can close the case and the patient is content,
and you’re pleased because there’s no more
work to do when finishing the case. To work only
with digital consultation, I don’t think that’s a solution
because I can’t imagine you’re able to maintain
your competence if you only work digitally. [#6]
Technology
The technology used in digital consultations caused participants
some problems, including recurring issues with the
internet connection. This was experienced as particularly
worrisome when the connection with the patient was lost
in the middle of a consultation and the physician was not
able to reach the patient again. Further, participants reported
that there were some disadvantages working from
home because they lacked technical support when working
outside office hours, forcing them to try to solve technical
problems by themselves. However, most of the participants
experienced very good technical quality, e.g., concerning
pictures of skin conditions. Several of the participants saw
potential in incorporating the digital consultation system
into their own everyday journal system rather than using a
different system for digital consultation.
Yes, the technical challenge is that we’re not primarily
working in our regular computer system but in another
system. For this to be really efficient, it needs to
be integrated into our existing journal system. So,
there are technical parts that can be improved. [#28]
Demands of job situation
Demands of job situation are the physical, psychological,
social, or organizational aspects of jobs that require physical
and/or psychological effort. Perceived time pressure
and role conflict (incompatible demands related to one’s
job or position) are also a part of the demand dimension.
Three subcategories were identified in this category.
Workload
Participants experienced that the workload was significantly
lower when working with digital consultation. They explained
this in terms of non-existing production demands,
i.e. number of consultations with patients per hour, in combination
with the type of medical cases they handled in
digital care. However, participants employed by private
companies had seen an increase in demands of production,
e.g., the number of patients they were expected to counsel
per hour. The privately employed participants described
that they had a very reasonable workload from the outset,
with no demands that they must administer a certain number
of patients per hour, but they noted that this was changing
as patient volumes increased, which they perceived to
be a shortcoming. The increased demands had led some of
the participants to look for other employers who could
offer more favorable working conditions.
The workload was quite low, the patient cases were
usually very simple to solve in 15 minutes, so there
were no large problems. You managed that without
any problems. [#3]
Patient safety
The participants believed maintenance of patient safety
when working with digital consultation was part of the job
demands. They noted that digital consultation had some
shortcomings that could have a negative impact on patient
safety, e.g., when patients sought medical advice for conditions
that were not suitable for digital consultation or
when there were technical problems so that the contact
with the patient was lost and the patient could not be
reached again. Some participants stated that difficulties in
mutual understanding between physician and patient was
quite common when there were language differences. This
communication problem could negatively affect patient
safety, according to some participants.
For I think, for example, sometimes when your patients’
Swedish [language] is very poor, I feel, and I
actually think many agrees with me, that it is better
with a traditional consultation where you really can
sort things out and talk, face to face. [#17]
Another concern about patient safety expressed by the
participants was the lack of a unified documentation system.
It was viewed as risky to prescribe medication without
knowing what other medications the patients were
prescribed since a majority of patients were unknown to
the physicians when working with digital consultations.
Resource use
Digital consultation requires that the participants handle
medical cases suitable for digital care. The participants
raised concerns about the risk of generating “unnecessary”
health care with digital consultation, making them
somewhat ambivalent towards the use of their medical
competence in the digital consultations. They noted that
the digital consultation predominantly reached young,
presumably healthy individuals, possibly at the expense
of the elderly population with a higher burden of disease.
Issues concerning the use of constrained health care resources
created concern for some of the participants.
The question about who decides what is, and what is
not, an important medical condition was also brought
up. Participants perceived that some patients used digital
consultation as a form of health care advice service,
which they considered as unnecessary health care because
a free health care advice service already exists in
Sweden. In most regions and private companies represented
in this study, digital consultation means that patients
first get in touch with highest medical level (i.e., a
primary care physician) instead of, e.g., discussing their
problems with a nurse as a first step. Some participants
expressed that they would like to see some sort of selection
of patients because a large proportion of patients
did not need to see a physician if limited health care resources
were to be used most effectively.
In my opinion, health care today is very, very available
for quite young, healthy individuals. But for
those who are really the most ill, it can be a complicated
system and difficult to access. [#15]
Moreover, it [digital consultation] may be a waste of
resources, like I told you before, you immediately
get the highest level of competence, in a very convenient
and available way. And that’s really the
greatest risk, that you pay a lot for a small measure
from the health care system. [#3]
Social support of the job situation
The social support of the job situation includes helpful interactions
with colleagues and supervisors. Social contacts
and structures affect basic psychologic mechanisms, which
are important for well-being in the long term. Social support
can also influence job stressors in a positive direction,
acting as a “buffering” mechanism.
Colleagues
Participants conveyed that they could feel somewhat socially
isolated when working with digital consultation from
home and/or in the workplace outside office hours, which
generated uncomfortable feelings of loneliness. This was
mostly reported by participants in publicly funded health
care who were accustomed to having a regular workplace
to go to. Participants employed by private companies did
not express the same sense of loneliness or isolation. On
the contrary, they had the opportunity to interact with
remote colleagues through internal chat forums where
they could obtain both medical advice and support
from others.
We have this community, it’s a fantastic source of
support among colleagues concerning both work
environment issues and also practical concerns, but
also concerning knowledge about patients. So it’s
really … It’s invaluable. It is not possible in regular
health care to have that sort of contact with colleagues.
Here, we have that possibility and you can
also receive a lot of support from your colleagues
and the employer too. But this collegial interaction
with colleagues is so valuable, so valuable. [#20]
With regard to support from colleagues in health care in
general, i.e., not necessarily colleagues in digital consultation,
most participants reported non-supportive attitudes
overall. This lack of collegial support seemed to generate
feelings of shame and guilt among some of the participants,
with some even avoiding telling colleagues about
their work as a “digital doctor” to avoid being taunted.
You feel ashamed, you know how others react to
this “so you’re after the easy money, how bad you
are, taking it from taxes”. They mean the cheapest
health care goes to traditional primary care and that
we (the digital physicians) take the easy patients
from traditional primary care, or “unnecessary” patients.
Many people think like this, which isn’t true.
Most of the patients haven’t been able to get help
from traditional primary care. [#18]
Supervisors
Some participants employed by private companies reported
an obvious lack of support from supervisors, i.e.,
health care colleagues in management positions. There
had initially been regular staff follow-ups, but they believed
that they were no longer able to discuss working
conditions with their supervisors. Participants working in
publicly funded health care experienced supervisor support
differently. In most cases, they perceived satisfactory
support from primary care supervisors. However, some of
the publicly employed participants expressed that their supervisors
were skeptical of digital consultation and did not
encourage them to work with this way, which left them
feeling unsupported and somewhat alone.
When it comes to work environment, most of it is ok
I figure, but a great deal has worsened. For me, I run
my cases, but I want my work to be acknowledged as
well. From patients I usually get acknowledged but
from my employer it has become worse. In my
opinion, the employer should be more attentive regarding
their employees. This is even more important
when employees are doing teleworking and not sitting
in a physical office. Initially, the employer was
very good in acknowledging my work, but not anymore,
so that’s a disadvantage. [#25]
Patients
Participants experienced considerable patient support
for the digital consultation. Many patients were very
positive and grateful for the fast, readily available care
they received, which they often communicated directly
to the participants. This response generated feelings of
satisfaction among the participants, who felt they could
really help patients solve their problems.
I told you before, I’ve never had patients this pleased/
content, one after another, everyone’s happy with
your work. Ok, it’s not the most complex burden of
diseases, but still, the patient’s in need of a solution
for a symptom that bothers them. You can solve it
easily, readily for all, for you. I think everyone’s very
happy with this way of solving the problem. [#6]
However, some of the participants also observed that
digital consultation situations could create a more anonymous
form of physician-patient communication,
making some patients lose their inhibitions so that they
were occasionally quite rude and sometimes said inappropriate
things they probably would not have done
in a face-to-face consultation.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to investigate primary care physicians’
perceived work demands, control over working processes,
and social support when providing digital
consultation to primary care patients. We found that physicians
working with digital consultation experienced several
advantages with this type of work. The physicians perceived
that the job demands were reasonable because the medical
cases handled in digital consultation were generally not too
complicated. Moreover, the physicians experienced a high
level of autonomy and perceived control over their work,
which they considered to be very valuable. The physicians
also felt they received a great deal of social support from
patients, which they found very satisfying. Overall, the participants
saw numerous benefits, not only with regard to
their own job situation but also for patients and the health
care system in general, even though they identified some
shortcomings and risks with digital care. Some of the perceived
shortcomings with digital consultations were technical
issues, concerns regarding patient safety and lack of
development in physicians’ medical skills if working exclusively
with digital consultations.
Concerning job control, the participants seemed to value
the flexibility and autonomy of digital consultation very
highly. The ability to choose where and when to work was
a considerable advantage with digital consultation over
traditional primary care work. Participants felt they had
more time to spend with family when they could work from
home. These findings are consistent with earlier research
concerning remote working, which has shown that flexible
working hours and schedules have a positive effect on productivity
and outcomes, such as increased job satisfaction,
lower turnover intentions, and reduced role stress (i.e.,
combining professional role with family role) [15, 38]. This
finding suggests that there could be some shortcomings
with regard to these particular factors in traditional primary
care and that physicians could benefit from more control
over their working situation, e.g. when and where to work.
The freedom of being able to choose when and where
to work was highly appreciated by the participants. They
do not have this sort of autonomy in the traditional primary
care setting, which largely lacks opportunities for
employees to have a flexible working schedule [39]. One
way of increasing flexibility for primary care employees
could be to integrate digital consultation into the schedule
of the daily work in traditional primary care, as well
as employers offering the opportunity for physicians to
work elsewhere (i.e., at home or other out-of-office arrangement).
This would give physicians more decisional
latitude on how and when to meet their patients.
The participants identified the technical equipment used
for digital consultation as an occasional source of problems.
The participants could not control these aspects of
the consultation, but it occasionally caused them problems;
patients were “lost” and could not be reached again
after internet connection issues. Similar technical issues
have been reported as a shortcoming and a source of
stress in other studies concerning digital consultations [8,
40, 41]. Technical issues and problems were more common
and pronounced among participants employed by
publicly funded health care compared with participants
employed by private companies, who perceived the technical
equipment as well developed and highly user
friendly. The technical shortcomings were also raised as a
potential risk regarding patient safety. If the physician
could not reach the patient after connection was lost it
could generate anxiety or stress for the physician depending
on the medical condition of the patient. This type of
potential problem would contradict the goal of health and
medical care according to the Swedish law of healthcare
that good health and care on equal terms should be provided
for the entire population [42].
The participants raised some concerns regarding the
potential misuse of health care because the digital route
to medical advice is very convenient for patients. This,
in turn, generated thoughts about who is entitled to
health care and to what extent health care is available for
everyone. Similar questions and opinions have been raised
by both clinicians and researchers and caused a lively debate
in newspapers and medical papers in Sweden as well
as in the United Kingdom and in the United States [22,
43, 44]. On the other hand, participants discussed potential
unloading of traditional care when patients with minor
health problems turned to digital consultations instead of
seeking physical care in a traditional way. The participants
emphasized that this could possibly lead to more time
available for other patients with multiple, chronic diseases
and for the elderly. This potential unloading has not been
realized in practice; instead, these studies suggest that
there is an increase in the number of patients seeking
medical advice digitally [22, 43, 45].
Regarding social support when working with digital consultation,
the participants expressed a feeling of satisfaction
in that the patients were very rewarding. Some of the
participants felt somewhat socially isolated and lonely
from time to time. However, others thought the interaction
with colleagues improved compared with traditional
primary care consultation in that they could get in
touch with colleagues through various electronic channels
and chat forums. This interaction provided an opportunity
to learn from other physicians who were also engaged in
digital consultation. Digital consultation enabled the physicians
to work from home, i.e., remote working. Earlier
research on this type of work has shown that remote
working does not have to impede employees’ social contacts
with co-workers [38]. However, the findings are inconclusive
regarding social support and its effects on
psychologic well-being and job satisfaction for employees
who engage in remote working in general [12, 46, 47].
Vander Elst et al. [12] showed that remote workers experienced
lower social support from colleagues the more extensively
they worked from home and that this was related
to higher levels of adverse psychologic symptoms, such as
cognitive stress and emotional exhaustion. This finding is
congruent with the results in our study because several of
the participants expressed that remote working was something
they did on a part time basis. The participants
employed by private companies experienced slightly more
support from co-workers than publicly employed participants.
This could possibly be explained by the wellestablished
digital chat forums available for the employees
as well as the opportunity to work from the common office
rather than from home whenever they chose.
There were some differences in perceived support from
supervisors between the physicians in our study who were
employed by publicly funded health care and those who
were employed by private companies. These differences
entailed, among other things, a decline in support from
supervisors in private companies compared with the situation
at the start. The participants in publicly funded
health care received sufficient support from supervisors although
there were some differences in supervisors’ enthusiasm
for digital consultation, which could affect
employers’ experience of support in a negative way. Digital
working is a change in the physicians’ way of working and
seeing patients, therefore it is important to have supervisors’
support because earlier research has shown that this
can mitigate change-related stressors, such as exhaustion
and cynicism among employees [46].
Another notable finding in our study was the satisfaction
most of the participants expressed with patients who
conveyed their appreciation and gratefulness to the physicians
with the consultation. This sort of recognition was
highly rewarding and somewhat of a new experience for
the participants, who were not used with this type of direct
and positive feedback from patients. The patients were
satisfied with receiving help almost instantly when seeking
digital care, and this made them grateful to the responsible
physician. Patients actually expressed amazement
with how quick the service was, according to the physicians.
The participants were frequently told that this contrasted
with many patients’ earlier experiences with
traditional primary care. Research on the patient-doctor
relationship in the digital era suggests the need for physicians
to acquire new skills in the consultation to be able
to diagnose patients without a physical examination as
well as interact through digital channels with patients they
may not have met before [48]. Furthermore, Mesko and
Győrffy [48] propose a change in the patient-doctor relationship
to more of a partnership. The findings in our
study are also in line with earlier research concerning
communication and the relationship between caregiver
and patient; patients may experience the digital way less
intimidating and find it easier to say what is on their mind
than in traditional consultations [49].
Our findings suggest that digital consultation entails
lower job demands than traditional work as a physician
in primary care. The participants observed that they predominantly
handled easier medical cases in digital consultations.
The combination of high levels of control and
low demands is well established in low-strain jobs, according
to Karasek and Theorell [14]. This type of job
yields few, if any, challenges for employees, but in return
stress levels are low and the risk of experiencing adverse
strain is generally very low, which makes this kind of job
highly desirable. Earlier research has shown that being a
physician is an occupation with high demands and
medium-to-high control, which leads to the development
of competence and increased learning and motivation
(e.g., active job), which the low-strain job does not
[14]. This lack of development and learning was also a
concern raised by several of the participants in our
study. There seemed to be consensus among the participants
that they did not want to work exclusively with
digital consultation; they wanted to continue with traditional
primary care work as well to maintain and develop
their competence. In the short term, digital
consultation seemed to provide some relief for stressed
physicians, but in the long term they believed this work
could disqualify them from working in regular health
care.
This study has a few limitations that should be noted
when interpreting the findings. We chose a qualitative
approach because little is known about primary care
physicians’ views on digital consultation. For this reason,
we conducted interviews with physicians to gain a deeper
understanding of the topic. Participation was voluntary;
the interviewees were included in the study after
they actively expressed their interest in participation.
This means that the participants may have been particularly
interested in the topic and/or early adopters with a
curious and positive mindset. The findings of the study
cannot be directly transferred to international settings.
The transferability of our results is limited to primary
care settings in Sweden, although participants were recruited
from different types of employers and forms of
employment. Despite this, the results in our study may
be applicable to other settings because the sample is
considered variable and adequate [50]. It would have
been interesting to interview physicians in more rural
parts of Sweden but by the time of this study, not all regions
in Sweden offered patients digital consultations
with primary care physicians. However, the private companies
offer their service to patients across Sweden and
the public companies have broad uptake areas which is
why the patients consulting digital doctors could be
expected to live in both rural and urban areas. Instead of
statistical generalization, we sought analytical (theoretical)
generalization by comparing findings with comparable
research to the extent it was possible due to the
limited amount of research on physicians’ digital consultation
in primary care.
The study also has considerable strengths. The multidisciplinary
research team enhanced the credibility of the
study, because it allowed different perspectives on the issue
under study [51]. The team consisted of the following professions:
physician (HF), behavioral economist (PN), political
scientist (IS), public health researcher (JS), behavioral
scientist (CE). Another strength was the relatively high
number of interviews (n = 28), although Malterud et al. [50]
have emphasized that the strength of the information received
(information power) is more important than the size
of the sample. Regardless, this enabled us to use quotations
from many different participants, adding transparency and
trustworthiness to the findings. It was also a strength that
the participants came from different geographic regions of
Sweden and from both public and private organizations.
Another strength was that the participants included men
and women of different ages and with different experiences
from previous primary care work.
Implications for further research in the area are important
because the work with digital consultation differs
greatly from the traditional consultation approach
that is part of physicians’ education. Digital consultation
is developing rapidly and further research on how it affects
physicians in primary care and other settings is important.
According to the findings in our study, digital
consultation could be one way to increase physicians’
perceived autonomy and reduce stress levels to some extent
if it is incorporated in the daily or weekly work.
This could possibly lead to increased job satisfaction and
reduced burnout among physicians, which is an important
issue. It is also important that digital consultations
are combined with traditional consultation so that competence
is maintained and developed.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this study has demonstrated that physicians
working with digital consultation perceive their
work as flexible with a high grade of autonomy. The demands
of digital work are reasonable to low. According
to the participants in our study, digital consultation is
preferably not something you can do full time if medical
skills and abilities are to be maintained and developed.
Participants’ perceptions of social support are that it is
pronounced among patients and to a lesser extent from
colleagues and supervisors.
Digital patient consultations have increased in the last
few years [1], a development which has intensified
tremendously due to the outbreak of COVID-19. Even so,
there is an obvious lack of research concerning physicians’
occupational health, psychological well-being, and job
satisfaction in telework, which constitutes a new way of
working for physicians. Further research in this area is important,
partly because it is a rather new phenomenon but
also because there are so many reports concerning physicians’
mental health and occupational stress.