Background
Up to 30% of patients with ulcerative colitis will require
surgery during the course of their illness [1]. Most
patients undergo total proctocolectomy followed by
either reconstruction of the rectum with ileal pouch-anal
anastomosis (IPAA) or permanent end ileostomy (EI) in
a 1-, 2- or 3-stage fashion. However, the decision-making
process is difficult owing to the complexity of the options,
which have very different risk profiles and impact on
quality of life. It therefore has been suggested that this
decision is well-suited to shared decision-making [2].
Shared decision-making describes a collaborative process
between patients and healthcare providers that
results in a decision reflecting best medical evidence and
the patient’s values and preferences [3]. Shared decisionmaking
has the potential to improve healthcare outcomes
by increasing patient knowledge and aligning care with
patient values [4]. Further, shared decision-making is
considered an important pathway to achieving patientcentered
care and improving health care quality [5, 6].
Among inflammatory bowel disease patients, shared
decision-making regarding medical management
improves health care outcomes, including patient adherence,
anxiety, satisfaction, and costs of care [7–9]. Previous
studies of medically managed ulcerative colitis
patients demonstrate high levels of desire to actively participate
in decision making [10]. However, preferences
for participating in decision-making are dynamic and
for a single patient may change with time or with different
decisions [11, 12]. Further, patients may prefer less
involvement in decisions they perceive to be higher risk
[13]. Therefore, it is not clear whether these same preferences
would apply to ulcerative colitis patients who are
making surgical decisions.
Following total proctocolectomy, the decision between
IPAA and EI is a high stakes decision with permanent
implications. In order to support patients in making
good surgical decisions, it is important to understand the
decision-making process from the patient’s perspective.
However, very little is known about the extent to which
patients with ulcerative colitis participate in making a
decision about surgery or their needs during the decision-
making process. We therefore conducted interviews
with ulcerative colitis patients who underwent surgery to
gain an in-depth understanding of the decision-making
process and to identify ways to support patients in deciding
between IPAA and EI.
Methods
Participants
We enrolled adult patients age 18–70 years with ulcerative
colitis who had surgery at the University of California,
San Francisco resulting in an IPAA or a permanent
EI in any number of stages. Eligible patients completed
surgical therapy 4–24 months prior to the interview.
We required a minimum of 4 months so that patients
had recovered from surgery and would have experience
adjusting to living with IPAA or EI. We also limited
enrollment to those who completed surgery within the
prior 24 months to maximize recall regarding preoperative
decision-making processes. The age limit of 70 was
chosen to optimize the group where IPAA would be a
surgical option [14]. We identified all candidate patients,
and then did a selective invitation process (letter followed
by telephone call) to balance enrollment of patients into
age categories (age 18–30, age 31–50, and age 51–70). In
each of these age groups we planned to recruit at least
one man, one woman, one patient undergoing permanent
end ileostomy and one undergoing IPAA. These categories
were developed in an effort to obtain a balanced mix
of views and opinions with the hypothesis that patient
experiences and perceptions would vary by age, sex, and
procedure type.
Interviews
Semi-structured interviews were conducted by a female
member of the team with prior experience conducting
qualitative research (RH). The interview guide (Additional
file 1) consisted of open- and closed-ended questions
refined iteratively by pilot testing with a large team
that included an experienced colorectal surgeon (EF),
decision scientist (EO), qualitative expert, and gastroenterologist.
Interviews took place in person (n = 3) or over
the phone (n = 13) and were conducted from a research
office. Participants did not have an established relationship
with the interviewer, nor were participants given any
personal information about the interviewer. At the conclusion
of each interview, participants were asked if they
would like to discuss anything else about their decisionmaking
experience. Interviews ranged in length from 25
to 58 min. No field notes were taken during or after the
interview. Transcripts were not returned to participants
for comment or correction. All participants completed
survey of basic demographic and disease-specific information,
which was recorded in REDCap (Research Electronic
Data Capture), a secure web-based application
[15]. Participants were offered a small monetary incentive
for participating.
Data analysis
A third party service transcribed the audio recordings
verbatim for analysis. Thematic analysis was performed
using the method described by Crabtree and Miller [16].
Authors JC, RH, YK, AK, CL, as well as CK (see acknowledgements)
independently reviewed transcripts and
coded the text to identify themes. We reviewed themes at
regular meetings with at least 6 authors in attendance. A
final code assignment for each transcript was reached by
consensus. We modified the interview guide in response
to emerging themes and conducted interviews until thematic
saturation was reached as determined by consensus
of the authors.
Ethical considerations
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
The University of California, San Francisco
Committee on Human Research approved all study
procedures. This study is reported using the Consolidated
Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research
Checklist (COREQ), see Additional file 1.
Results
We conducted a total of 17 interviews, 16 were included
in the analysis. One subject was diagnosed with Crohn’s
disease after surgery and was excluded. Participant characteristics
are detailed in Table 1. The mean age was
44 years and there were 8 men. Participants completed
all stages of surgery a median of 18 months prior to their
interview. Ten underwent IPAA and 6 received a permanent
end ileostomy (EI). All 6 patients in the permanent
end ileostomy group underwent 1-stage surgery.
3 patients in the IPAA group underwent a 2-stage procedure
(stage 1: total proctocolectomy with IPAA and
diverting loop ileostomy; stage 2: ileostomy reversal).
7 patients in the IPAA group underwent a 3-stage procedure
(stage 1: subtotal colectomy with end ileostomy;
stage 2: completion proctectomy with IPAA and diverting
loop ileostomy; stage 3: ileostomy reversal).
Participation in decision making
When it came to deciding between IPAA and EI, most
ulcerative colitis patients expressed active participation
in decision-making. Eleven patients reported that
they experienced “patient-led” decision-making (where
the patient felt independently responsible), 3 shared
decision-making with the surgeon, and 2 experienced
surgeon-led decision-making (please see Table 2 for representative
quotes). Surgeon-led decision-making was
used in cases where the surgeon felt the chance of pouch
failure was high due to indeterminate colitis (N = 1) or
low sphincter tone (N = 1).
Many patients felt that the decision between IPAA and
EI was well-suited to patient-led decision-making:
The surgery is going to change your life. So if you
need to make some drastic changes in your life, you
might as well be the one in charge of that.
Others expressed that the surgeon’s opinion was an
important part of decision making:
I felt like [IPAA] was…the option for me. All the
information [the surgeon] gave me, you know, my
age, and my health, would increase my chances of
success, and again, it would be a better choice for me.
Those who experienced surgeon-led decision making
felt comfortable trusting the opinion of the surgeon:
Well, I put all my faith in my doctors. And it’s like,
you know, they’re in the business. I’m not…so I put a
lot of faith in them. And when [the surgeon] told me
that I’d have problems at my age…well, I just went
along with her, because I figured, you know, she’s the
professional not me.
Seven patients underwent a subtotal colectomy as a
first step in treatment. In this group, 6 patients had a passive
tone in decision making regarding the choice to have
surgery, and in many instances, didn’t see that there was a
choice to be made. This sometimes was due to the severity
of the illness:
There was really no [choice] - I didn’t care. I mean,
just do anything, but do it now…just get [the colon]
out of me.
The Humira didn’t work. They put me on the TPN
[total parenteral nutrition]. And then that’s when
they said, ‘We’re going to need the surgery.’ And so it
wasn’t like I had a doctor’s appointment, walked in
and somebody said, ‘We need to discuss surgery.’
Others expressed needing to trust their physician to
save their life:
I had a hemorrhage, so there wasn’t really a decision
that I could make…I figured that if I listened to
the doctor, or, you know, followed what the doctor’s
orders were, that I would be fine.
Five of the 6 patients who experienced passive decision-
making regarding subtotal colectomy surgery participated
more actively in shared- or patient-led decision
making when it came time to deciding between IPAA and
end ileostomy. As one patient recalled:
They told me, ‘You either have surgery, or you’re
going to get colon cancer.’…For the J-pouch, they all
said that was my decision. But in terms of removing
part of my colon or all or part of the colon, all of
them recommended that it would be much better to
have all the colon taken out.
These experiences suggest that in acute illness or in
the setting of cancer risk, patients perceived less choice
for surgical treatment. In general, patients seemed to be
comfortable with this. In contrast, these same patients
showed increased engagement in the decision-making
process when facing a decision between IPAA and EI.
This suggests that patient participation in decision making
is dynamic and decision-dependent.
Challenges to decision making
When discussing challenges that patients encountered
during decision-making, three themes emerged. These
included patients who felt that they did not have enough
time with their surgeon during decision-making, the
overwhelming complexity of the decision, and lack of
support from family members who did not agree with the
patient’s decision (Table 3).
When it came to lack of support, a number of subthemes
emerged. First, patients had variable experiences
with their family members, some having supportive and
helpful relationships:
There were no difficulties. My three children thought
I should have had it sooner. And you know, there
were no problems. Everybody was supportive, especially
my husband.
And patients found that specific people were helpful,
while others were not:
My Dad’s just kind of there, literally, he’s just kind of
there. My sister, she doesn’t really like to talk about
it, especially when, like, she almost fainted when she
came in to see me when I was here after my surgery.
She doesn’t like thinking about me being sick, or
knowing anything about it, really. But it was mainly
me and my mom. I don’t think I’ve ever really made
an executive decision, you know, completely by
myself.
It was common that stigma regarding ileostomy surgery
was a source of difficulty in feeling supported:
The people that I decided not to include in divulging
I was having this kind of surgery were the peo-ple who were, like, ‘Oh, that would be the last thing.
I don’t know what I would do if I had that. That’s
horrible’…So there have been some people in my
life who, again, have this stigma of what this is like,
having an ileostomy. And I say that their negativity
is what played a role in me having to keep it from
them. So as far as my decision-making for the surgery,
I decided not to take their opinions in account.
One patient felt comfortable having less involvement
from family members:
Well, there was no one to talk it over with. I mean,
I had my mom. I mean, no one really understands,
either from an intellectual aspect, or a technical
aspect. And the emotional part, you know, I never
really need any help with that.
Ulcerative colitis patients vary in their desire for social
support and in the amount of support available when
making a decision between permanent EI and IPAA,
highlighting the role for an individual assessment of
patient needs during decision making.
Improving decision making
When discussing ways to improve decision-making,
three themes emerged. Themes included a desire to have
peer education regarding surgical options, earlier consultation
with a surgeon, and the desire for more information
prior to making a decision (Table 4).
Within the theme of desire for more information, 3
subthemes emerged. First, patients expressed a desire to
have more information in general terms:
There were quite a few details that I wish I had
known before. But I didn’t know to ask about them,
even.
Others desired more information about complications:
I wanted to hear more details about the complications.
And as far as I remember, it wasn’t trivialized.
But it was kind of, like, not enough attention was
paid to discuss that in length.
Still others wished to have more information about
what life would be like in the long-term:
I mean, most of the stuff I heard sounded as close to
a regular life as you could get. So I don’t know. To
me, there’s lots of realities that I don’t feel like are
really introduced or just explained.
Only three patients felt content with the information
they used to decide about surgery. These patient experiences
demonstrate the variable needs of patients as they
go through the decision-making process and highlight
the need for reliable and relevant information for patients
who are making decisions between IPAA and EI.
Discussion
In this study, we used semi-structured interviews to characterize
the process of decision-making between IPAA
and EI among surgical patients with ulcerative colitis. We
found that patients largely experienced active participation
in decision-making between IPAA and EI, but struggled
with not having enough time with their surgeon,
dealing with unsupportive family members, and feeling
overwhelmed by the general complexity of the decision.
Patients felt that decision-making could be improved
through increased information, access to peer education,
and earlier consultation with a surgeon. By focusing
on ulcerative colitis patients who have made the difficult
decision between IPAA and EI, our study addresses a
critical gap in the existing literature, which includes studies
on general perceptions of shared decision making [10]
and educational needs [17, 18] of non-surgical inflammatory
bowel disease patients, or patients who are making a
decision between surgery and medical management [19].
Our results demonstrate high levels of patient participation
in decision-making about surgery. This finding
is not surprising when considering other studies in
inflammatory bowel disease patients, which demonstrate
high levels of patient interested in shared decision-making
about medical management. For example, Baars,
et al. found that 98% of inflammatory bowel disease
patients reported that it was “very” or “quite” important
ple who were, like, ‘Oh, that would be the last thing.
I don’t know what I would do if I had that. That’s
horrible’…So there have been some people in my
life who, again, have this stigma of what this is like,
having an ileostomy. And I say that their negativity
is what played a role in me having to keep it from
them. So as far as my decision-making for the surgery,
I decided not to take their opinions in account.
One patient felt comfortable having less involvement
from family members:
Well, there was no one to talk it over with. I mean,
I had my mom. I mean, no one really understands,
either from an intellectual aspect, or a technical
aspect. And the emotional part, you know, I never
really need any help with that.
Ulcerative colitis patients vary in their desire for social
support and in the amount of support available when
making a decision between permanent EI and IPAA,
highlighting the role for an individual assessment of
patient needs during decision making.
Improving decision making
When discussing ways to improve decision-making,
three themes emerged. Themes included a desire to have
peer education regarding surgical options, earlier consultation
with a surgeon, and the desire for more information
prior to making a decision (Table 4).
Within the theme of desire for more information, 3
subthemes emerged. First, patients expressed a desire to
have more information in general terms:
There were quite a few details that I wish I had
known before. But I didn’t know to ask about them,
even.
Others desired more information about complications:
I wanted to hear more details about the complications.
And as far as I remember, it wasn’t trivialized.
But it was kind of, like, not enough attention was
paid to discuss that in length.
Still others wished to have more information about
what life would be like in the long-term:
I mean, most of the stuff I heard sounded as close to
a regular life as you could get. So I don’t know. To
me, there’s lots of realities that I don’t feel like are
really introduced or just explained.
Only three patients felt content with the information
they used to decide about surgery. These patient experiences
demonstrate the variable needs of patients as they
go through the decision-making process and highlight
the need for reliable and relevant information for patients
who are making decisions between IPAA and EI.
Discussion
In this study, we used semi-structured interviews to characterize
the process of decision-making between IPAA
and EI among surgical patients with ulcerative colitis. We
found that patients largely experienced active participation
in decision-making between IPAA and EI, but struggled
with not having enough time with their surgeon,
dealing with unsupportive family members, and feeling
overwhelmed by the general complexity of the decision.
Patients felt that decision-making could be improved
through increased information, access to peer education,
and earlier consultation with a surgeon. By focusing
on ulcerative colitis patients who have made the difficult
decision between IPAA and EI, our study addresses a
critical gap in the existing literature, which includes studies
on general perceptions of shared decision making [10]
and educational needs [17, 18] of non-surgical inflammatory
bowel disease patients, or patients who are making a
decision between surgery and medical management [19].
Our results demonstrate high levels of patient participation
in decision-making about surgery. This finding
is not surprising when considering other studies in
inflammatory bowel disease patients, which demonstrate
high levels of patient interested in shared decision-making
about medical management. For example, Baars,
et al. found that 98% of inflammatory bowel disease
patients reported that it was “very” or “quite” important
to participate in decision making regarding medical
management of their disease [10]. A study in Japanese
inflammatory bowel disease patients showed that 92%
of patients felt that shared-decision making was “very”
or “quite” important, and that a history of surgery was a
predictor of the desire for shared decision-making [20].
Further, our patients were able to achieve high levels of
participation in decision-making despite perceived barriers,
which also speaks to their motivation to participate.
It is important to address these barriers so that patients
can participate to their desired level and in a meaningful
way. Patient decision aids have promise for supporting
shared decision making and three have been developed
for inflammatory bowel disease patients [21–23] with
further trials underway [24, 25].
Our results further demonstrate that patient participation
in decision-making can change with different
decisions. In the present study, we found that patients
undergoing subtotal colectomy as a first step in their
surgical treatment were likely to report a passive role in
decision-making regarding the decision to undergo subtotal
colectomy, but then later played an active role in
making a decision about IPAA vs EI. The reasons for the
decreased participation at the time of subtotal colectomy
were not purposefully explored in the present study,
however, other studies demonstrate that patients making
medical decisions tend to defer decision making to physicians
when they have more severe disease [20] or disease
likely to result in mortality [13]. This finding underscores
the importance of reassessing patient desire to participate
in decision-making at each step of treatment.
The association between patient education and the
desire to engage in shared decision-making has been
shown in a variety of disease states [26] including inflammatory
bowel disease [8]. The majority of patients in the
present study desired increased information prior to
making a decision about surgery. The need for improving
patient education is particularly relevant in ulcerative
colitis patients, because more than 56–62% feel insufficiently
informed about their disease [17, 18, 27]. However,
patients feel that existing educational materials are
not tailored to their needs, including a lack of coverage of
important topics, such as long-term recovery, and practical
matters, such as returning to exercise, dietary restrictions,
and management of stomas [19]. The educational
needs of ulcerative colitis patients should be addressed in
order to support patients in engaging in decision-making
in a meaningful way. Our group previously reported a
pilot study demonstrating increased patient knowledge
and confidence regarding decision-making among ulcerative
colitis patients using a decision aid [22]. It is possible
that the identified knowledge gap could be closed
through wider dissemination of existing decision aids
and web-based sources [28–30], which should be specifically
evaluated for information completeness using
large groups of ulcerative colitis patients and other
stakeholders.
Our study demonstrated that some patients struggled
with inadequate support from family members and there
was a desire for increased peer support as a mechanism
to improve the decision-making process. This support
gap has been challenging in inflammatory bowel disease
patients because, although other studies show that
patients wish to have peer support when they are making
decisions [10, 19], structured, regular peer support
groups for inflammatory bowel disease often fail [31].
One reason for this finding is that patients find peer support
helpful during flares of disease or when they need
help with a particular problem as opposed to when they
are feeling well [31]. This challenge indicates that a different
“on-demand” structure for peer support is needed,
such as online groups that patients can utilize when they
need specific support, such as around the time of surgery.
The patients enrolled in the present study desired earlier
consultation with a surgeon. This finding is in agreement
with prior work that shows that more than half of
UC patients would have preferred to have an earlier operation
[32]. We recommend that surgical consultation not
be viewed as a failure of medical management. Involving
surgeons early is particularly relevant because a multidisciplinary
team-based approach to inflammatory bowel
disease is increasingly viewed as important and is recommended
by the American College of Gastroenterology
and British Society of Gastroenterology [33, 34]. Earlier
consultation with a surgeon could also address patient
concerns of the overwhelming complexity of the information
and not having enough time with the surgeon, as
surgical discussions could be spaced out over time and
new questions answered as they arise.
This study provides a rich qualitative analysis of decision
making between IPAA and EI among patients with
ulcerative colitis, however, there are limitations that
must be considered when interpreting the results. First,
the results are based on a relatively small sample from a
single institution. In order to create the generalizability,
we performed purposeful enrollment of patients across
age groups, sex, and procedure type and ensured saturation
prior to completing enrollment. Second, we performed
interviews postoperatively after decision-making
was completed. Patient postoperative experiences could
change the way that patients view their decision-making
process, and it may be difficult for patients to recall information
from the past. However, we attempted to mitigate
these influences by conducting interviews 4–24 months
after surgery, a shorter time interval than used in prior
studies [19].Conclusion
Our findings demonstrate that ulcerative colitis patients
play an active role in decision making between IPAA and
EI. However, they struggle with obtaining adequate social
support and information to support decision-making and
perceive these decisions to be overwhelmingly complex.
Patients could be better supported in decision-making
through a multi-faceted approach that would include
increased access to relevant educational resources, surgeons,
and peers. Preoperative educational materials
should include information about postoperative complications
and long-term changes in lifestyle. These materials
could help improve decision-making and facilitate
discussions with loved ones.