Background
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a fibroinflammatory
disease of the bile ducts resulting in chronic cholestasis
often progressing to end-stage liver disease and/or the development of hepatobiliary neoplasia [1]. No
effective medical treatments to slow disease progression
exist for PSC outside of liver transplantation, which is not
always curative as disease recurs in about 25% of transplanted
patients [2]. PSC is a rare disease, with reported
incidence ranging from 0.07 to 1.3 per 100,000 people
and reported prevalence ranging from 0.2 to 16.2 per
100,000 people [3]. Clinical presentation of PSC is heterogeneous,
it can affect both small and large intrahepatic
and/or extrahepatic bile ducts and is often, but not
always, associated with concurrent inflammatory bowel
disease, which occurs in ~ 70% of patients [4]. PSC has a
substantial socioeconomic burden. Many patients receive
costly procedure-based surveillance and data have shown
that PSC is the fifth leading indication for liver transplantation
in the United States [5] and is the main indication
for liver transplantation in some Nordic countries [6].
Rate of disease progression in PSC is highly variable and
prediction of when, or in who, the feared outcomes endstage
liver disease and hepatobiliary cancer will develop
remains difficult [4].
The risk of developing hepatobiliary cancer has been
estimated to be significantly higher in PSC patients compared
to the general population [7]. Cholangiocarcinoma
(CCA), a primary bile duct cancer, is the most common
and feared cancer in PSC [8], with reported lifetime
risk ranging between 6 and 30% [9]. CCA is one of the
most aggressive tumors of the biliary tract/liver, with a
reported median survival in all anatomical types without
surgery ranging between 5 and 12 months [10]. Unfortunately,
diagnosis of early-stage CCA is often extremely
difficult due to the lack of reliable diagnostic biomarkers,
and thus, many patients with CCA are not eligible for
curative surgery due to advance disease stage at diagnosis
[10].
Lack of prognostic tools and treatment options for PSC
is driven in part by our poor understanding of its pathogenesis,
which is thought to be complex, the interaction
of homeostatic perturbations driven by genetic variants,
environmental influences and biological response
throughout the course of disease [11]. Several processes
have been proposed to play a role in PSC pathogenesis
such as bile acid toxicity [12, 13], diminished biliary
bicarbonate umbrella [14], aberrant lymphocyte homing
[15, 16], leaky gut [17] and intestinal dysbiosis [18].
Genome-wide association studies have offered additional
insights into likely PSC risk factors and highlight the
role of immunity in PSC development [19, 20]. However,
due to multiple hinderances, previous research efforts in
PSC have been largely limited in scope and translation.
Patient-based longitudinal studies of PSC are severely
restricted by low disease incidence, lack of informative
biomarkers in early stages of disease, and relative
inaccessibility of the biliary tract [1]. Moreover, while
some of the current animal models do demonstrate individual
features of PSC, none display the constellation
of characteristics commonly observed in patients [21].
Thus, use of these models is largely limited to focused
studies, the findings of which may not be truly reflective
of human disease. Finally, while the environment is
thought to have a significant influence on PSC pathogenesis,
studies have been limited to recall-based questionnaires
[22], which lack precision to identify disease
associations.
The PSC Scientific Community Resource (PSC-SCR)
seeks to overcome previous shortcomings by facilitating
novel research in PSC through creation of a resource of
biospecimens and -omics scale data from patients with
PSC and relevant controls. This resource will be made
available to the broader community of PSC-interested
researchers, bringing together investigators with a wide
range of expertise to accelerate the pace of PSC research.
The ultimate goals are to individualizing care of patients
with PSC care and improving their outcomes.
The PSC-SCR is comprised of biospecimens and clinical
data collected under two biobank-focused IRB protocols
as well as research data generated using specimens
obtained from the resource. The first protocol (Mayo
Clinic IRB #670-02), which is no longer enrolling subjects,
was primarily designed to collect blood specimens
to facilitate robust studies of genetic and environmental
contributors to PSC using DNA and questionnaire-based
interrogations. However, additional sample types including
plasma, serum and peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) were collected and are available for use in
PSC research. The second protocol (Mayo Clinic IRB
#16-005892), which is actively enrolling subjects, has
the expanded scope to collect specimens to facilitate a
wide range of -omics scale studies. This protocol collects
additional sample types from blood, including RNA and
circulating cell-free DNA, as well as stool and urine specimens.
Both protocols collect(ed) specimens and data
from PSC patients and controls and the current protocol
is open to individuals enrolled in the earlier one. Where
necessary to discriminate between the two protocols in
the remainder of the manuscript we will refer to them as
the “current” (Mayo Clinic IRB #16-005892) or “previous”
(Mayo Clinic IRB #670-02) protocols.
Methods
Enrollment of patients and controls
Patient recruitment
PSC patients who receive their health care at one of the
three primary Mayo Clinic sites (Minnesota, Florida, and
Arizona) or in the broader Mayo Clinic Health System
are identified by chart review and invited in person or
are offered enrollment if they provide sufficient access
to their medical records to evaluate inclusion/exclusion
criteria. We also engage in collaboration with clinicians
and researchers from other non-Mayo medical centers
to increase patient enrollment while balancing the need
to obtain sufficient medical data to perform informed
studies with privacy concerns of patients and the collaborating
centers. Our previous protocol included seven
such collaborating medical centers: Indiana University,
University of Toronto, Virginia University Medical
Center, Mount Sinai Hospital, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Johns Hopkins University and University of
Pittsburgh. Our current protocol is engaged in two such
collaborations: Indiana University and University of
Miami. Interested clinicians/researchers are encouraged
to contact us regarding referring their patients to our
study or potential formal collaboration.
Control subjects
Individuals without liver disease who receive their health
care at one of the three primary Mayo Clinic sites (Minnesota,
Florida, and Arizona) or in the broader Mayo
Clinic Health System are identified by chart review and
invited in-person or by mail to participate in our studies.
Our previous protocol focused on recruitment of control
patients receiving care through the outpatient clinics of
the Division of Preventive Medicine and the Division of
General Internal Medicine. Our current protocol identifies
potential controls in collaboration with the Mayo
Clinic Biobank [23], and seeks to roughly match the
composition of recruited patients based on age, sex and
region of residence. Of note, this control population is
shared with our similarly sized biobank of PBC patients,
which is not described in this manuscript.
Enrollment criteria
In our current protocol, patients and controls of any
sex and racial or ethnic background between the ages
of 18 and 85 at study entry are eligible for enrollment.
Whereas our previous protocol also allowed for children
between the ages of 5 and 18 to enroll using a modified
consent process and sample collection kit. Pregnant
women and women of childbearing age can enroll as the
protocol does not pose a threat to pregnancy. All PSC
patients must meet the following established diagnostic
criteria for PSC to be enrolled in the study: (a) biochemical
evidence of chronic cholestasis (≥ 6 months,
duration); (b) cholangiographic evidence of multifocal
strictures and segmental dilatations in the bile ducts
and/or histological features consistent with PSC; and (c)
exclusion of secondary causes of sclerosing cholangitis
[24]. The resource includes patients with variant forms
of PSC such as small-duct disease and PSC overlapping
with autoimmune hepatitis; as well as patients who have
previously received a liver transplant. Patients with other
concurrent liver disease (besides for autoimmune hepatitis)
or who are unable to provide informed consent are
not eligible for enrollment. Currently, exclusion criteria
for controls includes documented history of cholestatic
or other chronic liver disease, inflammatory bowel disease,
or history of organ transplant.
Consent process
Participant consent is obtained at the beginning of the
recruitment process by mail-in, electronic or face-toface
protocols. Patients are encouraged to contact the
study staff with any questions and are informed that their
response will not impact their medical care. Our protocols
have been reviewed by the Mayo Clinic IRB and all
patients provide informed consent for use of their data
and biospecimens for current and future research.
Chart review
Patient clinical data is extracted from the Mayo Clinic’s
electronic and non-electronic medical records by
qualified physicians and manually entered into the PSC
Study Data Management System (PSC-SDMS), a custom-
designed SAS-based electronic data capture web
application developed by the Mayo Clinic’s Biomedical
Informatics Support Systems section. The PSC-SDMS
database is secure and password-protected and patient
records are updated at regular intervals.
Clinical data collected include demographic characteristics
such as gender, BMI, self-reported race and date
of birth; as well as PSC-related features such as date of
PSC diagnosis, pattern/type of biliary ductal involvement,
histological stage / biopsy results, and IBD status.
Data reflecting features related to the development of
PSC endpoints such as development of cirrhosis, hepatic
decompensation, liver transplantation and development
of PSC-related malignancies are also documented. A
complete list of clinical data collected from PSC patients
and stored in the PSC-SDMS is provided in Table 1. In
addition to manually curated data, results of clinical lab
assessments, such as liver function tests, are extracted
and entered in PSC-SDMS using an automated process.
Questionnaires
Following study enrollment each participant is asked to
fill out a custom-designed, comprehensive questionnaire,
the Liver Biobank Questionnaire, which collects
scientifically relevant demographic, clinical, medical,
surgical, dietary, environmental exposure, occupational,
and employment information from PSC patients. We
have previously published a large study of environmental
factors in PSC using the original version of this questionnaire
[22]. We have recently (October 14th, 2020)
updated and modified this questionnaire to better evaluate
past and current medications, which now includes
versions that can be completed online or using a smartphone.
A paper version of the current Liver Biobank
Questionnaire is provided as Additional file 1. Participants
in the current study will be asked to complete the
new questionnaire at 2-year intervals to help in documenting
changes in PSC patients’ lifestyles, exposures to
medications and identify new PSC-related outcomes that
are not part of the Mayo Clinic medical record. Patients
enrolling in the current protocol are also asked to fill out
a 24-hour Food Frequency Questionnaire in conjunction
with submission of their stool sample, which is available
online via the Automated Self-Administered 24-hour
Dietary Assessment Tool (https:// www. asa24. nci. nih.
gov/ resea rcher site/) .
Biospecimens
Following enrollment, patients are asked to provide
biospecimens, which are collected using mail-in kits
prepared and distributed by the Mayo Clinic Biospecimens
Accessioning and Processing (BAP) lab located in
Rochester, Minnesota. These kits can be processed by the
patients’ home clinic phlebotomy lab (blood samples) or
in the comfort of their home (urine and stool samples)
and are returned via overnight carrier service to the BAP
lab. Once received, this lab coordinates sample transfers
and provides all required sample preparation services.
The previous protocol primarily collected blood, which
was processed and stored as aliquots of DNA, buffy coat,
PBMC, plasma and serum. Additionally, this blood sample
was used to run a small panel of liver biochemistries
using the General Clinical Laboratory of Mayo Clinic:
alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate
aminotransferase, total bilirubin, and albumin as a
prospective measure of disease activity at time of sample
collection. Later, stool samples were also requested and
collected from a subset of patients enrolled in the previous
protocol. Participants in the previous protocol were
offered renumeration in the form of a choice of healthrelated
books.
In the current protocol, we ask participants to provide
blood, urine, and stool samples at time of enrollment.
While we encourage individuals to provide all sample
types, this is not required. The current blood kit collects
48 ml of blood, which is processed and stored as aliquots
of DNA, buffy coat, STRECK-tube platelet-poor plasma
(for cell-free DNA), PAXGENE tube blood (for RNA),
PBMC, plasma and serum. Additionally, an expanded
panel of liver biochemistries adding hematocrit, hemoglobin,
mean corpuscular volume, platelets, sodium
and complete blood count is run at time of sample collection,
to assist evaluation of disease state and provide
additional data for use in analysis of -omics datasets. For
PSC patients, we plan to request additional blood, urine,
and stool samples at 2-to-4-year intervals, depending on
level of interest. However, agreement to provide future
samples is not a requirement for enrollment. Patients
enrolled in the current protocol are offered renumeration
in the form of $40.00 US per submitted sample.
In addition to samples collected via mail-in kits, we collect
bile and biliary brushings from participants during
clinically scheduled endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP) at Mayo Clinic in Rochester,
MN. Bile aspirated during ERCP is collected in sterile
tubes and placed on ice after collection for processing
and storage. Also, biliary brushings obtained during
ERCP are collected in sterile containers containing Phosphate-
buffered saline solution, placed on ice, and used
immediately or stored. Finally, fresh tissue specimens
(liver parenchyma and bile duct) are collected through
the Mayo Clinic Tissue Request Acquisition Group from
patients with PSC and controls who undergo liver transplantation,
partial hepatectomy, or are a liver donor at
Mayo Clinic.
All biospecimens are stored de-identified, labeled
with a study-ID traceable only by the team of the principle
investigator (PI) or by certain members of the BAP
lab staff. The majority of biospecimens collected under
the previous IRB protocol, as well as all bile and tissue
samples, are stored in the laboratory of the PI in accessrestricted
freezers. In contrast, most of the biospecimens
collected under the current protocol are stored in
the BAP lab following sample preparation. This storage
service provides improved back-up and monitoring service
and facilitates transfer to core laboratories responsible
for aliquoting samples and performing omics-scale
experiments. Sample locations and information for BAP
lab-resident samples are tracked using BAP’s custom
research laboratory information management system
available to BAP lab staff. Additionally, all study samples,
whether stored in the PI lab or the BAP lab, are tracked
by study staff using a customized database that coordinates
sample location, sample usage, prospective lab
results and mapping to phenotypic and clinical data.
Data and specimen sharing
The data and biospecimens generated and obtained by
the PSC-SCR will be shared with interested researchers
proposing scientifically sound PSC-focused research and
with the broader research community to the extent possible.
As sample availability is limited, projects proposing
-omics scale interrogations focussed on PSC will be prioritized,
although such scale is not required. Due to the
complex and evolving nature of the resource, datasets
and samples will be prepared and provided on a caseby-
case basis in consult with requesting investigators.
This approach will help to ensure specific research questions
can be adequately addressed, ethics considerations
undergo proper review and that data and sample usage
is agreed upon and documented. The expectation is that
data generated using PSC-SCR samples will be made fully
available to the PSC-SCR in timely fashion, respecting
the ability of requesting investigators to independently
publish.
Status of the PSC scientific community resource
As of March 1, 2021, a total of 1396 PSC patients and
1,352 controls have been enrolled in the PSC-SCR and
provided blood specimens. This includes 1073 patients
only enrolled in our previous IRB protocol, 222 patients
only enrolled in our current protocol and 101 patients
enrolled in both protocols. Among the controls, 642 are
only enrolled in our previous protocol, 702 only in the
current protocol and 8 in both. An additional 188 PSC
patients and 529 controls have enrolled in our current
protocol but have not yet provided their blood specimen,
and thus, are not described in this manuscript.
Relevant clinical and demographic data as well as current
sample availability for all participants in the previous
IRB protocol is presented in Table 2. Demographics of
the patient group are consistent with previous reports as
62.4% are male, median age of diagnosis is 40.6 years and
77.2% have concurrent IBD. Median age at study entry
was 51.6 years with median disease duration of 6.2 years.
In contrast, the controls are older with a median age at
study entry of 61.3 years and only 27.2% were male. This
difference is due to this control population being shared
with a similar biobank of PBC patients that we maintain,
of which 90% of the patients are female and they tend to
be older than PSC patients. As well, the number of controls
collected under the previous protocol is smaller than
the patient population due to limited resources available
to support collection of controls at that time. Clinical
follow-up after sample collection is available for 52.0%
of the patient population, with 19% having over 6 years
of follow-up. The 48.0% of patients without follow-up
include all patients recruited through our collaborators
(n = 437) as well as self-referred (n = 17) and Mayo Clinic
patients (n = 110) with no available medical records after
study entry. A total of 366 patients had advanced disease
at time of study enrollment, 243 of whom had received
advanced disease and 74 received a liver transplant during
follow-up. Moreover, 76 of the patients were diagnosed
with hepatobiliary cancer prior to study entry,
with 50 patients developing hepatobiliary cancer during
follow-up. Genomic DNA and/or buffy coat, plasma and
PBMC samples are available for the majority (> 90%) of
PSC patients and controls while serum is more limited as
it was collected as a residual of prospective liver function
tests in the previous protocol. Finally, stool samples were
not collected from controls, but are available for 95 of the
patients from the previous protocol.
The clinical and demographic data for all participants
in the current IRB protocol that have provided their
blood specimen is presented in Table 3. As with the previous
protocol, the demographics of the patient group
are consistent with other reports with 56.0% being male,
median age of diagnosis of 41.5 years and 78.0% having
concurrent IBD. The current median age at study entry
is 52.6 years with median disease duration of 6.1 years,
which is similar to the previous study. Again, the control
population is shared with our ongoing biobank of PBC
patients and thus are older with a median age at study
entry of 67.5 years and only 31.8% are male. However,
unlike the previous protocol, we are now able to dedicate
additional resources to collecting controls in order
to better perform the planned multi-omic studies and we
currently have over twice as many controls as patients.
Clinical follow-up after sample collection is available
for 68.1% of the patient population, the majority having
0–3 years of follow-up as the current study has only
been enrolling for ~ 4 years. Unlike the prior protocol,
many of the patients with no follow-up have only recently
enrolled in the study and we anticipate having better
access to medical records such that 80–90% of the cohort
is likely to have meaningful follow-up in the future. Due
to the nature of the planned research, recruitment efforts
in the current protocol primarily focus on pre-transplant
patients. Thus, while 87 of the patients had advanced
disease at time of study enrollment only 9 of them had
already received a liver transplant. So far, an additional
20 patients developed advanced disease and 24 patients
received a liver transplant during follow-up. A total of 22
patients were diagnosed with hepatobiliary cancer prior
to study entry, with an additional 7 patients developing
hepatobiliary cancer during follow-up. Samples from the
blood collection kit (i.e., genomic DNA and/or buffy coat,
plasma, serum, PBMC, RNA and plasma cell-free DNA)
are available for most of the PSC patients and controls,
those without samples being due to rare problems with
collection such as delivery delays putting samples outside
of quality control standards. Stool and urine samples
have been provided by over 95% of controls; however,
fewer patients provide those sample type (75.8% stool
samples and 83.3% urine samples) likely because many
patients have concurrent IBD. Finally, we have, thus far,
collected bile samples from 34 patients during ERCP and
liver tissue from 18 patients at time of liver transplant.
Discussion
Advancements in understanding the complex pathogenesis
of PSC are needed to improve treatment
options and guidance in order to achieve better outcomes
for PSC patients. Patient-based studies leveraging
the latest technologies for targeted and wide-scale
interrogation of multiple omics layers offer promise to
accelerate PSC research through discovery of unappreciated
aspects of disease pathogenesis. However,
the rarity of PSC severely limits such studies. Here we
describe our effort to overcome this limitation, the
PSC-SCR, a repository of patient biospecimens coupled
with clinical and omics data for use by the broader PSC
research community.
The PSC-SCR is a continuation of our past efforts in
the study of PSC spanning over 15 years, which contributed
significantly to our understanding of genetic [19]
and environmental [22] components of disease and led
to development of a novel score for predicting the likelihood
of future hepatic decompensation in PSC patients
[25]. The resource is currently being utilized to perform
omics-scale projects investigating aspects of the exposome,
metabolome, methylome, immunome and microbiome
in PSC. We anticipate these projects will provide
novel insight into disease pathogenesis that will lead to
new lines of research across the spectrum of potentially
important disease mechanisms.
While it is a promising resource for PSC research, there
are limitations to the PSC-SCR. First, the primary goal of
the previous protocol was to perform genome wide association
studies, which only require a confirmed PSC diagnosis.
Thus, many of the patients from this protocol lack
extensive phenotyping and clinical follow-up needed for
studies aimed to identify new predictive biomarkers. Second,
Mayo Clinic is a major referral center for patients
who develop PSC-related complications (advanced disease,
abnormal biliary cytology, suspicious strictures, and
biopsy-proven CCA). As a result, a sizeable proportion
of the patients invited to participate in our protocols may
represent the more severe end of the disease spectrum.
Third, previous efforts have only collected samples at a
single time point. Thus, the number of patients developing
disease endpoints within a reasonable time frame for
event prediction is limited. To overcome this limitation,
we plan to begin collecting serial specimens at regular
intervals from interested patients enrolled in the current
protocol. Finally, incomplete medical records, lack
of adequate follow-up, and lack of precise information
on disease diagnosis, endpoints and outcomes is a major
limitation, particularly for enrolled patients who are seen
and cared for at outside institutions. To mitigate this
limitation, we are starting to implement use of emerging
tools for accessing electronic medical records from external
sites in order to more completely capture this important
information.
In summary, the PSC-SCR seeks to utilize state-ofthe-
art technology to generate -omics scale data from
a large cohort of patients with PSC. The generated data
and residual biospecimens will be made available to the
broader PSC research community to the extent possible
and will serve as a new platform to further our understanding
of PSC etiopathogenesis that could provide the
framework for future drug discovery in PSC.
