Background
Zenker’s diverticulum (ZD), is a rare disorder with an
estimated prevalence ranging between 0.01 and 0.11% in
the general population [1]. It is an acquired outpouching
of the mucosal and submucosal layers originating in
a region of relative weakness known as Killian’s triangle
or Killian’s dehiscence [2]. The most common pathogenesis
relates to increased intraluminal pressure leading
to an outpouching in an area of relative wall weakness
when compared with surrounding tissues [3]. This area
of weakness is located in the hypopharynx between two
strong pharyngoesophageal muscles, the cricopharyngeus
muscle and inferior pharyngeal constrictor [4]. It
occurs between the seventh and eighth decade of life
and rarely before the age of 40 [5]. It occurs with aging
specifically due to changes in fibrosis and muscle necrosis
of the upper esophageal sphincter [6]. Symptoms
may present for weeks to years before presentation and
diagnosis. Most patients present with a complaint of
dysphagia [7]. Two mechanisms have been proposed by
which the diverticulum can cause dysphagia: incomplete
opening of the upper esophageal sphincter and extrinsic
compression of the cervical esophagus by the diverticulum
[8]. As the diverticulum enlarges, the symptoms
become more severe with resultant weight loss. A sudden
increase in severity of hematemesis may signal the development
of ulcer [9]. Esophagography is necessary to confirm
the diagnosis of ZD [1]. Several surgical options are
available for the management of ZD [10]. Herein, a typical
case of ZD diagnosed through barium swallow examination
is reported in an elderly man.
Case presentation
An 85-year-old male was referred to our center with a
history of pain in swallowing and later regurgitation of
undigested contents to his mouth 3-4 h after meals. The
odynophagia and dysphagia was progressive in the last
one-year before his presentation. Initially his dysphagia
was to solid food alone and later to both solid foods
and fluids. His appetite was affected by his odynophagia
and he lost weight in 6-month period, in which he or
his family members failed to quantify. There was no history
of halitosis. One month prior to his presentation,
the patient developed intermittent cough during meals.
He was relatively healthy prior to onset of these symptoms.
There was no history of hypertension or diabetes
mellitus.
On physical examination, he was visibly wasted however
his vitals were normal and there were no neck swelling
or enlarged neck lymph nodes. His abdomen was soft
and non-tender and no organomegaly was detected. His
complete blood count showed hemoglobin concentration
of 10.9 gm/dl, total white blood cell count of 7000/ml and
platelets of 250,000/μl.
Esophagogram was done with oral suspension of
barium sulphate demonstrated a smooth posterior outpouching
of the proximal esophagus which was 2 cm
from the epiglottis. The outpouching demonstrated an
air-contrast level and measured 4.2 × 3.4 × 3 cm. However,
normal propulsion of contrast was demonstrated
below the outpouching. There was dilatation of the vallecullae
and piriform recesses with temporary upholding
of barium sulphate suspension (Fig. 1). The mid and distal
esophagus was normal in caliber and mucosal lining.
The tertiary waves were normal on dynamic examination
but not demonstrated in the post processed images.
So on the basis of the location of lesion and pouch like
appearance; it was diagnosed as ZD.
The patient was assessed by a surgeon and gastroenterologist
and flexible endoscopy guided diverticulotomy
was performed. There were no immediate or late
post-operative complications. During a 6 months follow
up, his symptoms had completely resolved and he added
some weight. The patient said that he was satisfied by the
treatment he received.
Discussion and conclusion
Esophageal diverticula are rare, with a radiologic and
endoscopic prevalence of 0.06–4%, in which Zenker’s is
the most common [11]. It is usually diagnosed between
the seventh and eighth decades of life [5]. In this case, the
patient presented in his mid-eighties.
The commonest symptoms of ZD at presentation are
dysphagia, regurgitation of undigested food, choking,
borborygmi in the cervical region, chronic cough, halitosis,
weight loss, and less commonly hoarseness [12].
The most consistent sign, however, is dysphagia. Physical
examination finding that is rarely seen is a swelling
in the neck that my gurgle on palpation (Boyce’s sign). In
the reported cases, there is variable time of presentation,
from onset to diagnosis, ranging from weeks to years [6,
12]. The patient presented with odynophagia and dysphagia
initially to solid and later to fluids. Then he developed
regurgitation of undigested food. There were complaints
of weight loss but no signs of malnutrition. There was no
palpable neck swelling on examination and the duration
of symptoms at presentation was only one year.
Barium swallow is the most important diagnostic tool
for dysphagia. Contrast video fluoroscopy allows constant
monitoring of the swallowing mechanism which is
valuable as single shot barium swallow may miss a small
diverticulum [13]. Barium suspension video fluoroscopy
was done on this case and clearly demonstrated the presence
of proximal esophageal pouch and absence of hiatus
hernia or reflux esophagitis.
ZD can be posterior, posterolateral, or lateral but the
most common type is the posterior pulsion diverticulum
[14]. Many authors classify the lesion according to size,
measured in craniocaudal dimension. The diameter up
to 2 cm is categorized as small, 2–4 cm—medium and
4–6 cm—large [15]. The diverticulum in this case was a
posterior pulsion and was medium size (3.4 cm).
The differential diagnosis of esophageal diverticula
depend up on the location of the diverticula [16]. Epiphrenic
diverticula are usually located in the distal
esophagus. The pathogenesis is considered to be secondary
to esophageal motility disorders and is associated
with congenital or acquired weakness of the
esophageal wall [17]. The acquired area of weakness is
known as Killian triangle or Killian’s dehiscence which
is in the hypopharynx between two strong muscles—
the inferior pharyngeal constrictor and cricopharyngeus
muscles [18]. A continuous intraluminal pressure
in this relative area of weakness leads to an outpouching
and is the major pathogenesis of this entity [2, 19].
Diverticula of the middle esophagus were classified as
Rokitansky diverticula, which commonly occur in the
thoracic esophagus. They are believed to occur due to
chronic inflammatory and fibrotic processes that pull
the wall of the esophagus outward; consequently, they
involve the three layers of the esophagus [20]. ZD are in
the proximal esophagus and are pulsion diverticula [2].
The primary purpose of ZD management is, to alleviate
symptoms and to improve the quality of life in
which it was achieved in our patient [20]. ZD is managed
surgically either by open left cervical incision or
minimally invasive endoscopic approach [10]. Several
surgical procedures have been reported: open diverticulectomy,
rigid/flexible endoscopic diverticulotomy,
diverticulopexy, diverticular inversion with or without
myotomy, and myotomy alone [10, 20]. Endoscopic
approach is gaining popularity due to its improved
post-surgical morbidity of elderly patients [21]. The
open surgical approach showed multiple disadvantages
compared to endoscopic interventions especially
in elderly and debilitating patients. The post-operative
complication of open surgical approach in the general
population was slightly higher than the flexible endoscopic
approach (10.5% vs 8.7 %), and higher mortality
rate of 0.6 versus 0.2% of endoscopic approach [10].
However, endoscopic approach showed no consistent
long-term outcome in the literature with general estimated
success rate of 63 to 100% and recurrence rate
between 0 and 33% [10, 22]. Recurrent nerve injury,
wound infection, hospital stay and fistula formation
showed to reduce with endoscopic approach while
intraoperative bleeding, and esophageal mucosal injury
increased [23]. The patient was managed by flexible
endoscopic diverticulotomy. There were no immediate
or late post-operative complications.
In conclusion, ZD is a rare condition of the proximal
esophagus, typically presents in elderly population. Barium
swallow is the most important diagnostic tool in the
diagnosis of ZD. Presenting symptoms can overlap with
malignant conditions of the esophagus. High index of
suspicion is needed to diagnose this condition as it is rare
in the general population.