In recent decades, with the rapid development of the
social economy and change in lifestyle, the prevalence
of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has risen
sharply worldwide. Estimates suggest that more than
1/4 of individuals worldwide have NAFLD, which has
become one of the most common chronic diseases [1–3].
Similar to the characteristics of other chronic diseases,
NAFLD usually has a long course of illness, affects multiple
organ systems of the body, and has many complications
and low public awareness rates [1, 4–6]. However,
because the physical injuries caused by NAFLD are often
chronic and asymptomatic, the actual prevalence rate
may be underestimated, creating a vast hidden burden of
disease to the already overburdened health care system
[2–4, 6, 7]. Combined with the previous valuable experience
in exploring the pathogenic features of hypertension,
diabetes, and other chronic diseases in humans
[8–10], we believe that preventing the occurrence and development of NAFLD will be the primary goal in the
future. Thus, the early detection of important risk factors
for NAFLD is the most important task presently [7].
The waist circumference (WC) and body mass index
(BMI) are currently the most widely used anthropometric
indicators to assess obesity worldwide and are also the
most critical risk factors for NAFLD [1, 3, 11]. These indicators
are simple to measure and provide excellent convenience
to prevent and manage many diseases [12, 13].
However, in recent years, in-depth studies have found
that the waist-to-height ratio (WHtR) can better assess
the risk of central obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and
other metabolic diseases [14–17]. Furthermore, several
recent cross-sectional studies have shown that WHtR is
a stronger predictor of NAFLD risk and its severity and
is more sensitive to diagnosis than WC and BMI [18, 19].
However, few studies have investigated the association
between WHtR and NAFLD, which contain deeper relationships,
such as non-linear relationships, and whether
a special population exists among different subgroups.
Additionally, the sample sizes of several existing studies
on the association between WHtR and NAFLD are relatively
small (N = 250–6143). Therefore, this study aimed
to further explore and analyse the association between
WHtR and NAFLD in adults using a large sample size.
Methods
Subject population and design
Our study population was from a large-scale health
examination programme called ‘human dock’ in Japan
that aims to promote public health and assesses common
chronic diseases and their risk factors through physical
examination. The research data have been uploaded
to Dryad public database by Okamura et al. According
to the terms of service of Drayad database, we can use
this data for secondary data analysis based on different
assumptions [20]. In previous studies, research ethics
was approved by the Murakami Memorial Hospital Ethics
Committee and informed consent was obtained from
all subjects; Additionally, in order to protect the privacy
of patients, the effective identification ID of all subjects
in the study was replaced by health codes, and the whole
study process followed the Declaration of Helsinki. Since
this study was a secondary analysis of previous studies,
there was no need to apply for separate ethical approval.
In previous studies, the researchers used a longitudinal
design and analysed the risk factors for diabetes [20].
In this study, we adopted a cross-sectional design that
included participants in the ‘human dock’ physical examination
programme from 2004 to 2015. We have added
some exclusion criteria to the previous research design:
(a) male alcohol consumption ≥ 210 g/w and female
alcohol consumption ≥ 140 g/w [21]; (b) viral hepatitis
or diabetes diagnosed at baseline; (c) on medication at
baseline; (d) impaired fasting blood glucose (FPG); (e)
age < 18 years and (e) missing covariant data.
Data collection
As mentioned previously [20], the clinical baseline information
in this study was collected through a standardised
self-administered questionnaire, including age, sex,
height, weight, WC, smoking status, drinking status,
systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure
(DBP) and habit of exercise. Information such as height,
weight and WC came from the patient’s self-report. The
habit of exercise was defined as participating in any exercise
more than once a week; Smoking status was divided
into nonsmokers, former smokers, and current smokers
by asking about smoking history when baseline data were
collected. Drinking status was divided into non-drinking
or small drinking (< 40 g/w), light drinking (40–139 g/w)
and moderate drinking (140–209 g/w) depending on
the amount of alcohol consumed. BMI was calculated
as weight/height2, and WHtR as WC/height. Haematological
indicators were tested by sampling venous blood
after a night of fasting and included gamma-glutamyl
transferase (GGT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), total cholesterol (TC), haemoglobin
A1c (HBA1c), triglyceride (TG), and FPG.
Diagnosis of NAFLD
NAFLD was assessed by abdominal ultrasound, and
experienced gastroenterologists reviewed the ultrasound
images without knowing the participants’ personal
information. According to the results of four types
of ultrasound, such as liver brightness, hepatorenal echo
contrast, vascular blurring, and deep attenuation, the
evaluation was made and a final diagnosis was made [22].
Statistical analysis
All the analyses in this study were performed using R
(version 3.4.3) and Empower (R) (version 2.0) statistical
software. To understand the association between WHtR
and other variables more intuitively, we grouped WHtR
into quintiles, and the linear trend of baseline characteristics
was tested by logical regression or linear regression.
Additionally, we used a multivariate logical regression
model to examine the NAFLD risk corresponding to each
WHtR quintile. As a sensitivity analysis, we treated the
WHtR quintile as a continuous variable and examined
the WHtR quintile and NAFLD risk trend. In multivariate
analysis, the adjustment rules of variables were followed
according to the Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement
[23]. The adjustment results of different degrees were shown in different models, where model 1 was the
unadjusted model, model 2 adjusted the basic demographic
variables (adjusted for age and sex), model 3
adjusted for variables whose impact on the WHtR and
NAFLD matching risk was greater than 10% (adjusted
for BMI, ALT, HDL-C, TG and height) [24], and model
4 adjusts all non-collinear variables (collinearity diagnosis
discriminates according to variance inflation factor
[25], Additional file 1: Table S1). We also checked
whether a non-linear relationship existed between WHtR
and NAFLD using the generalised additive model (GAM,
spline smoothing function). Finally, to further explore
the association between WHtR and NAFLD, we used the
likelihood ratio test to examine the interaction between
the pre-determined subgroup (sex, age, BMI, habit of
exercise, and drinking status) and WHtR.
In this study, the distribution pattern of the quantitative
variables was judged by the QQ plot, and the expression
was summarised as medians (quartile interval) or
means ± standard deviation (SD). The frequency of qualitative
variables was reported as a percentage, and chisquared
test evaluated the differences between groups.
Results
Baseline characteristics of WHtR
In total, 20,944 participants were enrolled, among which
6693 participants were excluded because they did not
meet the screening criteria (736 participants with viral
hepatitis or diabetes, 2321 participants were on medication
at baseline, 808 participants had impaired FPG,
1952 participants were heavy drinkers, 10 participants
for unknown reasons and 863 participants with missing
covariates), leaving 14,251 adults for analysis, including
7411 male and 6840 female, with an average age of
43.53 ± 8.89 years.
In this study, the WHtR values ranged from 0.28 to
0.79, and Table 1 evaluates the association between
the baseline data and WHtR quintiles. With the gradual
increase in WHtR, the proportion of male participants
gradually increased, the age, height, weight, BMI,
WC, SBP, and DBP of all participants showed a gradual
increase, the NAFLD patients, smokers and drinkers, and
the levels of ALT, AST, GGT, TC, TG, HbA1c and FPG
were also on the increased (all Ptrend < 0.05). Notably,
when the WHtR was elevated, we found that the number
of individuals who maintained the habit of exercise
gradually decreased, and the HDL-C levels were also
decreased (Ptrend < 0.05).
Baseline characteristics of NAFLD
Table 2 shows the baseline characteristics of the participants
diagnosed with NAFLD and non-NAFLD. Among
the 14,251 participants, the prevalence of NAFLD was
17.59%, mainly male patients (80.93%). In the NAFLD
group, the general clinical indexes (age, height, weight,
BMI, WC, WHtR, SBP, DBP, smoking status, and drinking
status) of the participants were higher than those in
the non-NAFLD group (P < 0.001). Additionally, among
the participants with confirmed NAFLD, significantly
fewer participants had a habit of exercise (15.04%). Furthermore,
except for HDL-C, the haematological indicators
of the NAFLD participants were all higher than
those of the non-NAFLD participants (P < 0.001).
Association between WHtR and NAFLD
In the multivariate logistic regression model, WHtR
was significantly positively correlated with NAFLD, and
this association remained unchanged in the unadjusted
model (model 1), the basic adjusted model (model 2),
the model adjusted according to the method recommended
by the STROBE statement (model 3), and the
model adjusted for all non-collinear variables (model
4). In the model that adjusted all the non-collinear
variables, we observed a 66% increase in NAFLD risk
for per SD increase in WHtR (adjusted odds ratio
(OR):1.66; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.45, 1.89).
Additionally, among the quintile groups of WHtR, participants
in quintile 2, quintile 3, quintile 4, and quintile
5 showed 3.62-fold, 5.98-fold, 9.55-fold, and 11.08-fold
increased risks of NAFLD, respectively, compared with
that in quintile 1 (P trend < 0.0001) (Table 3). These
results suggest that individuals with higher WHtR are
more likely to develop NAFLD than those with lower
WHtR.
We continued to use GAM to model the association
between WHtR and NAFLD. The regression spline
curve indicated that the relationship between WHtR and
NAFLD was non-linear, in which a WHtR of approximately
0.4 might be the threshold effect of NAFLD risk,
0.6 might be the saturation effect of NAFLD risk, and a
value between 0.4 and 0.6 might demonstrate linear relationship
with the risk of NAFLD (Fig. 1).
Subgroup analysis
To further reveal the deep association between WHtR
and NAFLD, interaction tests were performed in the predefined
subgroups (Table 4). Among these subgroups,
we found a significant interaction between WHtR and
BMI (P interaction < 0.01). Among them, this risk association
was significantly higher in non-obese individuals
than in those with BMI ≥ 24 kg/m2 (adjusted OR: 2.73
vs 1.94). Additionally, the interaction tests for age, sex,
habit of exercise, and drinking status were not significant
(Pinteraction > 0.05).
Discussion
This cross-sectional study, based on the general adult
population, examined the association between the
WHtR and the prevalence of NAFLD and found that
the risk of NAFLD was significantly associated with
an elevated WHtR value. Even after adjusting for all
the non-collinear covariates, the association remained
strong and positive (adjusted OR: 1.66; 95% CI: 1.45,
1.89), and this risk association was more significant in
non-obese individuals (adjusted OR: 2.73; 95% CI: 2.37,
3.14; Pinteraction = 0.0006).
The prevalence of NAFLD in this study was 17.59%,
which was relatively low compared with that in Asia
(27.37%) [2]. The cause may be related to a significant
proportion of participants in this study still maintaining
their habit of exercise (17.33%). It is well known
that regular exercise can reduce the risk of NAFLD and
is currently the primary way to prevent NAFLD occurrence
and control NAFLD development [1, 4, 5, 26]. In
this study, 84.96% of patients with NAFLD were from
individuals who had no habit of exercise (Table 4).
Additionally, although the prevalence of NAFLD in
non-obese people (BMI < 24 kg/m2) was lower than that
in overweight or obese people (BMI ≥ 24 kg/m2), the
subgroup analysis showed that the risk of NAFLD in
non-obese people was significantly higher than that in
overweight or obese people (adjusted OR: 2.73 vs 1.94,
Pinteraction < 0.01). In some recent studies, researchers
have expressed similar concerns, believing that nonobese
individuals in Asia are vulnerable to NAFLD and
the health problems of this unique population should
be given attention [2, 18, 27, 28].Compared with other studies on the association
between WHtR and NAFLD [18, 19, 28–30], the main
advantage of this study was based on the large sample
data, further analysis of various potential confounding
factors to perform strict statistical adjustment, revealing
the positive association between WHtR and NAFLD,
and examining the possible unique population through
hierarchical analysis and interactive tests. Additionally,
our analysis showed a non-linear relationship between
WHtR and NAFLD. A WHtR of approximately 0.4 likely
indicated a threshold effect of NAFLD risk; 0.6 might be
a saturation effect on the risk of NAFLD. A WHtR value
between 0.4 and 0.6 likely indicated a linear relationship
between WHtR and NAFLD risk. In previous studies,
researchers generally believed that the optimal cut-off
value for WHtR was approximately 0.5 [18, 19, 29–31];
our latest evidence also supports this conclusion, and we
visualised the association between WHtR and NAFLD.
We believe that when WHtR is in the range of 0.4–0.6,
the risk of NAFLD must be evaluated carefully. To our
best knowledge, this is the first study to demonstrate
a non-linear association between WHtR and the risk of
NAFLD.
The mechanism by which WHtR correlates with
NAFLD remains unclear. However, related studies have
shown that WHtR is closely related to chronic inflammation
and insulin resistance (IR), which may lead to
NAFLD occurrence [32, 33]. As explained in the ‘parallel
multiple-hit theory’, IR is the primary factor that triggers
NAFLD [34]. IR causes an increase in free fatty acids in
hepatocytes, and these fat molecules make the liver more
vulnerable to a second blow, increasing the liver’s susceptibility
to other damage factors [35, 36]. Additionally,
chronic inflammation can cause hepatocyte stress and
IR, which lead to lipid accumulation and form a vicious
circle, further increasing the risk of NAFLD [37, 38].This study’s advantage is that, based on a large sample
size, a standard questionnaire was used to evaluate the
habit of exercise as an important risk factor, and a rigorous
statistical adjustment was made to explore the
association between WHtR and NAFLD deeply. Additionally,
this study is the first to confirm that the association
between WHtR and NAFLD is non-linear and
provides a reference range of WHtR associated with
NAFLD risk.
This study’s limitations are mainly due to the following
aspects: (a) a cross-sectional design was adopted;
thus, the causal association between WHtR and NAFLD
could not be determined. However, due to the retrospective
nature of the study, the issue of observational bias
was avoided. Additionally, the data analysis in this study
was based on a large sample, and the conclusions drawn
could be considered relatively reliable; (b) IR was not
evaluated; thus, regarding the association between WHtR
and NAFLD, we can only speculate that the mechanism
of IR may be involved in one of the important links; (c)
the diagnosis of NAFLD was evaluated by abdominal colour
ultrasound, and the true prevalence of NAFLD may
be underestimated compared with liver biopsies—that
is, the effect of WHtR on NAFLD may also be underestimated.
However, abdominal colour ultrasound has
reduced the economic burden and physical damage of
physical examination in healthy individuals; with the
improvement in ultrasonic detection technology, the sensitivity
and specificity of abdominal colour ultrasound
in detecting NAFLD have reached a high level [39]; (d)
although we have adjusted a large range of known risk
factors, many risk factors may exist that we have not yet
discovered or cannot measure, causing inevitable residual
confusion; (e) since this study is based on a secondary
analysis of previous research data [20], diabetes patients
are not included in the data package, so it may cause a
certain selection bias. But from another point of view,
the positive correlation between diabetes and NAFLD
has been proved many times in many previous studies
[1, 2, 6], but this study still found that there is a positive
correlation between WHtR and NAFLD even excluding
patients with diabetes, so it can be considered that this
association is relatively reliable.
Conclusion
In summary, the results of this study suggest that in
adults, the WHtR is positively associated with NAFLD,
and the relationship between the two is non-linear, with
significant threshold and saturation effects. These findings
further enrich the latest evidence and may benefit
the public in terms of the prevention and intervention of
NAFLD. Given that the WHtR is a repeatable and easyto-
measure indicator, we suggest that WHtR should be
promoted as a routine programme to screen adults for
NAFLD.