The excess accumulation of fat in the liver in patients
without other causes such as excessive alcohol consumption
or viral hepatitis is recognised as non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease (NAFLD) [1]. It is a spectrum of diseases
comprising two distinct conditions: non-alcoholic fatty
[2]. The latter is a severe form in which the steatosis is
accompanied by lobular inflammation and hepatocyte
ballooning that can progress to liver fibrosis, compensated
cirrhosis, decompensated cirrhosis, hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), and other liver-related and non-liver
related mortalities such as cardiovascular diseases [3–7].
These are the causes of the mounting number of hospital
admissions, which are likely to continue to increase every
year.
NASH is now considered the second most common
indication for liver transplantation in the United States
after chronic hepatitis C [8]. A number of previous studies
have revealed that patients with NASH are at high
risk for advanced liver disease [9–11], and those with significant
fibrosis have a significantly higher risk of overall
mortality than the general population [12]. A study on
the epidemiology and disease burden of non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis suggested that NASH can affect 3% to
5% of the global population, with minor variations at the
country-specific level [13]. A study focusing on the economic
impact of NASH in Hong Kong suggested that the
projected cost of NASH over 20 years would be $1.32 billion,
at $257 per-person year [14], while a study on the
lifetime cost of advanced NASH in the United States
demonstrated that the condition costs a total of $96.18
billion, at $139,724 per patient [15].
In Thailand, several studies have calculated the incidence
and prevalence of NAFLD. Previous studies
showed that the prevalence of NAFLD varied from 24.58
to 67% depending on patients’ underlying diseases [16–
19]. However, information concerning the cost of illness
of NASH—particularly NASH with significant fibrosis—
is still limited in Thailand as well as in other low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs). Certainly, an understanding
of the economic burden of NASH in Thailand
might be useful in helping policy makers with the
development of strategies to manage this disease, which
is likely to become a significant health issue in the near
future. Therefore, this study set out to estimate the economic
burden of NASH with significant fibrosis (fibrosis
stage ≥ 2), using Thailand as an example of an LMIC.
Methods
Description of model
A Markov model, which was built in Microsoft Excel,
was adapted from a study conducted by Chongmelaxme
et al. [20] to estimate the health care costs and prevalence
of NASH with significant fibrosis (fibrosis stage
2 and higher) in Thailand. The model consisted of the
normal state and the ten other health states, namely, no
fibrosis (F0), fibrosis stage 1 (F1), fibrosis stage 2 (F2),
fibrosis stage 3 (F3), compensated cirrhosis or fibrosis
stage 4 (F4), decompensated cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplantation
(LT), post-liver transplantation (post-LT), and
death. The model was developed adhering to the natural
history of the disease, which progressively worsens to
more severe states, and regression was allowed only from
F0 to normal, F1 to F0, F2 to F1, F3 to F2, and F4 to F3
(Fig. 1). The model comprised the general Thai population
aged 18 years and older (51 million people) at the
beginning of the model. In the analysis, the population in
each age cohort entered the model at the normal state,
and in the next cycle, they either remained in this state
or transited to fibrosis stage 0 or death. The annual cycle
length and a lifetime horizon were used in the model. The
size of the population of each age group was based on
Thailand Official Statistic Registration Systems, and the
age-specific mortality rate (ASMR) was based on Global
Health Observatory data from the World Health Organization
[21, 22] (Additional file 1: Appendix 1 and 2). This
model was performed from a payer perspective. All costs
were discounted at the rate of 3%, in accordance with the
recommendations of the Thai Health Technology Assessment
(HTA) guidelines [23].
Input parameters
Overall, the input parameters were based on a literature
review and country-specific data sources. All input
parameters are detailed in (Table 1). The prevalence of
NAFLD in the general Thai population was pooled from
previously published local studies [17–19, 24], and the
age-specific prevalence of NASH with significant fibrosis
was calculated from the NASH registry data of Siriraj
Hospital, Mahidol University, and previous publications
[25, 26] (see Additional file 1: Appendix 3 and 4). The
transitional probabilities were mainly based on the study
of Chongmelaxme et al. [20], which was the previous,
model-based, economic evaluation study in Thailand.
Transitional probabilities
The transitional probabilities for all fibrosis stages were
reanalysed using data from a systematic review and
meta-analysis estimating the rates of fibrosis progression
[27]. The transitional probabilities from F4 to decompensated
cirrhosis and to HCC were based on published
articles [28–32], whereas that of patients experiencing
liver transplantation was derived from country-specific
studies [33–35]. The age-specific mortality rate (ASMR)
of the Thai population [22] multiplied by the relative
risks of mortality among NAFLD and cirrhosis patients
[36] was used as the mortality rate. The mortality rate of
HCC patients was derived from a study estimating the
mortality rate of Thai patients with HCC [37]. Since data
on the mortality rate of transplanted NASH patients are
not available, this study applied the death rate associated
with liver transplants and post-liver transplantation in
chronic hepatitis B and C patients [38].
Costs
Since this study was conducted from a payer perspective,
only the direct medical costs were estimated. A
micro-costing method was utilised to estimate the cost
of health care utilisation. The outpatient costs included
outpatient medication care and laboratory testing, with
NAFLD patients being assumed to visit an outpatient
clinic four times a year [39]. The relevant costs were
obtained from a costing database in Thailand [40]. The
treatment costs only related to NAFLD and NASH. As
the costs for compensated cirrhosis, decompensated cirrhosis,
and HCC are not available, they were assumed to
be the same as for hepatitis C patients and were adapted
from a country-specific study [41]. However, the costs of
hepatitis C medications and viral testing were excluded.
Also, it can be assumed that the costs of management of
DC, HCC, LT, and post-LT would be the same in patients
with advanced liver disease, regardless of the disease etiologies
[15]. All costs were adjusted using the Consumer
Price Index and reported in 2019 US Dollars (1 US Dollar
= 32.3 Thai Baht) [42, 43].
Analysis
The outcome measures were the first-year cost, the fifthyear
cost and the lifetime cost for each age group. The
prevalence and incidence of NAFLD and the NASH with
significant fibrosis population were estimated for 2019.
A probabilistic sensitivity analysis (PSA) was performed
to assess uncertainty and the impact of the base-case
input parameters on the model outputs and their robustness.
The sensitivity analyses were conducted for all age
groups.
Results
Prevalence of NAFLD and NASH with significant fibrosis
The model estimated that the total NAFLD prevalence
rate would be 32.17% and the total NASH with significant
fibrosis prevalence rate would be 5.74% in 2019. It was
found that the 18–39 age group would have the highest
prevalence rate, with 35.12% and 7.14% for NAFLD and
NASH with significant fibrosis, respectively. In 2019, of
the total NAFLD cohort, 17.84% of the cases were estimated
to have NASH. Based on the Thailand population,
our model predicted that the total number of adult
patients with NAFLD would be 16.6 million, while the
number of NASH patients with significant fibrosis would
be 2.9 million in 2019. Additionally, about 50% of the
NASH with significant fibrosis population in 2019 would
comprise adults aged under 39 (Table 2; Additional file 1:
Appendix 5).
Estimated costs
We estimated the economic burden of NASH with significant
fibrosis at the first-year, fifth year and over a
lifetime. In the base-case analysis, the first-year costs
would be $886,664,483, the fifth-year costs would be
$886,376,246, and the total lifetime cost for NASH
with significant fibrosis was projected to be $15.2
billion or $5,174 per case. In 2019, the GDP of Thailand
was $543 billion which this burden account for
approximately 3% of the 2019 GDP. On one hand, we
found that the highest estimated lifetime cost per case
would be for adults aged over 60, mounting to $9,492
per patient, while the lowest cost per case would be in
Canada and the US (5.2% [46] and 5.3% [47], respectively).
However, these rates are slightly higher than the
global prevalence, which ranges between 3 and 5% [13].
Interestingly, compared with other Asian countries such
as China (2.4% [47]), Japan (3.0% [47]) and Hong Kong
(4.5% [14]), the estimated NASH prevalence rate for
Thailand is higher. This higher prevalence may be influenced
by differences in ethnicity, genetic composition,
diets, and sedentary lifestyles [14, 48]. Also, previous data
showed that the growth rate of overweight and obesity
has been much higher in recent decades in Thailand as
compared to those countries [49]. However, these contributing
factors need to be explored further. Nevertheless,
awareness of this high prevalence for Thailand is
important because it could urge clinicians and policy
makers to focus on, and prepare for, the significant burdens
presented by this disease.
In addition, when considered individual age groups,
our results revealed that the lower-aged population has
a higher prevalence of NAFLD and NASH. This could
result from the older population having lower levels of fat
deposits in the liver [50–52], which might be explained
by the accumulated fat in the liver being burned out and
becoming more fibrotic. Moreover, younger people today
will face a higher burden of metabolic syndrome as compared
to earlier generations [53], this could contribute to
higher NAFLD and NASH prevalence in the lower-aged
cohort.
The total lifetime cost of NASH is substantially high,
being equivalent to approximately 3% of the GDP of
Thailand for 2019 [45]. Focusing on each age group, we
found that the lifetime cost per case for the younger age
group was lower than that for the older group. Although
the life expectancy of the older population is shorter than
that of the younger population, the total lifetime cost
per case is double that of the older population because
more advanced diseases and higher progression rates are
detected in the older population. Additionally, our results
reveal the significant burden from NASH with significant
fibrosis which is not only comparable with other
significant health issues in Thailand such as alcohol consumption
[54], smoking-related diseases [55], and obesity
[56], but also higher in terms of economic burden resulting
in the loss of health care resources and the country’s
economy.
Evidently, NASH with significant fibrosis cause the
financial burden in both developing and developed countries.
When comparing the total number of NASH cases
and the financial burden revealed by our study with the
corresponding data from developed countries [15], the
costs and the number of cases in Thailand are lower. Nevertheless,
they have a relatively high impact when considered
in relation to the Thai economy.
It is important to note that our study estimated the burden
from a payer perspective; hence, the costs of comorbidities,
nonmedical costs, and societal costs of NASH
were excluded from the model. This means that the economic
burden of this disease is likely to have been markedly
underestimated. If such parameters were included,
the total costs of NASH would be larger because it would
include the money spent by patients and their household
members, as well as non-monetary losses, such as opportunity
costs and lost income caused by illness.
In Thailand’s context, health care services are still
restricted, particularly human resources. This is a critical
issue that must be considered. There is a significant
human impact both in terms of the healthcare professionals
needed to deal with the disease and its consequences,
and the loss of productive workers due to the
illness. From our findings, around 3 million cases of
NASH are predicted in 2019, yet there are only about
61,000 clinicians in Thailand [57]. This equates to a ratio
of 1:50 for the doctors available to the number of NASH
with significant fibrosis patients. There is an even lower
ratio for the current number of hepatologists in Thailand
(1:6,000 for NASH with significant fibrosis, and 1:130,000
for the general population, of whom about 6% may be
diagnosed with NASH at any time). These ratios indicate
that if a strategy is not developed to prevent NASH
and its consequences, there will be insufficient numbers
of medical professionals to provide adequate care to all
patients and to effectively monitor the disease. As well,
there will not be sufficient funding available to support
patients from low-income households or those receiving
healthcare via Thailand’s Universal Coverage Scheme.
Thus, we should develop strategies to prevent NASH
and its progressive state; otherwise, we will have to deal
with the high costs of the disease. Screening is one possible
strategy. It could enable early disease detection and
promote early treatment, which would require relatively
low funding. However, the cost of the screening strategy
itself should be considered; therefore, a further study on
screening costs is required.
Both NASH and its complications present huge burdens.
For example, while cirrhosis and HCC need highcost
treatments, these diseases typically have poor
outcomes. This study only considered NASH and its
consequent diseases; when we take the real-world situation
into account, there is much evidence that NASH is
associated with comorbidities such as diabetes, obesity,
dyslipidaemia, metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular
diseases [8, 14, 58–60]. It may also lead to higher mortality
and a higher financial burden for those with underlying
diseases [10, 36]. Thus, predictions of the economic
and financial burdens of the disease are important evidence
in support of the need for preventative strategies,
especially in developing countries.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to report the
economic burden of NASH in LMICs. This study used
Thailand as an example LMIC to reflect the increased
burden of NASH in Southeast Asia. Our results are consistent
with other studies that claimed that the burden of
NAFLD and NASH are large and are ever increasing [14,
15, 46, 59]. The findings of the present study highlight
that the prevention and treatment of NASH should be
addressed by every LMIC in the world.
A key strength of this study was that its findings are
likely to be valid as most of the input data used for the
model were drawn from local sources. Secondly, the
probabilistic sensitivity analysis that we conducted determined
that the model was robust in its estimations of the
costs of NASH with significant fibrosis.
There are some limitations to this study. First, there
is a lack of biopsy-proven NAFLD prevalence data for
the Thai general population. We therefore pooled the
prevalence of NAFLD from studies [17–19, 24] that had
diagnosed the disease using imaging tests (ultrasonography)
and transient elastography techniques (FibroScan).
Because of their higher sensitivity, these information
sources provided a more accurate disease prevalence
than studies that had used liver function tests as the
diagnostic method. Moreover, the prevalence of NAFLD
was consistent with the previous systematic review and
meta-analysis in Asia [61]. Second, there are no direct
assessments of the incidence and prevalence of NASH
in NAFLD patients, in view of the high risk of severe
complications from liver biopsies conducted on NAFLD
patients without any explicit risk of having NASH with
significant fibrosis. Consequently, the NASH with significant
fibrosis data were limited. Hence, we adopted
the biopsy-proven and elastography-confirmed NASH
with significant fibrosis prevalence to signify the proportion
of NAFLD cases in Thailand [25, 26] as well as
to minimise errors from the sampling variability that
may occur in biopsy diagnostic method [62]. Third, we
used the constant rate of liver transplantation which
does not vary according to age of the patients. Nevertheless,
the probability of liver transplantation was based
on local data [33–35]. Forth, due to the unavailability
of local or NASH-specific data, a few input parameters
were retrieved from international studies, for instance,
the transitional probabilities of fibrosis progression and
regression. As well, the mortality rates of liver transplant
and post-transplantation patients were adopted from the
rates of Thai patients with hepatitis B and hepatitis C
infections. Nevertheless, this information should be able
to be used as representative data for the Thai population
[20]. Fifth, regardless of clinical manifestation, entire
patients in this model who had been diagnosed NASH
were assumed to receive standard treatment and applied
in the cost calculation. In the real-world practice, those
without clinical abnormality might not receive the treatment.
Lastly, our study did not consider other non-liverrelated
events which are known to associated with NASH
such as cardiovascular diseases, obesity, etc. Thus, the
total costs will increase if the treatment of those comorbidities
are included.
Conclusions
NASH with significant fibrosis cause substantial economic
burden in Thailand. This should prompt clinicians
and policy makers to pay more attention in
developing and implementing the effective strategies
for the prevention and management of NASH.