Background
The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is the largest organ system
of the human body and exerts a variety of physiologic
functions during a normal state. Other than serving as
a digestive conduit, the GI tract also plays an important
role in immunomodulation, hormone control, fluid
and electrolyte balance, and physical protection from
ingested environmental threats [1–3]. During the period
of critical illness, GI complications may occur as a result
of diverse injurious mechanisms, such as hypoperfusion,
ischemia–reperfusion injury and pro-inflammatory
cytokine responses [1, 4, 5], and these complications
are linked to increased mortality and morbidity among
patients suffering from them [5, 6]. In this regard, occurrence
of GI complications under a myriad of conditions
may not be simply viewed as an innocent victim but can
otherwise precipitate deleterious consequences.
Along this line, GI dysfunction has been proposed to
be the motor of multiple organ dysfunction in critical
illness although the pathophysiology involved (e.g., bacterial
translocation, altered intestinal tight junctions,
cytokine production and interaction with the gut microbiome)
remains incompletely understood [3, 7–9]. However,
despite of scientific interest in this issue, the clinical
relevance of GI complications is still controversial with
an unknown yet probably adverse impact on the outcome
of patients. In addition, outside of intensive care settings,
little if any is known about the effects of GI complications
on clinical trajectories and prognosis of non-critically ill
patients.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to investigate the
incidence of GI complications and their influence on
patient outcomes under a non-critical care setting. Specifically,
we chose to focus on the analysis of clinical
information on patients with pneumonia because it is the
most common cause of hospitalization and carries a significant
risk of mortality around the globe. Moreover, by
this way, we could include a more homogeneous patient
population for comparisons of clinical presentation
and disease severity between different groups of study
subjects.
Materials and methods
Study settings and population
This retrospective observational study was conducted at a
university-affiliated hospital in Taiwan. The protocol has
been approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the
National Taiwan University Hospital (201902005RIND)
and written informed consent was waived because of the
retrospective and non-interventional design of the study.
Adult patients ≥ 20 years of age admitted to the general
medical wards between January 2012 and December
2014 were screened for eligibility in this study. Patients
with an admission diagnosis of pneumonia were identified
as the study subjects. The diagnosis of pneumonia
was verified by a board-certified chest physician based on
the overall medical records and radiologic findings [10].
For patients who were hospitalized twice or more during
the study period, we included only the first hospitalization.
Patients were excluded if they had an admission
diagnosis other than pneumonia, were transferred from
other facilities, or had missing data for calculating the
severity score for pneumonia. In addition, patients with
pre-existing GI disorders that may interfere the assessment
of GI complications, such as inflammatory bowel
disease, gastric/colorectal cancer, colostomy/ileostomy,
and short bowel syndrome, were also excluded from the
analysis.
Data collection and definitions
Data retrieved on hospital admission included patient
demographics, physical signs, comorbidities, laboratory
testing results, and pertinent clinical events. Comorbidities
of interest were chronic kidney disease, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease,
diabetes mellitus, heart failure and malignancy [11, 12].
The Confusion, Urea, Respiratory rate, Blood pressure
and age ≥ 65 (CURB-65) score was calculated to assess
the severity of pneumonia [13]. GI complications were
evaluated during the first 3 days of hospitalization and
their definitions were described as follows: (a) bowel
dilatation: radiologically confirmed bowel dilatation in
any bowel segment; (b) diarrhea: loose or liquid stool
three or more times per day; (c) GI bleeding: appearance
of blood in vomited fluids, nasogastric aspirate or
stool; (4) ileus: absence of stool for three or more days
[2, 5]. Pertinent clinical events included development
of septic shock and acute respiratory distress syndrome
[14, 15], which were also assessed in the first 3 hospital
days. In case that patients were rehospitalized after the
index admission, the main reasons for rehospitalization
were also obtained and categorized as infectious or
non-infectious etiologies.
Outcomes
Patients were followed up until death, 30 days after
discharge or loss to follow-up, whichever came first.
The primary outcome was the survival status at hospital
discharge. Other outcomes of interest included
length of stay during the hospitalization, and incidence
of unscheduled readmission and time to readmission
within 30 days after the index discharge among the hospital
survivors.
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were presented as mean ± standard
deviation or median (interquartile range) per data
distribution, and were analyzed by the independent
sample t-test or Mann–Whitney test, respectively. Categorical
variables were reported as number (%) and
were compared using the chi-square or Fisher’s exact
test, as appropriate. The logistic regression model was
built to identify factors independently associated with
hospital mortality in the multivariate analysis. Variables
of laboratory testing were dichotomized by either the
upper or lower limit of the reference range, as appropriate.
All potentially confounding covariates were entered
into the multivariate model without model selection. A
two-tailed P value of < 0.05 indicated statistical significance.
The statistical analyses were conducted by using
the SPSS version 15.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) software
package.
Results
During the study period, a total of 1001 patients were
included in this study (Fig. 1). The mean age of the study
population was 73.7 ± 15.2 years and 598 (59%) of them
were males (Table 1). On average, the CURB-65 score
was 1.6 ± 1.0. The leading comorbidities were diabetes
mellitus (28%), malignancy (19%) and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (12%). Only few patients developed
septic shock (2.3%) or acute respiratory distress
syndrome (0.7%) in the first 3 days of hospitalization. The
median length of hospital stay was 8 (5–12) days. The
incidences of GI complications are presented in Table 2.
Diarrhea (5.2%) was the most common complication and
approximately 1 out of 9 patients (11%) experienced one
or more GI complications.
There were 862 (86%) survivors and 139 (14%) nonsurvivors
on hospital discharge (Table 1). The non-survivors
were older (77.2 vs. 73.2 years; P = 0.003) and had
a higher CURB-65 score (2.1 vs. 1.6; P < 0.001) than the
survivors. Also, non-survivors were more likely to have
comorbid malignancy (28% vs. 17%; P = 0.002) and experience
septic shock (12% vs. 0.7%; P < 0.001) compared to
survivors. Regarding laboratory testing, a higher white
blood cell count (13.0 vs. 11.0 K/μL; P = 0.006), neutrophil-
to-lymphocyte ratio (15.6 vs. 10.3; P < 0.001), and
C-reactive protein value (8.6 vs. 7.4 mg/dL; P = 0.017)
were observed in non-survivors than survivors. On the
contrary, non-survivors had lower serum albumin levels
than survivors (3.2 vs. 3.4 g/dL; P < 0.001). The length of
hospital stay was longer in non-survivors compared to
survivors (8 vs. 8 days in medians; P = 0.025). Regarding
GI complications, no statistically significant differences
were found in any single complication between the survivors
and non-survivors (Table 2). However, non-survivors
more often developed any of the GI complications
compared to survivors (17% vs. 10%; P = 0.019).
Table 3 shows the logistic regression model incorporating
patient demographics, comorbidities, laboratory
results, clinical events, CURB-65 scores and the presence
of GI complications for odds ratios (ORs) of hospital
mortality in the pneumonia patients. Independent
risk factors of mortality included an increase in CURB-
65 scores (OR 1.952 per point increase; 95% confidence
interval [CI] 1.516–2.514), comorbid malignancy (OR
1.943; 95% CI 1.209–3.123), development of septic shock
(OR 25.896; 95% CI 8.970–74.765), and the presence of
any GI complication (OR 1.753; 95% CI 1.003–3.065).
In addition to an association with increased hospital
mortality, the presence of GI complications in patients
with pneumonia was also associated with a longer hospital
stay (Table 4). Moreover, among the pneumonia
patients surviving to hospital discharge, those with any
of the GI complications during the first 3 days of hospitalization
seemed more likely to be readmitted within
general wards. Instead, simple, easily recognizable GI
signs and symptoms were used to delineate the clinical
profile of GI complications in our study population. As
the first study in this field, our results should encourage
researches to define explicit characteristics of GI
conditions in non-critically ill patients.
An interesting finding in this study is that pneumonia
patients with GI complications were readmitted
within 30 days of discharge more often than those
without, although the difference did not reach statistical
significance. Great efforts have been put on identification
of risk factors for readmission following
hospitalization for pneumonia. Comorbidities, socioeconomic
status, and so on play a pivotal role in this
regard [27, 28]; however, to our knowledge, none of
the studies identified the association between GI dysfunction
during the index hospitalization and risks of
readmission. Our finding may not be that unexpected
but is pathophysiologically plausible. Gut origin of
sepsis hypothesis proposes that translocation of potentially
harmful bacteria across the intestinal barrier
causes sepsis at distant sites [29]. Thus, GI dysfunction
may render the host susceptible to infections and consequently
result in rehospitalization. The observation
that the majority of readmissions in this study could be
ascribed to infectious diseases may partly support this
hypothesis.
A number of limitations pertaining to this study
should be considered. First, the incidence of GI complications
can be underestimated since clinically insignificant
events may not be reported by the patients
or well documented in the medical records. However,
important and influential GI conditions are unlikely
to be missed, and our results are practically informative
to clinicians in daily practice. Second, that only
pneumonia patients were enrolled for analysis may
limit the generalizability of the study findings to other
non-critically ill populations. Nonetheless, inclusion
of this non-GI disease alone is also the strength of our
study because we were able to clearly delineate and
analyze the effects of GI complications on patient outcomes.
Undoubtedly, more studies are encouraged to
validate our findings in other disease contexts. Third,
the impact of pre-existing GI disorders on GI complications
and the interactions between them remain to
be elucidated. In our study, patients with pre-morbid
GI diseases were excluded from analysis in order to
distinctly define the development of GI complications.
This is the advantage and also the disadvantage of our
study design, and prospective, well-defined studies
(e.g., meaningful changes in GI signs and symptoms)
are required to solve these issues.
Conclusions
GI complications are not that commonly observed outside
of ICU settings; however, they still exert a negative
impact on prognosis of pneumonia patients, including
higher mortality and prolonged length of hospital
stay. In addition, development of those complications
in patients with pneumonia during the index hospitalization
seems to be associated with the post-discharge
outcome, namely, 30-day rehospitalization. Therefore,
the findings altogether illustrate the important prognostic
role of GI complications in patients with non-GI
diseases under a non-critical care setting.