Background
Operative management of traumatic hollow viscus injuries
has been a subject of much debate, and colon injury
especially remains a feared entity [1, 2]. Over the three
decades following World War II, colostomy creation was
the standard treatment for traumatic colon injuries [2–5].
Civilian surgeons started attempting primary repairs and
anastomoses at the end of the 1970s; this change was
soon validated by dozens of articles, including five randomized
controlled trials [6–10] and a meta-analysis [11].
However, close analysis of these studies shows that
surgeons were still wary of primary repairs for the most
severe digestive wounds [12–15]. Recent articles written
by military surgeons dampen the enthusiasm for primary
repairs of the colon, evoking high mortality rates in case
of fistula [16]. In everyday practice, the inconvenience of
carrying a stoma appears negligible next to the complications
of an anastomosis leak [17].
In the era of damage-control laparotomy, the problem
of bowel continuity might be seen as a secondary
issue [18, 19]. Nevertheless, damage-control laparotomy
should not be considered as routine management for all
patients with abdominal trauma [20]. Definitive surgery
should be conducted whenever possible—and thus, the
question of interrupting bowel continuity remains a key
issue.
Preservation of bowel continuity is the preferred strategy
in our institution regardless of the site—small bowel
or colon—of the injury. The aim of the study was to analyze
our management of patients with traumatic bowel
injuries, using a prospective patient registry in a high volume
trauma center. We aimed to identify which factors
influenced the decision to preserve or not preserve bowel
continuity and which factors were predictors for morbidity
and mortality.
Material and methods
We reviewed a prospectively held database of consecutive
patients admitted for abdominal trauma with
lesions of the digestive tract from 1997 to 2017. Included
patients had emergent laparotomy, during which injuries
to the small bowel and/or the colon were confirmed and
treated. Simple serosal tears and lesions to the mesentery
with no repercussions on bowel vitality were excluded.
Demographic data, type of bowel injury, type of
trauma, time to surgery, hemodynamic status, transfusion,
and biologic and radiologic data were gathered from
medical charts.
The overall severity of the trauma was evaluated in two
ways: hemodynamic status upon admission (patients
with a systolic blood pressure lower than 90 mmHg or
receiving vasopressors were considered to be unstable),
and severity scores such as the Injury Severity Score (ISS)
and the New Injury Severity Score (NISS). Both scores
rely on a thorough examination of the patient and an
exhaustive list of all lesions found, and are scaled from
1 to 75. The most commonly used threshold to define
severe trauma is 15. While the ISS was developed to predict
mortality, the NISS is supposed to better predict inhospital
morbidity.
During surgery, four types of injury management were
identified: simple suture, resection and anastomosis,
bowel resection with the ends left stapled in the abdomen,
and stoma (with or without prior resection). As
previously stated, we aimed to preserve bowel continuity
as often as possible. Simple suture, with interrupted
or running stitches of absorbable thread, was preferred
in case of small wounds with clean edges. Resection and
anastomosis were used if the bowel was ischemic or containing
several wounds on a small segment. Anastomosis
without resection was used to treat transfixing perforations
without ischemia [21]. Both types of anastomosis
were analyzed as a single group. All anastomoses were
carried out with staplers.
If preservation of bowel continuity was considered
unadvisable, a stoma was made, either as a loop stoma
or as a resection and double stoma. In unstable patients
presenting with the “hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy”
triad, damage control laparotomy (DCL) was
performed; the bowel was stapled shut and left in the
abdomen, with simple skin closure. If the patient survived,
a second procedure was performed 24 to 48 h later
for definitive treatment of the bowel injury.
Postoperative course was analyzed for complications.
Specific morbidity included intra-abdominal abscess,
anastomotic or suture leak, wound abscess, and renewed
intra-abdominal bleeding. Morbidity was defined as
complications occurring during the hospital stay or in the
month following surgery. The severity of complications
was evaluated with the Clavien–Dindo classification.
Mortality was defined as in-hospital death.
Chi-squared tests, Fisher’s exact tests and Student’s
t tests were used for univariate analyses. Factors identified
with an alpha level less than or equal to 0.05 were
tested using logistic regression. Results are presented
as means ± SD, as medians and IQRs, or percentages.
A p value less than or equal to 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. All tests were two tailed. Statistical
analyses were conducted using SPSS (IBM Corp, SPSS
Statistics for Windows, Version 23.0, Armonk, NY, USA).
Results
Between 1997 and 2017, 165 patients were admitted for
traumatic bowel injuries. Two patients died during surgery,
8 patients had lesions of the mesentery that did
not compromise the intestinal tissue, 17 had only serosal
wounds of minimal severity, and 5 patients had charts
that were too incomplete to be included. A total of 133
patients (81% male) with a median age of 33.4 (i.q.r
11–79) years were included.
Fifty-three patients (40%) were admitted for blunt traumas,
54 (40%) were admitted for stab wounds, and 26
(20%) were admitted for gunshot wounds. Most patients
(n = 93, 70%) had at least one injured organ other than
the small bowel or colon. Thirty-eight patients (29%)
were in shock on admission. Fifty-five patients (41%)
needed a blood transfusion during the first 24 h, including
26 patients who required 6 red blood cell (RBC) units
or more. (Table 1).
One hundred and four patients (78%) had small bowel
injuries, and 62 patients (47%) had colon injuries. Most
patients had a primary repair or a resection and anastomosis
(Table 2). There was no significant difference
between the choice of treatment for small bowel injuries
and that for colon injuries (p = 0.318). Concerning the
patients themselves, 71 (53%) had only small bowel injuries,
29 (22%) had only colon injuries, and 33 (25%) had
injuries in both sites. There was no significant difference
in terms of preservation of bowel continuity between the
three groups (p = 0.333).
Seventy-five patients (56%) had a single resection (with
or without anastomosis) and/or repair, while 58 patients
(44%) had several resections and/or repairs. There was
no difference between these two groups in terms of
preservation of bowel continuity (p = 0.348), morbidity
(p = 0.401) or mortality (p = 0.445).
Mortality was 8% (n = 11), including 8 patients who
died before the third postoperative day (POD) from
uncontrollable bleeding due to severe disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). The remaining 3
patients died of septic shock.
On univariate analysis, the following factors had a
pejorative impact on mortality: blunt trauma (p = 0.036),
transfusion of at least 6 blood units (p = 0.001), ISS over
15 (p = 0.003), elevated NISS (p < 0.0001), lesion of the
mesentery (p = 0.003), lesion of abdominal solid viscus
(p = 0.032), and hemodynamic shock (p = 0.013).
Forty-three patients (32%) had abdominal complications.
Among them, 3 patients had suture or anastomosis
leakage, accounting for a fistula rate of 2.2%. Ten other
patients had intra-abdominal sepsis unrelated to the
management of their bowel injuries: 4 infected hematomas,
1 infected pancreatic necrosis, 1 rectal fistula, 1 collection
in an old drainage site, and 3 peritonites. These
complications and their management are detailed in
Table 3.
Concerning stoma creation, there were 15 ileostomies
and 9 colostomies. Median delay for stoma reversal was
69 days for ileostomies, and 164 days for colostomies.
Six patients had early ileostomy reversal, before POD 12.
Five were successful, one patient had emergent laparotomy
for anastomosis leakage and double-barrel ileostomy
was created anew. He had uneventful ileostomy reversal
2 months later.
All three patients with anastomosis or suture leakage
were initially admitted for small bowel injuries.
The first patient presented with bowel ischemia following
mesenteric disinsertion; he had small bowel resection
and ileoileal anastomosis. He suffered anastomosis
leakage and peritonitis on POD 8, and was treated by
emergent laparotomy and double-barrel ileostomy. He
died a few days later from septic shock due to perineal
gangrene.
The second patient had right colectomy and ileocolonic
anastomosis, and small bowel resection with ileoileal
anastomosis. On POD 1 he had emergent laparotomy
for abdominal compartment syndrome. The small bowel
anastomosis was ischemic; it was resected and made into
a double-barrel ileostomy. The patient recovered and had
ileostomy reversal six months later.
The last patient had four small bowel injuries and massive
fecal contamination. He had two primary repairs and
one resection and anastomosis, while the most proximal
injury was made into a diverting stoma. Despite this
precaution, he had emergent laparotomy on POD 14
for suture leakage; the segment of bowel with the failed
repairs was resected and a stoma was made. However, he
developed septic shock and died the following day.
Severe overall morbidity (grade 3 to 5 of the Clavier-
Dindo classification) was 32% (n = 43), mostly correlated
with intensive care complications (e.g., pulmonary and
catheter infections, deep vein thrombosis, and anticoagulation
accidents).
On multivariate analysis, risk factors for severe overall
morbidity were the creation of a stoma (p = 0.036),
heavy vascular expansion in the first 24 h (p = 0.005) and
a long delay before surgery (p = 0.023). Risk factors for
abdominal complications were heavy vascular expansion
(p = 0.024) and transfusion (p = 0.048) in the first 24 h.
Details of the univariate analyses are shown in Table 4.
Risk factors for the creation of a stoma were fecal contamination
and polytransfusion (p < 0.001).
Discussion
Bowel injuries are most common in abdominal trauma,
and most general surgeons will be confronted to the
problem of repairing these injuries [22]. Stoma creation
has become less and less popular when dealing with traumatic
bowel injuries. Stone and Fabian have compared
stoma creation and primary repair for colon injuries in
139 patients, in a pioneer randomized study in 1979 [6].
Their conclusion was that primary repair was at least as
safe as colostomy, in the absence of major risk factors
such as arterial hypotension, delayed operation, multiple
associated injuries, and destructive colon injuries requiring
resection. Their study was followed by four other trials,
all in favor of primary repair or anastomosis [7–10].
The notion of major risk factors, defining “high-risk
patients”, is found in many studies that were published
after Stone and Fabian’s. Even though most of these studies
proclaim the superiority of primary repair, several
authors recommend caution when high-risk patients
are concerned and do not reject colostomy creation out
of hand. Miller et al. used these major risk factors to
define an algorithm for the management of colon injuries
[13–15]. Following this algorithm, nondestructive
colon injuries should be treated with primary repair,
and destructive colon injuries should be treated with
resection with anastomosis, provided the patient has no
comorbidity and has received fewer than 6 RBC units.
If these conditions are not met, the patient should be
treated with fecal diversion. This algorithm was tested
for 15 years in the same center. Ultimately, Sharpe et al.
reported an 80.4% rate of primary repair or anastomosis,
with a 2.5% rate of postoperative fistulas [15].
In our data, the factors that most influenced the surgeon’s
decision were fecal contamination and the transfusion
of at least 6 RBC units in the first 24 h. Ultimately,
we had an 87% rate of primary repair or anastomosis for
small bowel injuries and an 81% rate for colon injuries. In
our experience, fistula rate was a low 2.2%, with no leakage
after colon injury repair.
In the management of bowel injuries, it is usually
understood that fecal diversion aims to protect
high-risk patients from postoperative complications.
However, in our study, a major risk factor for severe
morbidity was the creation of a stoma; this was
tested in a multivariate analysis against other factors
such as trauma severity, shock on admission and
polytransfusion. Sasaki et al. noted an increase in
septic complications in the colostomy group in 1995,
although some complications occurred at the time of
stoma reversal [10]. In our series, seven patients with
ileostomies had complications related to high output,
and six had early ileostomy reversal (before the 12th
POD), either to avoid these systemic complications or
to counter them. Four patients with colostomies had
wound infections.
As previously said, one of the most compelling reasons
for making a stoma was fecal contamination; yet
an increasing number of studies show that, contrary to
polytransfusion, fecal contamination is not a risk factor
for post-operative complications and should not be a
contraindication to primary repair [23].
From our results, we consider fecal diversion to be useless
in preventing severe complications. However, should
an ileostomy be created at the time of emergent laparotomy,
early stoma reversal may be considered to avoid
further morbidity—such as short bowel syndrome—in
stabilized patients [24, 25].
In 2019, the Eastern Association for the Surgery of
Trauma released new recommendations for the management
of colon injuries [26]. Unsurprisingly, following the
trend of recent years, it is recommended that resection
and anastomosis or primary repair be performed for lowrisk
patients, rather than colostomy. High-risk patients
were defined as patients presenting with a delay longer
than 12 h, hemodynamic shock, associated injuries, contamination,
transfusion of over 6 RBC units, or left-sided
colon injuries; for these patients, anastomosis or primary
repair is conditionally recommended. Colostomy may
still be used for selected patients.
Our findings are in accordance with these recommendations.
Moreover, we found that the treatment of colon
injuries should not be different from the treatment of
small bowel injuries and that the site of injury did not
influence either the method of repair or the postoperative
outcome. Undergoing researches might lead to the discovery
of performant sealants that, when applied on an
intestinal suture, may prevent anastomotic leakages [27];
thus, the use of stoma in dealing with abdominal trauma
might be further minimized.
Conclusion
Bowel continuity should be preserved as often as possible
when managing intestinal trauma, regardless of
the site of injury. Anastomoses and sutures are safe in
most cases, with a 2.2% fistula rate. Stoma creation is
an important factor for postoperative morbidity, which
should be weighed against the hypothetical risk of anastomosis
leakage.