Rapidly ageing populations means that many people
now die in advanced age, and the number of deaths in
advanced age is projected to increase substantially over
the coming decades in most countries [1]. Countries
where health costs are predominantly publicly funded
will experience greater costs to the tax base over the
next decades, however the extent of these costs is not
known.
Understanding the costs of health services in the last
year of life is important for several reasons. Firstly, there
is evidence that the inverse care law applies at the end
of life, meaning that people most in need of care often
miss out [2]. Crucially, this pattern of care is determined
in no small part by social determinants such as cultural
and ethnic affiliation, gender, and socioeconomic status
[2]. Therefore, understanding cost patterns is an important
factor in addressing established inequities in healthcare
[3–6]. Secondly, end of life healthcare costs are
dominated by costs incurred from inpatient hospitalisations
[7, 8]. However, there is debate as to the extent to
which this pattern of healthcare utilisation results in real
benefit to the patient [9], and if it reflects the end of life
aspirations of people of advanced age [10]. Finally, it is
essential that governments are prepared for the level of
investment required to support current patterns of end
of life healthcare utilisation.
Although a high level of healthcare utilisation is common
in the last year of life, this variation has not been
sufficiently described in New Zealand. In light of population
projections estimating a 88% increase in the number
of older Māori (the indigenous people of NZ, with older
people being defined as those aged 80+), and a 55% increase
in the number of older non-Māori in the next 10
years in NZ, as well an increase in the number of deaths
per year in NZ by 30% in the next 15 years [11, 12], this
paper aims to establish public hospital (acute) and longterm
aged residential care home costs in the 12 months
before death in Māori and non-Māori of advanced age
in NZ. It also aims to establish the primary correlates of
high costs in the last year of life.
Methods
Population and data sources
This paper draws on data from an existing longitudinal
study in New Zealand (LiLACS NZ), as well as data from
matching participants National Health Index (NHI)
numbers to the hospitalisation National Minimum Dataset
(NMDS) held by the Ministry of Health (MoH).
When LiLACS NZ was initiated in 2010, 937 older New
Zealanders were enrolled from a population-based
sample, including 421 Māori aged between 80 and 90,
and 516 non-Māori all aged 85 [13]. In this cohort,
the non-Māori group was overwhelmingly made up of
Europeans, with 89% being NZ European, and 10%
Other European [14]. All participants were followed
up and NHI matching enabled notification of deaths.
At the time of this study, 454 individuals in the cohort
had died, 213 of whom were Māori and 241
non-Māori.
Covariates on study participants were gathered in the
first wave of data collection, including gender, age, region,
district health board (regional funding body) of
residence (DHB, Bay of Plenty or Lakes), and living arrangement
(alone, with spouse only, or other).
Deprivation (10 deciles regrouped into 3 categories) was
based on the NZDep, an area level index ascertained by
geocoding participants addresses at the time of enrolment
[15]. Health conditions (asthma, cancer, cerebrovascular
accident, congestive heart failure, and diabetes)
were ascertained from a combination of self-report,
physical examination, hospital and primary care medical
record review, and blood analyses [16].
The NMDS contains admission data on acute public
hospital admissions and long-term aged residential care
admissions (henceforth termed care homes). Care homes
in New Zealand consist of both high-level dependency
(similar to nursing home care in the United Kingdom
and Australia and skilled nursing facility care in the
United States of America) and low-level dependency
(similar to residential homes in the UK, hostels in
Australia, and assisted living care in the USA). Based on
a standard financial assessment, high dependency care
home costs are fully subsidised in NZ, and low dependency
care home costs are part subsidised based on a
means test. In this paper, we report MoH (publicly)
funded costs as recorded in the NMDS. Care home costs
reported are those relating to high-level dependency (i.e.
hospital level aged residential care) only.
Acute public hospitalisation costs for each participant
were calculated based on the Weighted Inlier Equivalent
Separations (WIES) attached to each hospitalisation
event. These WIES are calculated based on length of stay
and diagnostic-related groups [17], with individual level
data available on request from the MoH. Costs are
assigned by multiplying the number of WIES by a standard
cost weight specific to a year, in this case 2016.
Yearly costs relating to admissions in care home facilities
were based on the total average annual cost of continuing
care in aged residential facilities in 2018 ($77,410)
[18], adjusted to 2016 NZ dollars by removing the inflation
observed in WIES costs between 2016 and 2018 [6,
17]. Individual care home costs were calculated by applying
the annualised costs pro rata to the days in care
from the MoH data.
Costs were reported in two categories, these being
acute public hospital costs and long-term care home
costs. As we are taking a health services costs approach
to our study, we do not report other private costs such
as those relating to primary care or out of pocket costs
for care homes.
Statistical analysis
Māori and non-Māori are reported separately to examine
potential inequities and because care practices differ
between cultural groups. Descriptive statistics illustrate
costs in the last year of life stratified by sociodemographic
and health variables (Table 1a and b). We tested
for differences between different levels of variables
within the same ethnic group. Table 2 highlights the distribution
of costs among all participants stratified by
ethnicity and gender. Similar analyses were carried out
examining the distribution in the ‘number of admissions’
and ‘length of stay’ variables. We categorised each of
these three variables into three groups each. Costs were
categorised into no cost, moderate cost (between $1 and
$50,000), and high cost ($50,000 and over). The number
of admissions variable was categorised into no admissions,
between 1 and 4 admissions, and 5 or more admissions,
and the length of stay variable was categorised
into no stay, between 1 and 39 days in hospital, and 40
or more days in hospital.
In order to compare costs in those who died in the last
12 months against those who did not die in the same
time period, participants were matched on birthdate and
costs were compared between those who died and those
still living. For example, if a participant died between
their 85th and 86th birthdays, their last year of life costs
were compared with the mean of all individuals who
were still alive between their 85th and 86th birthdays.
Age groups were grouped into 3-year age bands, and
analysis was only carried out in each band if both groups
had 10 or more participants. As individuals who did not
die often had costs spanning multiple years, weighted averages
were computed for this group. Comparisons between
those who died and those still alive are presented
as a ratio. Similar analysis was carried out for the number
of admissions and length of stay variables.
We used generalised linear regression models to explore
variables statistically significantly associated with
costs in the last year of life. Due to the skewed distribution
of the cost data it was found that using a log link
rather than identity link improved the model fit markedly,
meaning that log (costs) was the dependent variable
for regression analysis. Dummy variables were
created with non-Māori males as the comparison group,
and GLM regression models were built in stages; the 4
ethnic/gender combinations, the previous model plus all
variables except health conditions, and the previous
model plus health conditions. Analyses were conducted
using SAS 9.4 for Windows (© 2016 SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC, USA).
Results
The average total publicly funded hospital and longterm
care home costs in the 12 months prior to death
were $16,211 and $17,351 for Māori and non-Māori respectively
(Table 1a, difference not significant). These
costs are predominantly attributable to acute hospital
costs ($15,592 and $15,372 for Māori and non-Māori respectively,
Table 1b).
Within ethnic group comparisons show costs were
higher for non-Māori men than non-Māori women, and
costs were lower for non-Māori who lived alone. Costs
were higher for non-Māori who had cancer than non-
Māori who did not, and higher for Māori patients with
congestive heart failure (CHF) and diabetes than Māori
without these conditions (all p < 0.05, Table 1a). When
considering acute hospitalisations alone, the only differences
that remained were the following; for non-Māori,
those living alone had lower costs and those with cancer
had higher costs. For Māori, those with CHF had higher
costs (all p < 0.05, Table 1b).
The majority of participants had moderate public hospital
costs (up to $50,000) without care home costs (324,
71%), and 79 (17%) had no acute hospital or care home
costs. Only 33 (7%) had any long-term residential care
home costs reported in the NMDS (Table 2).
Twelve (9.5%) non-Māori men had high costs in their
last year of life (≥$50,000), whereas 7 (6.5%) Māori
women had high costs (Table 2), and 23 (18.3%) non-
Māori men spent 40 or more days in a public hospital or
care home in their last year of life, compared to 18
(15.7%) non-Māori women (see Supplementary Table 1,
Additional file 1). The small number of non-Māori men
with high costs and long lengths of stay may have
skewed the data, largely caused by the few non-Māori
men residing in care homes for long periods in their last
year of life. Nine non-Māori men spent 40 or more days
in care homes in their last year of life compared to 4
non-Māori women (Table 2). When considering public
hospital admissions alone, 8 (6.3%) non-Māori men and
6 (5.6%) Māori women had high costs in their last year
of life (see Supplementary Table 2, Additional file 1).
Costs in the last year of life were much higher in comparison
to costs for individuals who did not die in the
same time period (Table 3). The difference was larger
for non-Māori women in comparison to any other ethnic/
gender combination. The ratio of difference tended
to be smaller when considering acute hospitalisations
alone (see Supplementary Table 3, Additional file 1).
Similar results were observed for the number of admissions
and length of stay variables, with the ratio of difference
largest for non-Māori women and non-Māori men
respectively (see Supplementary Tables 4 and 5, Additional
file 1).
Regression analyses examining influences on costs in
the last year of life showed that there were no variables
statistically significantly associated with log (costs) and
no differences between the gender/ethnic groups in unadjusted
or adjusted models (see Supplementary Table 6,
Additional file 1). In terms of model calibration for the
regression models, including demographic variables
(DHB, rurality, deprivation, and living arrangement) or
both demographic variables and health conditions improved
the model fit. However, the Akaike Information
Criteria indicated that this was possibly at the expense
of overfitting (i.e. making the model unnecessarily complicated).
As such, the adjusted models are not such improvements
that they are preferable over our original
(uncorrected) model.
Discussion
The average last year of life healthcare expenditure of
older New Zealanders in this study was $16,816 NZD
per person, lower than a previous NZ study which examined
deaths in the last year of life at all ages ($21,100
NZD) [8]. International comparisons vary, with an Australian
study reporting an average last year of life cost of
$13,513 AUD for inpatient hospitalisations in people
aged 65 years and over [19], and a USA study reporting
an average of approximately $23,619 USD for inpatient
hospitalisations (including skilled nursing facility care) in
Medicare beneficiaries aged 65 years and over [20]. In
the USA study [20], 61% of the overall healthcare expenditure
for patients in their last year of life was related
to inpatient hospitalisations. Considering we report
hospital costs exclusively, the total costs would be even
greater.
While there was no overall disparity relating to ethnicity
or gender in the adjusted regression models, there
appears to be a small number of non-Māori who have
very long lengths of stay in their last year of life. These
results are largely in contrast to the international literature,
where ethnic minorities have a higher degree of
healthcare utilisation than whites in the last year of life
[21–23]. Internationally, racial and ethnic minorities
generally receive fewer medical interventions throughout
life, but this often seems to be reversed at life’s end. In
New Zealand, ethnic disparities in health care utilisation
and outcomes throughout life are well documented [4,
5]. Indeed, we show small numbers of non-Māori have
long lengths of stay at the end of life, although the difference
is largely explained by the differing use of care
homes. Furthermore, ongoing LiLACS analyses shows
that care home use for Māori in this group is half that of
non-Māori [24]. There is evidence to suggest that part of
this difference may be attributable to New Zealand’s history
of institutionalised racism and greater socioeconomic
deprivation for Māori [25, 26], although cultural
differences in end of life care, such as care for Māori at
home and the use of traditional, non-Western medicines
are likely to play a role as well [27–30]. Other LiLACS
NZ reports have shown that costs to the public health
system are ‘passed’ on to informal caregivers such as
family and friends more so for Māori than non-Māori
[27, 31], and as Hayman and others [32] note, while the
costs of informal care are difficult to quantify, the value
of such care can be substantial [33–35].
Participants who died cost 8.1 times more than those
living on in the same year, which is slightly lower than a
ratio of 8.7 found in the USA [20]. While a Danish study
[36] found that costs differed (at all ages) between men
(ratio of 13.3) and women (ratio of 9.4), we found a ratio
of 8.6 for non-Māori men and 8.8 for non-Māori
women. Although the ratio was lower for non-Māori
men, this can be explained by higher costs at any stage
of life relative to non-Māori women (i.e. NMM receive
more health care resources in their last year of life as
well as in years they do not die). Men are more likely
than women to make contact with medical specialists
and be admitted to hospital, and therefore receive more
resources than women on average [37]. Moreover, non-
Māori men were more likely than non-Māori women to
express a preference for medical intervention at the end
of life within this sample, consistent with evidence that
men receive more chemotherapy and ICU admissions
prior to death than women [38]. Medicare expenditure
on inpatient services in the United States is also greater
for men than women, which may be partly explained by
women being more reliant on “social supportive” services
than inpatient care [23]. In addition, earlier age at
death is associated with greater spending, and men die
younger than women on average [23].
We were unable to illustrate a strong trend toward
older decedents costing less than their younger counterparts.
Other literature has highlighted age disparities related
to choice, care patterns, and care rationing [8, 23,
39–41]. As a result, some studies have noted that the deceased
to surviving cost ratio often seems to diminish
over time [36]. It is possible that we did not observe the
same effect due to the advanced age group in our study.
Our regression model did not show any variables
which were statistically significantly associated with
costs. Although Hanchate and others [21] did not transform
their cost variable into log (costs), their regression
model included many variables which were statistically
significant (e.g. race, health conditions, and deprivation),
even when controlling for a number of similar covariates
to our study. We suggest that the differences found in
mean costs in Table 1 may be related to skew in the
data, and indeed, the ‘last year cost’ and ‘length of stay’
variables were both highly skewed (partly shown in
Table 2, see Supplementary Figures 1 and 2, Additional
file 1), especially in non-Māori men. Chan and others [8]
also found a small proportion of individuals with an unusually
high level of healthcare utilisation in their last
year of life to account for a significant proportion of the
total cost, and it is worthy to note that these outliers are
of importance in clinical practice [42].
This is the beginning of an exploration to ensure
equitable and appropriate end of life care is delivered in
NZ. Higher healthcare costs at the end of life may not
necessarily translate to improvements in health outcomes,
quality, access, or satisfaction with care [8, 43].
According to Chan and others [8], the use of high cost
interventions should be based on clinical factors, patient’s
expectations, and the cost utility of interventions.
In this paper, we considered publicly funded costs exclusively
and did not account for costs to patient’s families
or other parts of the health system. As different groups
may have different needs requiring different types of
care and support at a system level, it is important that a
holistic approach to patient and family healthcare is considered,
while simultaneously respecting ethnic and gender
specific care patterns. For example, LiLACS NZ
participants highlighted that “not being a burden to family”
is the most highly prioritised end of life preference
for both Māori and non-Māori [44]. Internationally,
some patient surveys suggest that around half of persons
with a serious chronic illness would prefer to die at
home rather than in hospital [45]. Other literature highlights
more preventative strategies, such as the need to
implement and evaluate interventions that are known to
reduce hospitalisations [7, 46]. Given the different cultural
approaches to end of life care, it is likely that a
mixture of these strategies will be needed in the NZ
context.
The primary strengths of our study are that we enrolled
a relatively large number of people of advanced
age using a population-based strategy, had an acceptable
response rate at the studies outset, and were able to access
most participant’s administrative health records.
This allowed us to calculate hospitalisation costs in the
last year of life and compare these with individuals still
living. Furthermore, the focus on advanced age and
equal explanatory power for Māori make this study
novel and of adequate size for conclusions to be drawn.
As this data is part of the wider LiLACS study, the results
here can be cross-checked in future against other
findings from the wider study and can contribute to a
much richer set of results than possible from purely administrative
data.
Conversely, the main limitation of our study is that we
explored publicly funded healthcare costs exclusively
and no other costs such as out of pocket care home
costs, primary care costs, or informal care. We expect
care home costs to be underestimated as we cannot be
certain that all public funds for care home admissions
are counted. As mentioned however, inpatient costs generally
dominate expenditure at the end of life, so it is
likely we captured the majority (or much more) of
healthcare expenditure among our study population.
Furthermore, it must be acknowledged that there is considerable
variability in hospitalisation cost data and that
results need to be interpreted with caution. While there
was a suggestion that non-Māori men had higher costs
and longer lengths of stay in their last year of life than
other groups, it is possible that our results were driven
by chance alone. The results from this study are suggestive
of underlying differences between groups that warrant
further investigation, such as using data from New
Zealand’s Integrated Data Infrastructure. A further analysis
of this administrative data would allow for a greater
sample size and stronger regional lens as care access,
utilisation, and underlying health structures may differ
across the country.
This study set out to investigate costs in the last year
of life in Māori and non-Māori of advanced age in NZ.
Acute hospitalisation and care home costs were 8.1
times greater for patients in their last 12 months of life
compared to those still living. There were ethnic and
gender disparities highlighted. This raises questions as to
whether money at the end of life is being spent appropriately,
and how it could potentially be more equitably
targeted to meet the diverse needs of older people and
their families.