In the recent decades, advances have been made in
medicine, technology, and public health and the knowledge
of people about health, nutrition, and education
has improved. As a result, life expectancy has increased
throughout the world and the world population has
moved towards getting old [1]. Elevated life expectancy
has in turn led to a diminished mortality rate, an augmented
lifetime, and problems concerning the quality of
life among elderly people [2]. One of the problems associated
with a longer lifetime is falling. Falling is among
the reasons for injury and death in elderly individuals, as
one out of every three people over 65 years old and one
out of every two individuals over 80 years old experience
falling during a year [3–5]. According to the literature,
falling among elderly people imposes heavy expenses
both directly (medical) and indirectly (non-medical) on
people and the society [6, 7]. Fracture, performance
limitations, traumatic injuries to the brain, disability,
extra expenses, and mortality are among the most important
sequels of falling [8].
Falling in elderly individuals is affected by diverse factors,
some of which can be balanced, while some cannot.
Fear of falling and impaired balance are known as the
adjustable risk factors of falling in old people [9]. Fear of
falling is one of the common problems in elderly people
and is more frequently observed in individuals with an
experience of falling, impaired balance, low social activities,
depression, and weak autonomy [10, 11]. Studies
have indicated that about half of elderly individuals have
experienced falling at least once [12, 13]. Fear of falling
results in limitations in physical activities, which might
be followed by falling. Consequently, the quality of life
decreases and a low-mobility lifestyle occurs [14]. In
addition to the fear of falling, impaired balance is one of
the most prevalent reasons for falling amongst elderly
people [15]. Disturbed balance results in the fear of falling
in elderly people, which can lead to impaired daily
activities and diminished quality of life [3, 5]. Disturbed
balance, which is another reason for falling in elderly
people [15], has been defined as the disability for maintaining
balance and alterations in body consistency at
the center [16].
There are various methods for maintaining or enhancing
balance and some of the common therapeutic techniques
include tango dance [17, 18], yoga [19, 20], tai
chi [21–23], and video games. Considering the tendency
of modern society towards computer and video games
played by smart computers [24–28], video games have
been recently noted as a substitute for the rehabilitation
of disabled people. Some of the benefits of using smart
computers for improving balance entail the possibility of
easy application at home, lower costs compared to other
therapeutic methods, and better acceptance of the intervention
by individuals due to being interesting [25].
Xbox Kinect is a smart computer that can simulate balance
exercises. This computer can recognize people’s
movements by a camera and infrared motion sensors
and helps people perform movements correctly in case
they are wrong. Moreover, this smart computer allows
people to move freely and have diverse positions [27].
The Xbox Kinect can be used for rehabilitation purposes
as well as for exercising (also termed “exergames”) [29].
Considering the elevated population of elderly people
in modern societies and the high prevalence of falling in
this group, exercises that can promote the physical performance
of these people and decrease the risk of falling
have been taken into consideration by health caretakers.
Therefore, it is highly important to evaluate low-risk
methods, which can partially improve the balance of
these individuals and finally enhance their quality of life
[30]. Some studies in this regard have demonstrated that
video exercises might improve physical performance and
balance [25, 31], eventually leading to a reduction in the
fear of falling [12, 15, 32]. For instance, Bieryla (2016)
conducted a pilot study on healthy elderly individuals
from living communities and an intervention group
trained with the Kinect for Xbox 360 for 3 weeks. The
results showed significant changes in Berg Balance Scale
(BBS) and Fullerton Advanced Balance (FAB) [31]. Another
systematic review also showed the positive effects
of Kinect systems on rehabilitation for elderly people
suffering from stroke and falling risk [33]. However,
most of these studies were pilot investigations with small
sample sizes and short intervention durations. Moreover,
studies conducted in Iran have assessed the effect of
video games on elderly people with stroke [34]. Elderly
people living in nursing homes, on the other hand, may
suffer from balance disorders and fear of falling for reasons
other than stroke. Therefore, studying the effect of
these methods among elderly people with various disorders
could provide a more appropriate conclusion about
this type of exercise for researchers. According to Neil
et al., there are significant differences in the physical
interaction and therapeutic emphasis of diverse games
[35].
Nurses have an important role in ensuring the safety
of their clients and face many challenges in this regard
[35]. Given that lack of balances and falls are threatening
factors for the safety of the elderly, it is necessary for
nurses to investigate the impact of various interventions
on reducing these threats. Considering the importance
of this issue and the lack of investigations in this regard,
the present study aims to evaluate the impact of Virtual
Reality (VR) exercises on balance and fear of falling
among the elderly people living in the nursing homes.
Methods
Study design and setting
This clinical trial with a pretest-posttest design was performed
in the nursing homes of Shiraz, Iran in 2019.
Participants
The participants of the current study were males and females
aged over 60 years living in nursing homes. First,
all interested elderly people were invited to participate
in the research. Afterwards, the interested individuals
were tested using the Timed Up and Go (TUG) test, and
60 people with TUG scores of 14–20 were selected [36]
based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The initial
TUG test scores of the participants were recorded for
comparison to post-intervention scores.
The inclusion criteria of the study entailed the ability
to walk with or without assisting tools and the permission
of the doctor at the nursing home. The exclusion
criteria included a history of acute and chronic physical
cognitive, and mental diseases that might hinder exercising,
participation in other exercises similar to the intervention,
having problems leading to problematic
exercises, unmodified hearing and seeing problems, and
balance disorders due to the problems of the vestibular
system and cerebellum diagnosed by a doctor.
Ethical consideration
The present study was approved by theEthics Committee
of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences (IR.SUMS.-
REC.1398.573). It was registered in Iranian Registry of
Clinical Trials (IRCT) with registration number of
IRCT20190727044347N1 on 2019-08-17. All necessary
permissions for conducting the research were obtained
from the relevant administrators and all methods were
performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines
and regulations. Furthermore, a session was held after
the selection of participants for explaining the study objectives
and procedures. Written informed consent
forms were also taken from all participants.
Sample size
According to the research by Park et al. (2017), using
the equation for the difference of BBS means (mean of
50 ± 6.27 for the intervention group and 44.7 ± 7.47 for
the control group), and considering type 1 error of 0.05
and power of 80%, the sample size was calculated as 27
for each group. Considering dropout, 30 participants
were allocated to each group, making a total sample size
of 60 [37].
Randomization
The participants were divided into an intervention group
(i.e., exercise by Xbox Kinect) and a control group (i.e.,
routine programs of the nursing homes) through random
allocation using double randomized permutation
block with foursome blocks. The random list was generated
by a statistician using the “Random Allocation”
software, and 15 blocks were selected for forming the
two study groups. The list was then provided to the
researchers, and one of them performed the
randomization accordingly.
Interventions
The participants were asked to fill out the demographic
questionnaire, Falling Efficacy Scale (FES), and TUG test.
It should be noted that the TUG test results were collected
at the stage of sample selection. Afterwards, the
balance of all participants was measured and recorded.
Next, the intervention group received simulated balance
exercises in the form of two 30–60-min sessions on a
weekly basis for 6 weeks. For simulated balance exercises,
Xbox Kinect was applied, which is a game console
simulating balance exercise in the game environment
and allows a person to move freely and have diverse positions.
This computer recognizes and executes the
movements of people via a camera and infrared motion
sensors. This smart computer contains a variety of
games. In this study, suitable games for improving the
balance of elderly people were selected in a meeting with
the professors of the Rehabilitation Department. The selected
games (Kinect Sports 1 and 2) included penalty,
goalkeeping, ski, and darts, and each session covered a
different aspect of enhancing balance. All selected exercises
required the application of upper and lower organs
while standing (Table 1).
In order to perform simulated exercises in each session,
first, the position of the individual was set at 1.5–2
m from the computer and the exercise was explained to
the person. Prior to the exercises, permission was taken
from the doctor of the nursing home. Exercises were
stopped in case of fatigue, pain, or dyspnea. During the
game, the participants were encouraged by the researcher.
It is worth mentioning that special mats were
used in order to prevent injury to the elderly people.
The exercises were continued for 30–60 min each session
and all participants in the intervention group played
all specified games for 6 weeks.
In the control group, the elderly individuals received
the routine programs of nursing homes, including
jogging in the nursing home, table tennis, and some artistic
activities, for 6 weeks. After 6 weeks of intervention,
balance, physical performance, and fear of falling were
assessed in the participants of both control and intervention
groups and were compared to the data recorded
previously.
Outcome measures and follow-up
Data collection tools in the present study included a
demographic questionnaire, FES, Berg Balance Scale
(BBS), and the TUG test. The demographic questionnaire
encompassed age, gender, previous employment
status, education level, marital status, duration of stay at
the nursing home (direct question from elderly people),
and a record of the number of fallings during the previous
year.
Fear of falling was evaluated using FES, which addressed
the rate of fear of falling during different daily
activities. The answers ranged from “I am worried a little”
[1] to “I am worried very much” [4]. Thus, the scores
of the survey could range from 16 to 64, with higher
scores showing a greater fear of falling. The validity and
reliability of the English and Persian versions of this tool
have been evaluated and confirmed in the previous
studies.
The participants’ balance was assessed utilizing BBS,
which is a clinical test for evaluating people’s static and
dynamic balance. This survey contained 14 items
responded based on a five-point Likert scale, in which
four indicated the best execution and zero demonstrated
the worst execution. The total score of the scale could
range from zero to 56 and was obtained by summing up
all 14 items. The psychometric characteristics of this instrument
were investigated and confirmed in the previous
studies in Iran [38].
The participants’ balance in walking was evaluated by
applying the TUG test that examined distinct aspects of
static and dynamic balance during daily activities. This
test included three stages of standing up, walking three
meters, turning around, and returning. The time of the
test, as the dependent variable, was measured by a timer.
When the participants announced that they were ready,
the timer was started and when they returned and their
backs touched the chair, the timer was stopped. The validity
and reliability of this tool have been assessed and
confirmed in various studies [39, 40].
Statistical analysis
The normality of the data was assessed using the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, and the results indicated that
all demographic data and other study variables had normal
distribution. Descriptive statistics were used for the
demographic data and the variables were reported as
mean, standard deviation, frequency, and percentage.
Independent t-test and chi-square test were applied for
comparing the two groups regarding the demographic
variables. Moreover, the pre- and post-intervention
scores were compared in the two groups via paired ttest.
To compare the difference between the scores of
the two groups, independent t-test and Analysis of Covariance
(ANCOVA) were utilized.
Results
A total of 150 elderly people were candidate for participating
in the current study, among whom 112
people expressed a tendency for participation. The
TUG test was conducted for these individuals, 65 of
whom had a test time of over 14 s and could be enrolled
into the study. Afterwards, these people were
evaluated in terms of other inclusion criteria and finally,
60 (16 females and 44 males) were selected and
divided into a control and an intervention group
through random allocation (Fig. 1). After 6 weeks of
intervention, balance, physical performance, and fear
of falling were assessed in the participants of both
control and intervention groups and were compared
to the data recorded previously.
The mean age of the participants was 70.83 ± 7.79
years and most of them were male (73.3%) and single
(45%). The demographic characteristics of the participants
have been presented in Table 2. Accordingly, no
significant difference was found between the two groups
in terms of age, gender, marital status, education level,
occupation, duration of stay at the nursing home, and
number of falls before the intervention (p > 0.05).
Comparison of the study variables, including pre- and
post-test balance, TUG test, and FES, has been summarized
in Table 3. Accordingly, the mean score of balance
significantly augmented in the intervention group post
intervention (p < 0.001), while this elevation was not observed
in the control group (p = 0.687). In addition, the
mean balance changes were significantly different between
the control and intervention groups (p < 0.001).
Considering the results showing that the two groups
were not similar in this regard before the intervention,
ANCOVA was used. The impact of the intervention on
balance in the intervention group was significant even
with the pre-test effect control (p < 0.001).
The study findings revealed that the mean of the postintervention
TUG test reduced by about 2.33 s in the
intervention group (p < 0.001), while the two groups
were not significantly different (p = 0.88). Considering
the difference between the two groups at the beginning,
ANCOVA was utilized. The influence of the intervention
on this factor was found to be significant with the pretest
effect control (p < 0.001).
The results indicated that the mean score of FES was
similar in the two groups prior to the intervention.
However, the mean score of this factor decreased significantly
following the exercises (p < 0.001), but did not
change in the control group (p = 0.217).
Discussion
According to the results of the present investigation,
simulated balance exercises could lead to the enhancement
of balance, TUG test, and FES among the elderly
people with impaired balance. The findings revealed that
virtual exercises resulted in the improvement of the
mean score of balance in the participants, as BBS was
enhanced. Other studies also showed that utilization of
Xbox smart computer could promote balance and reduce
the risk of falling in old people [24], video games
could improve motor function in patients with cerebral
infarction [37] and enhance dynamic balance in children
with ataxia [41]. A meta-analysis on elderly people indicated
that sport interventions could diminish the fear of
falling at a low to moderate level [15].
However, Ki-hun-cho et al. demonstrated that although
video exercises enhanced dynamic balance, no
significant impact was noted on the static balance of the
individuals under investigation [42]. Virtual games are
mentally and physically challenging for people and the
direction, rate, and speed of movements alter constantly
during the games. As a result, rapid mental processing
and body balance control along with fast changes are required
[43].
Most of the games used in the current study needed
the active movements of the hip joint, knees, ankles, and
different muscles. A higher rate of using these joints and
muscles along with more efforts of elderly people to
concentrate on games could enhance balance among the
participants. Moreover, receiving real-time and individual
feedbacks from the system based on balance status
resulted in the participants’ more focus on their balance
and further attempts to enhance their balance in future
games. It is worth mentioning that exercise might result
in diminished fallings and fear through improving
power, stepping, balance, and mood [12]. Furthermore,
receiving visual feedbacks in simulated exercises could
lead to the elevation of the participants’ awareness of
their balance control and enhancement of their selfefficacy
[44].
In the present study, the TUG test that consisted of
three stages and was another index of balance was over
14 s in both groups at the beginning, demonstrating balance
disorder in both groups. However, the TUG test
decreased significantly in the intervention group after
the intervention. These results were in line with those of
the research by Htut et al. [44] concerning the effect of
virtual exercises on the physical, cognitive, and functional
status of elderly people. These authors reported
that the TUG test was significantly reduced in the intervention
group compared to the control group. Moreover,
Park et al. [37] indicated that simulated exercises
by smart Xbox Kinect could improve the TUG test
among people with hemiplegia. Yang et al. [45] also
stated that VR exercises had impacts similar to those of
real exercises, and might enhance balance. They concluded
that virtual exercises could be a suitable substitute
for real training. However, Bieryla et al. [31] showed
that video games promoted balance among elderly
people based on BBS and Fullerton Advanced Balance
Scale, while TUG and functional tests did not change.
According to the results, virtual exercises might improve
walking performance and tolerance through increasing
people’s activity and engagement in games [37].
The current study results demonstrated that simulated
exercises significantly diminished the fear of falling
amongst elderly participants in addition to improving
their balance. The latter finding was consistent with that
of the study by Levy et al. and Singh et al. who showed
that virtual exercises enhanced the fear of falling among
elderly people [43, 46]. However, in the Kwok et al.
study, these exercises did not diminish the fear of falling
in elderly individuals in 12 weeks, but reduced the fear
after 24 weeks [47]. Nonetheless, Rodriguez et al.
assessed the influence of dance by Xbox Kinect on the
fear of falling in elderly people and revealed that dancing
with video games did not affect the fear of falling among
these people [48]. In justifying these inconsistent results,
Hornyak et al. believed that the fear of falling in old
people depended on their physical performance, and
older age resulted in increased fear of falling due to declined
physical performance [49].
Participating or memory of participating in challenging
activities, such as virtual sports, might promote balance
confidence and decrease the fear of falling [48]. No improvement
in the balance and fear of falling in the control
group in the present study highlighted the necessity
for elderly people to be physically active. The lack of
sports activities in these people might cause impaired
balance and augmented fear of falling, leading to a
higher rate of falling [30].
Overall, the results of the present study showed that
video exercises could improve elderly people’s balance
and fear of falling. The impact of video exercises, as an
interesting tool [14, 50], could provide a guide for the
treatment team for the enhancement of these variables.
As a result, the most is made of small spaces in institutes,
which do not have sufficient space for other exercises
or when elderly individuals are not interested in
other sports.
Strong points and limitations
The tendency of elderly individuals for participating in
the exercises in the current study was among the strong
points of the research. Moreover, the participants stated
that these exercises resulted in competition and happiness.
Nevertheless, a limitation for this investigation was
a disturbance in the sensor of the Xbox Kinect in some
situations, which caused the researcher to be mistaken
by a participant in some situations and made him keep
the distance to solve this problem. The difficulty of exercises
for some participants at the beginning was another
study limitation. Additionally, Kinect systems are not
suitable for patients with severe disabilities [29]. Considering
the fact that there were no severely disabled patients
in the present study, the effect of the VR on theses
patients’ outcomes could not be measured. One other
study limitation was the lack of traditional exercises,
such as Otago and tango dance, for comparison of their
efficiency to that of the exercises used in the research.
This might be taken into consideration in future studies.
Furthermore, some researchers have pointed out some
limitations of this type of intervention, including the
fixed location of the sensor with a range of capture of
roughly 10 meters, difficulty in fine movements capture,
and indirect fall-risk assessment [29]. Given that researchers
in most studies have focused on improving the
mobility of patients and advantages of this intervention,
it is necessary to consider more realistic and specific results.
Moreover, rehabilitation objectives, including fine
motor skills, cannot be evaluated by Kinect alone, and
these results should be accompanied by those of other
evaluation methods. Of course, games were not used as
a rehabilitation strategy in the present study. However, if
they are used for rehabilitation, other evaluation
methods, such as elderly people’s opinions, should be
used.
Conclusion
The findings of the present study demonstrated that
simulated balance exercises could lead to the enhancement
of balance, TUG test, and FES in elderly individuals
with balance disorder. Considering the efficacy of
virtual balance exercises in improving the balance of elderly
people and some positive features of such exercises,
they can be utilized in nursing homes. Some of these
positive points include easiness to use and lower costs
compared to some therapeutic methods. Nonetheless,
further investigations for evaluating diverse virtual exercises
and their impacts on different physical and psychological
aspects compared to traditional exercises are
warranted.