Dementia places a tremendous burden on society worldwide.
The total number of people with dementia in the
world was estimated to be 35.6 million in 2010, and this
number is projected to increase to 115.4 million in 2050
[1]. The total cost of dementia is also enormous, estimated
at US$ 604 billion in 2010 [1]. Under these
circumstances, the prevention of dementia and
dementia-related disorders is of high priority.
The role of sleep in cognitive function and dementia
has drawn attention, although evidence is still insufficient
[2]. According to recent reviews and metaanalyses,
sleep duration and sleep disturbance are determinants
of cognitive decline and dementia [3–7]. Moreover,
daytime napping is reportedly associated with
cognitive function in older adults [8–11]. However, findings
from previous studies have been somewhat inconsistent;
some reported possible adverse effects of
napping, especially long napping, on cognitive function
[9, 11], whereas others reported possible beneficial effects
of napping, especially short napping [8, 10]. Furthermore,
except for one longitudinal study [8], only
cross-sectional studies [9–11] have been conducted.
We previously conducted an epidemiologic study to
investigate associations between cognitive impairment
and lifestyle factors, including sleep characteristics and
daytime napping, in community-dwelling older adults
[12]. The present study aimed to clarify longitudinal associations
between cognitive decline and sleep characteristics,
in particular whether daytime napping is beneficial
or harmful for cognitive function, based on 5-year
follow-up data from participants of the study mentioned
above.
Methods
Design and participants
This study was a 5-year follow-up cohort study. Participants
of the baseline study were included in the study,
and those with cognitive impairment diagnosed by the
revised Hasegawa’s dementia scale (HDS-R) at baseline
were excluded. Participants at baseline were communitydwelling
older adults living in the following three areas
of Ojiya City, Niigata, which were set by the city government
as model areas: Heiseicho (an urban area), Matto
(a rural, farming area), and central Katakai (an urban
area) [12]. Among all 592 residents aged ≥65 years who
were not receiving long-term care insurance services and
who were invited to participate in the study, 535 (90.4%)
underwent the baseline examination. A high participation
rate (90.4%) was obtained due to efforts of public
health nurses in charge of each area. Of these 535 residents,
509 (95.1%) who were considered cognitively normal
were invited to participate in the present 5-year
follow-up study, and 371 (72.9%) underwent the followup
examination. We also included 18 individuals who
had normal cognitive function at baseline and did not
participate in the follow-up examination, but were diagnosed
with dementia at medical facilities during the
follow-up period, because these individuals met our
diagnostic criteria of cognitive decline described below.
The final study cohort thus comprised 389 individuals.
Figure 1 shows the flow of participant enrollment. Informed
consent was obtained from all participants who
underwent the follow-up examination. The consent was
verbal because, according to the Ethical Guidelines for
Medical and Health Research Involving Human Subjects
in Japan [13], investigators are not required to obtain informed
consent in writing for human studies which are
not invasive or do not involve interventions. The protocol
of this study was approved by the Ethics Committee
of Niigata University.
Baseline examination
The baseline examination was conducted in three areas
of Ojiya city in October–December 2011 for Heisei-cho
residents, August–November 2012 for Matto residents,
and July–September 2013 for Katakai residents. Trained
nurses visited and interviewed participants to collect the
following information: demographic characteristics,
health status (including cognitive function) and lifestyle,
family environment (living with family or alone), current
occupational status (unemployed/retired or employed),
and histories of hypertension, cerebrovascular disease,
and diabetes. The interviewer’s guide of this study is
shown in Additional Information 1. Cognitive function
was assessed using the HDS-R [14]. We also collected
information regarding alcohol consumption (classified
into five categories: 1) non-drinker, 2) < 7 gou (1 gou is
equivalent to 180 mL of Japanese sake), 3) 7–13 gou, 4)
14–20 gou, and 5) ≥21 gou per week) and smoking status
(classified into three categories: 1) non-smoker, 2) past
smoker, and 3) current smoker). Usual bedtime and
sleeping hours were asked and recorded, and the duration
of daytime napping was recorded as 1) none, 2) <
30 min, 3) 30–59 min, and 4) ≥60 min. We did not consider
the number of daytime naps because this information
was not obtained during the interviews. Participants
were also asked about current sleep disturbances and
the use of sleeping pills. Details of the baseline examination
have been described previously [12].
Five-year follow-up examination
The follow-up examination, including the HDS-R test,
was conducted 5 years after, and in the same manner as,
the baseline examination, i.e., in October–December
2016 for Heisei-cho residents, August–November 2017
for Matto residents, and July–August 2018 for Katakai
residents.
Assessment of cognitive function
The HDS-R, a 30-point test, was used to assess general
cognitive function, with a score ≤ 20 defined as cognitive
impairment at baseline. The HDS-R was developed to
screen for dementia (sensitivity: 0.90, specificity: 0.82)
with a cutoff of 20/21 [14]. The HDS-R has been used in
East Asian populations [15, 16] and demonstrated to
have a diagnostic accuracy similar to that of the MMSE
[17]. One advantage of using the HDS-R over the MMSE
is its diagnostic accuracy regardless of education level
[17]. The HDS-R was administered during baseline and
follow-up examinations, and change in HDS-R (ΔHDSR
= [score at follow-up] – [score at the baseline]) was
calculated. We used a cutoff of ΔHDS-R ≤ -3 to detect
the presence of cognitive decline, referring to the cutoff
of ΔMMSE ≤-3 (30-point test) used in previous studies
[18, 19], based on the fact that longitudinal scores of
HDS-R and MMSE change in the same direction in
community-dwelling individuals [20]. We also included
18 individuals who had normal cognitive function at
baseline and did not participate in the follow-up examination,
but were diagnosed with dementia at medical facilities,
as having cognitive decline.
Statistical methods
The χ2 test was used to test for independence of categorical
data for participant characteristics. Cumulative incidence
of cognitive decline was calculated and compared
according to levels of potential predictor variables by
odds ratios (ORs) computed using simple and multiple
logistic regression analyses. Dose-dependent associations
were assessed by simple and multiple logistic regression
analyses and reported as P for trend values. First, unadjusted
ORs for cognitive decline according to potential
predictors were calculated. Second, ORs were adjusted
for age and baseline HDS-R. Third, we calculated
multivariable-adjusted ORs (hereafter referred to as
“fully-adjusted ORs”) of bedtime, duration of sleep, and
duration of nap for cognitive decline using the forced
entry method to adjust for the confounding effects of all
potential predictor variables. For example, the OR for
duration of sleep was calculated and adjusted for age,
baseline HDS-R, sex, region (dummy variables), family
environment, job status, histories of hypertension, cerebrovascular
diseases, and diabetes, alcohol consumption,
smoking status, bedtime, duration of nap, presence of
sleep disturbance, and use of sleeping pills. Duration of
nap was transformed into a dummy variable (0, 1–29
min; 1, others) because the results suggest that a 1–29
min nap is associated with a decreased risk of cognitive
decline. Although a cutoff of ΔHDS-R ≤ -3 was used to
detect cognitive decline, we used cutoffs of ≤ − 4 and ≤ −
2 for the sensitivity analyses. Outliers exceeding 3SD
were not found among continuous variables. SAS statistical
software (release 9.1.3, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC,
USA) was used for data analysis. P < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Results
The mean age of participants was 74.6 years (SD 6.4).
Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics of participants
by sex. Significant sex-based differences were observed
in family environment, job status, and alcohol consumption.
Specifically, significantly higher proportions of
women lived alone, were unemployed, had lower alcohol
consumption, and had a later bedtime than men. Moreover,
women took significantly shorter naps than men,
and had a greater proportion of those who do not nap at
all.
The overall cumulative incidence of cognitive decline
was 106/389 (27.3%). Table 2 shows the cumulative incidence,
unadjusted ORs, and age- and baseline-HDS-Radjusted
ORs for cognitive decline according to levels of
predictor variables. Age was robustly associated with unadjusted
ORs for cognitive decline. The age- and
baseline-HDS-R-adjusted OR was significantly lower for
“1–29 (min)” daytime napping relative to no napping
(reference).
The fully-adjusted OR was significantly lower for “1–
29 (min)” daytime napping relative to no napping (OR =
0.47, 95%CI: 0.23–0.96) (Table 2, Fig. 2). Earlier bedtime
was dose-dependently associated with cognitive decline
(fully-adjusted P for trend = 0.0480) (Table 2). However,
the duration of nighttime sleep was not associated with
cognitive decline, sleep disturbance, or the use of sleeping
pills. Napping duration and nighttime sleep duration
were not significantly correlated with each other (Spearman’s
correlation coefficient r = 0.082, P = 0.1036).
Sensitivity analyses were conducted to confirm the significant
findings above. When a cutoff of ΔHDS-R ≤ -4
was used to detect cognitive decline, the fully-adjusted
OR for cognitive decline was significantly lower for “1–
29 (min)” daytime napping relative to no napping (fullyadjusted
OR = 0.39, 95%CI: 0.16–0.91; Additional Figure
1), and the fully-adjusted P for trend of bedtime was
0.1612. When a cutoff of ΔHDS-R ≤ -2 was used, the
fully-adjusted OR was marginally lower for “1–29 (min)”
daytime napping relative to no napping (fully-adjusted
OR = 0.58, 95%CI: 0.32–1.05; Additional Figure 2), and
earlier bedtime was associated with cognitive decline
(fully-adjusted P for trend = 0.0025), with a fullyadjusted
OR of 0.28 (95%CI: 0.11–0.71) for “11:00 p.m.-”
relative to “-8:59 p.m.” (reference).
Discussion
This study is the first to report a significant decrease in
cognitive decline in older adults who habitually take
short daytime naps (< 30 min). Cross-sectional studies
previously showed associations between daytime napping
and cognitive impairment. Cross et al. [9] reported
that longer napping is significantly correlated with increased
levels of cognitive deficits in 133 adults aged >
50 years. Similarly, Owusu et al. [11] showed that unintentional,
longer naps were correlated with poorer performance
on cognitive tests in 2549 communitydwelling
adults aged ≥65 years. While these studies suggested
the unfavorable effect of longer napping, shorter
napping reportedly had a favorable effect on cognitive
performance [21]. In a cross-sectional study in clinical
settings, Asada et al. [21] found that napping for up to
60 min, but not more than 60 min, was protective
against the development of Alzheimer’s disease. Lin
et al. [10] conducted a large-scale cross-sectional study
in 10,740 Chinese older adults (≥60 years) and found
that short nappers (< 30 min) had a significantly lower
prevalence of cognitive impairment as assessed by the
MMSE compared to no nappers and long nappers (≥30
min). Our findings are consistent with this report.
To date, only one longitudinal study of up to 10 years
has been conducted [8], which reported that the risk of
MMSE-assessed cognitive impairment was significantly
lower in those who habitually take naps, regardless of
duration, in a UK cohort (median age, 75 years). The discrepancy
between their findings and ours may be due to
the different definitions of cognitive impairment. The
present study used a decrease in HDS-R score of ≤ − 3
points to define cognitive impairment, whereas Keage
et al. [8] used newly diagnosed cognitive impairment according
to MMSE scores. It is also possible that factors
such as the difference in ethnicity might have played a
role.
A number of studies have reported on the physiologically
beneficial effects of napping on cognitive performance
in adults [22, 23]. One study even suggested that
napping leads to improved cognitive performance in
older adults [24]. However, the specific effects of short
naps are not fully understood. Short naps (< 30 min) reportedly
improved cognitive performance and alertness
and were associated with less sleep inertia [22, 24].
Moreover, an epidemiologic study found that short naps,
but not long naps, had a protective effect against cardiovascular
risk [23], suggesting that short naps have stressreleasing
effects. These findings suggest that short naps
might also be beneficial for cognitive function, since
cognitive decline and dementia are considered stressrelated
conditions/diseases [25, 26].
The underlying mechanism by which short napping
confers a beneficial effect is unclear. However, there is
growing evidence that brain β-amyloid is cleared during
sleep through the glymphatic system [27], and that low
sleep quality is associated with brain β-amyloid burden
in older adults [27]. Thus, short napping may be beneficial
against brain β-amyloid by improving sleep quality.
Short napping may also have a direct, favorable effect on
β-amyloid clearance, although this will need to be investigated
in future studies.
Recent meta-analyses have found an association between
longer sleep duration and increased risk of cognitive
decline [3, 4]. However, we did not find a significant
association between the duration of nighttime sleep and
the risk of cognitive decline, although longer sleep
groups (“8–8.9-h” and “≥9-h” groups) tended to have a
higher risk of cognitive decline (OR = 1.55, 95%CI: 0.74–
3.26, N = 67, and OR = 1.47, 95%CI: 0.50–4.35, N = 23;
respectively). The non-significant ORs may partly be due
to insufficient sample sizes of the longer sleep groups.
Nonetheless, our findings are consistent with the findings
of the meta-analyses mentioned above [3, 4].
In the present study, an earlier bedtime was associated
with a higher risk of cognitive decline (fully-adjusted P
for trend = 0.0480). While evidence is scarce, a large cohort
study [28] found no association between bedtime
and the risk of dementia, although that study only classified
bedtime as earlier or later than 11 PM. Older people
living with dementia reportedly go to bed early [29].
Thus, the effect of bedtime on cognition warrants further
examination.
Some baseline characteristics differed by sex, including
the duration of daytime nap, in our study population.
Moreover, a significantly greater proportion of women
took no daytime nap compared to men, suggesting that
this, as well as other female-specific characteristics (e.g.,
family environment, job status, alcohol consumption),
may account for the higher risk of dementia in women
relative to men.
The present study has several strengths. First, we used
a cohort design, which is preferable for detecting causal
associations. Second, this study had a high participation
rate at baseline (90.4%) and an acceptable follow-up rate
(72.9%). Finally, information regarding participant lifestyle
was obtained and confirmed through interviews
during home visits by experienced nurses.
This study also has some limitations. First, we obtained
sleep-related information through interviews by
trained nurses, but the information was based on selfreport.
Therefore, there is a possibility of misclassification
bias, which might have led to an underestimation of
associations between predictors and outcomes. Second,
we did not collect information on naptime, although the
timing of naps is an important factor related to cognitive
function [24]. We did not systematically obtain information
on the number of naps either. These two aspects, as
well as nap duration, could influence sleep quality at
night, which in turn could affect cognitive function. Finally,
we did not evaluate conditions which could affect
sleep, such as depression and sleep apnea.
Conclusion
Short daytime napping (< 30 min) reduces the risk of
cognitive decline over 5 years for community-dwelling
older adults. Further studies will be needed to determine
if short naps decrease the risk of clinically-diagnosed
dementia.