Inputs arising from various groups of peripheral receptors
play a role in vibrotactile sensibility. Four separate channels
have been proposed to mediate the sense of touch
from the glabrous skin of humans [1]. The ability to detect
high frequency (60–1000 Hz) vibration principally depends
on the P channel, associated with Pacinian corpuscles
(PC). However, by manipulating stimulus parameters
a second channel the NPI channel, may also be responsive
to vibrotactile stimuli in this range. The NPII channel, associated
with Meissner's corpuscles in glabrous skin and
hair follicle receptors in the hairy skin, and their rapidly
adapting (RA) afferents fibres, appear to best respond to
low frequency (2–100 Hz) vibration. The fourth channel,the NPIII channel responds best to frequencies in the
range of 0.4–100 Hz [1]. There are considerable differences
in the density of receptors and receptive field sizes
among the glabrous skin locations, the hands and the lips
being most densely populated [2,3] and having small receptive
fields [3,4]. Even within the hand there is a significant
increase in the density of receptors when moving
from the proximal part of the finger to the fingertip [2,5],
which accounts for the outstanding sensitivity of this region.
The receptor density is also associated with cortical
magnification, i.e. densely populated body regions having
larger cortical representation [6].
The hairy skin shows location specific variations in receptor
density and field size, presumably reflecting the functional
roles played by the afferent input from these skin
surfaces. The hairy skin of the forearm has a predominance
of slowly adapting afferent units, with rapidly
adapting units being only sparsely distributed [7]. The
skin of the face also has a predominance of slowly adapting
mechanoreceptive units, some fast adapting type I or
RA units with receptive field sizes similar to those seen in
the hand, and an absence of fast adapting type II or PC
units [3]. The hairy skin surfaces examined in this study
were chosen for their proximity on the somatosensory
homunculus to the area for the glabrous hand [8]. Alterations
to the somatosensory input to one area on the
homunculus are known to affect the sensitivity of surrounding
areas [9].
Deteriorating effects of advancing age have been demonstrated
for most sensory modalities [10,11]. Vibrotactile
sensibility has also been reported to show age related
changes [12–20]. Although initial studies (for review see
[14]) were implemented using rather crude stimulating
devices, some of the more recent methodologies allowed
quantitative evaluation of this sensory modality
[14,15,20,21]. However, most of these quantitative studies
also had limitations. They either tested a single location
or skin type [14–17] and/or used a single vibration
test frequency [16,17,19,20], which did not allow the assessment
of separate afferent channels involved in vibrotactile
signalling. In this study our aim was to investigate
the effects of aging on vibrotactile sensibility in various
body regions and, by using different frequencies, determine
the changes in vibration information processing signalled
through separate channels of afferent units.
Methods
Subjects
Testing was performed on 22 young adults (11 females
and 11 males; 17–27 years old, μ ± δ, 20.2 years ± 2.2) and
22 elderly adults (11 females and 11 males; 55–90 years
old, μ ± δ, 68.6 years ± 10.6). All subjects were in good
general health, without any history of upper limb nerve lesions,
peripheral vascular disease or diabetes mellitus.
Testing was carried out in a temperature-controlled room,
no measures were made of skin temperature. The study
was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of the
University of Sydney and conforms to the guidelines for
human experimentation of the National Health and Medical
Research Council of Australia.
Apparatus
Sinusoidal vibration was delivered perpendicular to the
skin surface at each test site via a 2 mm diameter perspex©
probe attached to the shaft of a mechanical vibrator
(GWV4). The vibrator was mounted on an isolated rigid
trunnion (Gearing and Watson, T4), in turn attached to a
series of adjustable levers allowing the vibrator to be positioned
at a range of heights and orientations. Sinusoidal
waveforms were generated by a computer equipped with
the Labview® application, passed to a linear power amplifier
(Gearing and Watson, PA30) and then delivered to the
mechanical vibrator. The use of the Labview® application
allowed instantaneous alterations in the frequency and
amplitude of the sinusoids. Although online measurements
of the dampening effect of applied loads on displacement
of the vibrator probe were not made, offline
measurements using a linear displacement transducer
(OD4, Schlumberger Industries) indicated that there was
no reduction in the peak-to-peak amplitude of the sinusoid
under loads equivalent to those experienced during
data collection. As the mechanical vibrator did not emit
any audible sound at the frequencies and amplitudes used
in this series of experiments auditory masking was not
required.
Experimental procedure
Subjects were tested at four sites bilaterally:
i) palmar surface of the distal one third of the distal pad
of the middle finger,
ii) anterior surface of the forearm, in the midcubital line,
at the junction of the proximal and middle one third of
the forearm,
iii) lateral aspect of the shoulder at the junction of the
proximal and distal halves of the deltoid muscle, and
iv) immediately inferior to the zygomatic bone on the
face.
Subjects were seated with the upper limb supported, foam
blocks were used to stabilise the upper limb and to hold
the forearm and hand in a supine position. At each site,
the apparatus was positioned so that the probe tip was
making contact with the skin surface. The tip projected 2
mm through a 6 mm diameter hole in a rigid perspex plate (300 mm2) suspended from the rigid trunnion. The
plate was positioned parallel to the skin surface and acted
as a guard to maintain a constant indentation of the probe
into the skin of the testing site and to limit the spread of
surface waves across the skin. The probe and the rigid surround
were separated by a gap of 2 mm on each side.
Two different frequencies of vibrotactile stimulation were
selected for preferential activation of separate afferent
classes, 30 Hz to preferentially activate rapidly adapting
(RA) units and 200 Hz to activate the Pacinian (PC) units.
At each site and at each frequency subjects were initially
allowed to experience an amplitude of vibration above
the threshold for detection. The amplitude of the test frequency
was then gradually decreased (descending mode)
and subjects were asked to indicate the point at which the
vibration could no longer be detected. The amplitude of
the sinusoidal waveform was then gradually increased
from a subthreshold level (ascending mode) and subjects
were asked to indicate the point at which vibration could
again be detected. Sinusoidal vibration amplitude in both
the ascending and descending modes was incremented
and decremented respectively, in steps of 0.17 μm for 200
Hz vibration and 1.05 μm for 30 Hz vibration. On average,
three step changes in amplitude were made during
each second. Threshold was determined by averaging the
results of six trials (three descending and three ascending).
This method of limits procedure has been shown to be as reliable
as, and more time efficient than the two-alternative
forced-choice procedure in a group of adult subjects aged
22 to 56 years [22]. Furthermore, in four elderly subjects
we studied the vibration detection thresholds for 30 Hz
and 200 Hz vibration on the tip of the index finger and on
the thenar eminence using both methods. A t-test comparison
revealed no significant differences in the detection
thresholds obtained using the method of limits and the
two-alternative forced-choice procedure (fingertip 30 Hz
p = 0.48, fingertip 200 Hz p = 0.70, thenar eminence 30
Hz p = 0.32, thenar eminence 200 Hz p = 0.28). As the
time course of the testing procedure was much shorter
with the method of limits, taking into account the
number of sites tested and the age of elderly subjects, this
method was considered to be more suitable for the study.
Statistical Analysis
For each group of subjects, group means and standard errors
were calculated for the detection threshold of each
test frequency at each site. To analyse the effects of aging
on vibrotactile sensibility, a three way ANOVA with repeated
measures on two variables, formatted as A × B × C
with repeated measures on variables B and C, was used to
analyse all the data. Variable A was defined as age, firstly
young vs. elderly, and then as old (55–64 years, n = 9) vs.
older (65–74 years, n = 6) vs. oldest (over 75 years, n = 7),
variable B was defined as frequency (30 Hz vs. 200 Hz)
and variable C was defined as test site.
Results
In the substantial majority of subjects tested, the detection
thresholds for both low and high frequency vibration
were lowest in the glabrous skin of the fingertip, an observation
that reflects the high innervation density at this site
[2]. At 30 Hz vibration, the fingertip was the most sensitive
site for detection in forty-one subjects, while in the remaining
three subjects (all within the young group) the
cheek was the most sensitive site. At 200 Hz vibration the
fingertip was the most sensitive site for detection in forty
subjects. In the remaining subjects, the cheek was the
most sensitive site in three (2 young, 1 elderly) and the
shoulder in one young subject. The least sensitive site for
vibration detection was the shoulder in twenty subjects,
the forearm in seventeen subjects, and the cheek in seven
subjects. At the group level, the threshold of vibration detection
at the fingertip at both 30 and 200 Hz was significantly
(p < 0.001) lower than detection threshold at each
of the other sites. Pooled results for all subjects at each site
are shown in Table 1. In the glabrous skin, i.e. fingertips, the detection thresholds
for high frequency vibration were lower than those
for low frequency vibration in all subjects. These results
conform with previous observations on frequency tuning
curves obtained from both psychophysical human and
electrophysiological animal studies (for review see [23]).
The hairy skin locations also showed similar frequency
sensitivities, i.e. a greater sensitivity to high frequency vibration,
however as expected the detection thresholds
were significantly higher than the glabrous skin. Figure 1
shows the results obtained from an individual subject at
both frequencies for all sites tested. The threshold levels
shown at various sites are representative of the results obtained
from the majority of subjects.
Although in general, the vibration detection thresholds at
the fingertip and at the forearm were lower in the descending
mode compared to the ascending mode, these differences
were not statistically significant. At the shoulder and
at the cheek, the vibration detection thresholds were lower
in the ascending mode compared to the descending
mode, but again these differences were not statistically significant.
Accordingly, data obtained from the ascending
and the descending modes were combined for further
analysis.
Effect of age on vibration detection thresholds
ANOVA revealed statistically significant main effects for
age (F 1,42 = 15.57, p < 0.001), for site (F 1,42 = 31.33, p <
0.001) and for frequency (F 1,42 = 39.04, p < 0.001). Follow
up t-tests within the elderly group revealed significantly elevated thresholds for the detection of vibration
at both frequencies and at all sites, except the fingertip
(p < 0.01). When data obtained from young and
elderly subjects were further analysed, those differences
that were significant appeared to be the result of deterioration
in detection thresholds at all sites, except the fingertip,
with aging. The differences in sensitivity between
elderly fingertips and other sites were significantly greater,
(F 1,42 = 15.65, p < 0.001), than the differences between
young fingertips and other sites. Furthermore, it appeared
that this discrepancy was further affected by frequency (F
1,42 = 12.47, p < 0.01), with greater deterioration of
thresholds for 30 Hz vibration at all sites, except the
cheek. Figure 2 shows the comparison of vibration detection
thresholds between young and elderly subjects at
each site. For all sites, apart from the fingertips, the elderly
group showed higher detection thresholds at both frequencies.
It should be noted that at 30 Hz vibration there
was considerable variability within the elderly group. For
this frequency at the fingertip, although the elderly group
had higher detection threshold values overall, the statistical
analysis did not reveal any significant differences between
the two groups.
Analysis of data from the elderly group
Figure 3 shows the group means and standard errors for
vibration detection thresholds at each site for the three
subgroups of elderly subjects. Analysis of these data revealed
the same main effects for frequency (F1,19 = 38.30,
p < 0.001) and for site (F1,19 = 34.92, p < 0.001) within
the elderly group, as that revealed by the analysis of data
from young versus elderly groups. A main effect for age (F
1,19 = 7.53, p < 0.02) was seen, with thresholds for vibration
detection in two of the elderly groups (older, aged 65–
74 and oldest, aged 75–90) being significantly (p < 0.04)
elevated when compared to the thresholds in the remaining
group (old, aged under 65), for both frequencies and
at all sites, except the fingertip. At the fingertip, although
overall there was an increase in the detection threshold
values with increasing age, there were no statistically significant
differences between those aged under 65 and
those in the older (aged 65–74) and oldest (aged 75–90)
groups (p = 0.06 - 0.24).
When the fingertips of the older (aged 65–74) group were
compared to those of the oldest (aged 75–90) group, there
were no significant differences for the 200 Hz vibration
detection threshold (p = 0.32), but at 30 Hz the fingertip
detection thresholds of the oldest group were significantly
(p = 0.02) higher than those of the older group. At the remaining
sites (forearm, shoulder and cheek) there was
greater deterioration for the detection of 30 Hz vibration
compared to detection of 200 Hz with progressive aging.
This effect was more pronounced at the shoulder and at
the cheek, than at the forearm.
Discussion
Comparison to previous work
The overall results of this study are in agreement with previous
work, the hairy skin locations demonstrate higher
detection thresholds for both 30 Hz and 200 Hz vibration
[24], the hairy skin of the cheek showing almost none of
the U-function described by Verrillo and further demonstrated
by Barlow [25].
Direct comparisons of absolute thresholds reported here
and those reported by others are difficult for two reasons.
Firstly, the contactor size (0.04 mm2) used in the current
study is smaller than that reported by most other groups.
The detection threshold for high frequency vibrations is
known to be affected by contactor size. Spatial summation
in the Pacinian system in the presence of a large contactor
leads to lowered detection thresholds [21].
However, detection thresholds for low frequency vibrations
appear to be somewhat independent of contactor
size, even for very large contactors [14,21,26]. Secondly,
the gap between the contactor and the rigid surround used
here was larger than most other studies (2 mm vs 1 mm).
A larger gap has been shown to elevate detection
threshold for low frequency vibrations due the enhanced
sensitivity of this class of receptors to the presence of an
edge in their receptive field [27]. The relatively small contactor
and larger contactor-rigid surround gap used here
may account for the generally higher detection thresholds
seen in this study in comparison to others.
For the glabrous skin of the fingertip of young subjects,
detection thresholds for 30 Hz vibration reported here are
comparable to those reported by Mountcastle et al, 1972
[28], Ferrington et al, 1977 [29], Barlow, 1987 [25] and
Horch et al, 1992 [18]. While each of these groups used
different contactor sizes to the present study, the critical
similarity appears to be the size of the contactor-surround
gap. Both the current work and the Ferrington group used
relatively large gaps, while the Mountcastle and Horch
groups used no surround. The thresholds reported by other
groups [26,21,30,31] using similar or larger contactor
sizes and a smaller contactor-rigid surround gap are considerable
lower. Detection thresholds for 200 Hz vibration
at the fingertip are comparable to the work of
Gescheider et al, 1994 [26] using a smaller contactor and
a similar gap. However, most other studies
[21,24,28,30,31] used larger contactor sizes, known to
significantly improve detection for high frequency vibration
[21].
For the hairy skin locations, the detection thresholds for
30 Hz vibration are higher than those previously reported
for the forearm [24,32], but considerably lower than those
reported for the cheek [25]. Each of these groups used
larger contactors and smaller contactor-surround gaps than the present study. For 200 Hz vibration the thresholds
reported here are comparable to previous reports for
the forearm [24,32] and considerably lower than those for
the cheek [25]. There are no previous reports of vibrotactile
detection thresholds for the hairy skin of the shoulder
region.
Comparison of detection thresholds between young and
elderly subjects
The overall results of this study are in agreement with previous
studies [13–21], that aging has a significant
deteriorating effect on vibration sensibility, and that greater
deterioration is observed on the proximal sites tested.
However, a number of previous studies reported that only
a small percentage (5%–24%) of subjects showed deterioration
in vibration sensibility with advancing age [33–
35]. Even though these impairments were particularly
prominent beyond the eighth decade of life, the vibrotactile
sensibility appeared to be normal on the upper extremities
compared to the lower extremities [35]. Our
results also appear to be in agreement with these studies,
as we were unable to demonstrate a deterioration of vibrotactile
detection at the fingertips in elderly subjects. The
reasons for the differential effect of aging on detection
threshold at various body regions are not clear. Several hypotheses
have been put forward to account for the mechanism
of aging related deterioration in
mechanoreception. These include, changes in the mechanical
properties of the skin, decrease in density and alterations
in the morphology of mechanoreceptors,
decline in the number of spinal root afferent fibres, changes
and irregularities in internodal distances as a result of
demyelination and remyelination that may influence the
input transmission synchrony, and diminished circulation
and ischaemia at the peripheral and spinal cord levels
(for review see [15]). Some or all of these factors may be
responsible for the age related changes observed in vibrotactile
sensibility at various body regions.
Similar methodology to that described here has been used
by other groups to measure the detection thresholds of the
glabrous skin of young and older subjects. Both Goble
[21] and Gescheider's [26] groups found a deterioration
of detection thresholds at the fingertip for both high and
low frequency vibrations in older subjects, with greater
deterioration of thresholds for high frequency vibrations.
Increasing the size of the contactor caused small improvements
in the ability to detect low frequency vibrations,
but made an insignificant difference to the thresholds for
high frequency vibrations. Verrillo [14] found a deterioration
of detection thresholds at the thenar eminence for
high frequency vibration, but no change in low frequency
detection thresholds, with aging. Similarly, Gescheider et
al, 1994 [26] demonstrated age related changes in detection
thresholds for high frequency vibrations at the thenar
eminence (low frequency thresholds were not reported in
this paper). Each of these latter studies used a very large
contactor. However, in the present study we were unable
to demonstrate a deterioration in detection thresholds for
high and low frequency vibrations at the fingertip. There
is a 3–6 fold increase in the RA and PC type mechanoreceptive
unit density between the palm of the hand and the
fingertip [2]. Furthermore, a recent study on the distribution
of Pacinian corpuscles in the hand of human cadavers
reported that while 44–60% of corpuscles of the hand
are found in the fingers, only 8–18% are located in the thenar
and hypothenar regions [5]. Therefore, the different
results reported for vibrotactile sensibility in the upper extremities
may be related to the variability in receptor density
within this body part. If aging affects a proportion of
afferent units and their associated receptors in a given area,
it is likely that the densely populated regions, such as
the fingertips, may retain their sensitivity compared to less
densely populated areas, such as the thenar eminence.
Vibration detection threshold differences amongst elderly
subjects
Our analysis of data obtained from elderly subjects indicates
a more significant deterioration of detection thresholds
in the older (age 65–74) and oldest (age >75) groups
compared to the old (age <65) group at all sites tested, except
the fingertip. Therefore, it appears that on proximal
body sites there is a progressive decline in the sensitivity
to vibration with increasing age. Such progressive changes
with aging have previously been reported [14]. Verrillo
[14] described a more prominent decrease in sensitivity to
high frequency vibration but not to low frequencies,
measured on the thenar eminence, in a group with a mean
age of 65 years. Possible mechanisms for this deterioration
include reduction in the number of Pacinian
corpuscles, and more favourably, structural changes in the
corpuscle morphology [14]. Either of these hypotheses
would be particularly relevant for body regions less densely
populated with receptors. In our results, measurement
of both high and low frequency vibration detection
thresholds on proximal body sites also indicated a progressive
deterioration with aging. However, at the fingertip,
particularly at 200 Hz, no significant difference could
be established between values obtained from the three
elderly groups. This conflicting outcome is likely to be due
to the different hand regions tested in the present and in
Verrillo's studies [14]. It is most likely that gradual
changes in receptor density and/or structure throughout
aging would result in progressive deterioration in vibrotactile
sensibility, more profoundly so in proximal regions
where receptor densities are lower.
In addition to these possible peripheral mechanisms, such
as the afferent unit density, central mechanisms may also
play a role for vibration detection sensibility to be restudies indicating that the adult central nervous system is
capable of undergoing plastic changes (for review see
[36]). Alteration of inputs to the central nervous system
may occur not only as a result of peripheral or central lesions,
but also following increased stimulation of a particular
body region. Evidence also appears to suggest that
active forms of peripheral stimulation involving attention
are most effective in inducing changes in the central representation.
It has been shown that when monkeys perform
a vibration frequency discrimination task with a
particular finger, the cortical representation for the trained
finger increases compared with control fingers [36,37].
Mapping of the cortical representation of the trained skin
location revealed a significantly greater (1.5–3 times) area
of representation compared to equivalent skin locations
on control fingers of the same or opposite hemisphere,
and on fingers of passively stimulated control monkeys
[37]. Evidence from human studies also suggests similar
consequences. For example, results from a neurophysiological
imaging study indicate that the sensorimotor cortical
representation of the left hand of string players is
greater than the right hand representation and the representations
in non-violin playing control subjects [38]. In
another study, it has been reported that the cortical
representation of the fingertip in Braille readers is larger
than the representation of the fingertip of sighted control
subjects [39].
The functional implications of a larger cortical representation
can be assessed by means of psychophysical methods.
The preliminary results of a study from our
laboratory suggest lower thresholds for vibration detection
in the string playing fingers of adult violinists. Previously,
Stevens, Foulke & Patterson [40] assessed the tactile
acuity in blind and age-matched sighted subjects, and reported
that blind subjects showed better performance at
the fingertips than sighted subjects. Although this study
further suggested that the acuity at the fingertip declined
in both blind and sighted subjects as a function of age, it
should be noted that the tests applied in this study were
based on discriminatory aspects of tactile sensation rather
than vibrotactile detection measurements. It may well be
the case that the afferent channels conveying different aspects
of mechanoreception are differentially affected during
aging. It is therefore possible that, as the most
frequently and attentively used body part, especially for
texture discrimination, grasp and slip detection, the cortical
representations of fingertips may be functionally retained
throughout life. Such central changes may occur
through various mechanisms, such as expansion of representations
or synaptic strengthening of neural
connections.
Conclusions
In summary, the results of this study confirm the changes
in vibration detection sensibility throughout aging. However,
there appears to be no significant deterioration of
this function at the fingertips. The preservation of detection
thresholds at the fingertips reflects the functional importance
of the skin of the fingertip throughout life in
exploration and manipulation of the environment, and is
consistent with central mechanisms of plasticity likely to
result from such use. The exact mechanisms of this process
are not clear at present, but may be established in the near
future with more advanced techniques, such as magnetic
resonance imaging, that can detect central representational
changes.

