Introduction
The lumbar hernia, is defined as the protrusion of an
organ (either intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal) or extraperitoneal
contents through a defect in the posterolateral
abdominal wall [1], which was first proposed in 1672 by
Barbette and the first true case was published by deGarangeor
in 1731 [2, 3]. The lumbar region is surgically
defined as space between the twelfth rib superiorly, the
iliac crest inferiorly, the erector spinae medially, and
the external oblique laterally; anatomically, lumbar hernias
can be categorised as superior (Grynfeltt-Lesshaft
triangle) and inferior (Petit triangle) lumbar hernia [4].
Because the clinical manifestations are often vague or
asymptomatic, the diagnosis of lumbar hernia is difficult
and is usually not suspected initially. Low suspicion
may lead to delayed diagnosis or misdiagnosis of other
soft tissue lesions, such as subcutaneous lipoma, retroperitoneal
tumor, abscesses, fibromas or perirenal abscess
[5, 6]. Normally, surgical treatment of lumbar hernias is
essential because of risks of incarceration, strangulation
and perforation [7–9]. However, surgical repair can be
often difficult considering the location of the hernia and
the surrounding bony structures [1, 10].
Previously, with only a few hundred of patients
reported, lumbar hernias are extremely rare [9, 11]. In
view of the sparsity of lumbar hernia, a hernia surgeon
may only come across one case throughout their career
[11]. Up to now, there is little information about the clinical
features, surgical treatment and postoperative followup
of lumbar hernia. There is still ongoing discussion
regarding which is the optimal surgical technique to be
employed for lumbar hernias [9]. Therefore, we investigated
the clinical features, treatments, and long-term
follow-up outcomes of lumbar hernias based on data
obtained from 28 consecutive patients at our institution
in the present study.
Materials and methods
Patients selection
All patients diagnosed with lumbar hernia from our
institution between April 2011 and August 2020 were
retrospectively recruited in this study. Patients with
incomplete medical records or without operation were
excluded. Abdominal computed tomography and/or
ultrasonography were routinely performed preoperatively
for each patient. All data were obtained from the
electronic medical chart, including patient’s age, sex, side
of hernia, previous history of lumbar surgery or trauma,
anesthesia methods, body mass index (BMI), surgeryrelated
information, total hospitalization expenses
and co-morbitity, etc. Written informed consent were
obtained from each patient in this cohort. This study
was approved by the Institutional Review Board of West
China Hospital and was carried out in accordance with
the declaration of Helsinki.
Anaesthetic and surgical procedure
General or local infiltration anesthesia was used for tension-
free lumbar hernia mesh repair in this study. No
sedation or analgesia was preoperatively used as premedication
for those who under local infiltration anaesthesia.
The local anesthetics solutions were comprised of 20 ml
of 2% lidocaine, 10 ml of 1% ropivacaine and 2 ml of
0.1% epinephrine, and adding normal saline to the total
amount of 160 ml. Finally, the concentration of lidocaine
and ropivacaine was 0.25% and 0.06% respectively. Stepwise
infiltration anaesthesia was performed using a 10-ml
syringe and a 22-gauge needle. In general, 40–50 ml were
injected for unilateral lumbar hernia. Additionally, the
patients who under general anesthesia were given the following
drugs: inhalation anesthetics, propofol, sufentanil,
atracurium, penehyclidine, midazolam, analgesics and
antiemetics.
After anesthesia, a transverse incision in the flank
directly over the hernia was made for most patients
according to the location and size of hernia sac. Stepwise
subcutaneous dissection and blunt dissociation of
muscles (some overlying stretched muscle fibers were
resected if necessary to expose the defect) were used to
expose the hernia sac. And then, the hernia sac was dissected
from its surroundings and reduced. A pre-peritoneal
plane was created with blunt swab dissection.
In the present study, mesh repairs were made using the
ULTRAPRO™ PLUG (UPP, Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany),
ULTRAPRO™ Hernia System (UHS, Ethicon,
Norderstedt, Germany), and PROCEED™ Surgical Mesh
(PROCEED, Ethicon, Somerville, USA) according to the
size and location of abdominal wall defect. After reducing
the sac (especially for those with small hernia defect),
the anchor of the UPP was then placed through the
defect into the preperitoneal space without any suturing,
as it would unfold automatically due to its elasticity. The
rim was then sutured onto the margins of the defect with
3–0 absorbable suture (Fig. 1). For the relatively large
hernia ring, after the hernia sac was fully reduced and
the preperitoneal space was separated, the bottom mesh
of UHS device was inserted through the defect; during
the placement of mesh, it is essential to ensure that the
bottom mesh was extended 2–3 cm or more from the
defect edge, and the upper mesh was then sutured with
the defect surface. Additionally, some patients with large
abdominal wall defect, transabdominal surgical approach
was performed and the PROCEED mesh was used. If
hernia sac was huge, it was excised intraoperatively. The
mesh with the appropriate size would be placed according
to the defect of the abdominal wall (mesh edge
beyond defect range at least 5 cm), and the mesh was
flattened and fixed properly. And then, the wound was
closed. The drainage tube was not placed routinely unless
the wound was large.
Follow‑up and statistical analysis
All patients were followed up by telephone calls and
outpatient clinic visits, and the last follow-up time was
September 2020. Calculations statistical analysis was
performed with the Statistical Package for the Social Science
(SPSS) version 21.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc, Chicago,
IL, USA). Continuous variables were expressed as
mean ± standard deviation or median (range). Measurement
data was analyzed by variance analysis. Categorical
were described as frequencies and percentage, and
compared with Chi-square or Fisher’s exact test. All p
values were two-sided, with p < 0.05 indicated statistically
significant.
Results
Patient and clinical characteristics
Until August 2020, a consecutive series of 28 patients
with lumbar hernia in our institution were retrospectively
collected, including 13 males (46.4%) and 15 females
(53.6%), with the male-to-female ration of 0.87 (Table 1).
The ages of the patients ranged from 5 to 79 years
(median 55 years), with a mean age of 55.6 ± 14.9 years.
Almost all patients presented with a history of a painless
mass in the lumbar region. A total of 7 cases had a
previous history of lumbar trauma (one case) or surgery.
Only 1 5-year-old patient had congenital lumbar hernia
(unilateral), while the remaining patients (27 cases) had
acquired lumbar hernia; of the 27 patients, 20 (71.4%)
cases were primary, while a total of 7 (25.0) patients
were secondary. There were 11 (39.3%), 15 (53.6%) and 2
(7.1%) cases had right, left and bilateral lumbar hernia for
the entire cohort, respectively. In other words, there were
30 lumbar hernias in this study. Superior and inferior
lumbar hernia were found in 25 (89.3%) and 3 (10.7%)
patients; the four hernia sacs of 2 patients who diagnosed
with bilateral lumbar hernia were all protruded through
the superior lumbar triangles. Moreover, two abdominal
wall defects were intraoperatively observed in 1 patient
with unilateral lumbar hernia. Protrusion of intraperitoneal
content (colon) was observed in 2 cases, but no
incarceration or strangulation was found (Fig. 2). Incarceration
was found in 13% (4/30) of lumbar hernias, but
no strangulation occurred for the entire cohort. Moreover,
a total of 2 patients were complicated with inguinal
hernia, one of which had bilateral inguinal hernia. There
were 16 and 12 patients underwent general and local
anesthesia, respectively.
Surgical outcomes
All patients underwent classical open repair. General
anesthesia was applied in 16 cases (group A), whereas
12 patients received local anesthesia (group B). A total
of 27 patients underwent mesh repair, and primary closure
was performed in one case with congenital lumbar
hernia. Totally, 25 cases underwent extraperitoneal
repair. No patient in the group B required conversion to
general or spinal anaesthesia. There were no significant
between-group differences in sex, age, BMI, and side of
lumbar hernia (p > 0.05). Though a trend for smaller size
of abdominal wall defect and shorter operation time were
observed in the group B when compared with group A,
the differences were not significant (p > 0.05). No postoperative
bleeding and infection occurred. Of note, patients
in the group B had a shorter hospital stay than that of
group A (3.5 ± 1.3 days vs. 7.1 ± 3.2 days, p = 0.001), as
well as total hospitalization expenses between the two
groups (2988.6 ± 1268.8 $ vs. 1299.0 ± 229.3 $, p < 0.001).
With a median follow-up duration of 45.9 months (range
1–113 months), only 1 (3.3%) lumbar hernias recurred
for the entire cohort. In addition, there was no significant
difference with respect to chronic wound pain and foreign
body sensation between the two groups during the
follow-up period (Table 2).
Discussion
Lumbar hernias can be classified based on location and
etiology [1]. According to the anatomical location of the
defect, lumbar hernias were divided into Grynfeltt hernia
(the superior triangle) and Petit hernia (the inferior triangle).
However, blunt abdominal trauma may also create
lumbar hernia, which was classified as the “diffuse”
type and was not be confined to these two triangles [12,
13]. The superior lumbar triangle is an inverted triangle
whose base is formed by the 12th rib and the serratus
posterior inferior muscle, while the inferior lumbar triangle
is an upright triangle whose base is formed by the
iliac crests. The most common site for the occurrence
of lumbar hernias is in the superior lumbar triangle [10,
14]. Superior and inferior lumbar hernia were found in
25 (89.3%) and 3 (10.7%) patients in the present study,
which is consistent with their reports. Moreover, lumbar
hernias can be divided into two categories: congenital or
acquired. In all, approximately 20% of lumbar hernias are
congenital [1], and acquired lumbar hernias account for
80% of lumbar hernias [13]. Congenital lumbar hernia
occurs in infancy, and may be associated with musculoskeletal
or other birth defects [10, 15–17]. Furthermore,
acquired lumbar hernias can be further classified as
either primary or secondary. The former type (spontaneous)
is precipitated by conditions associated with
increased intra-abdominal pressure or aging, chronic
bronchitis, and extreme thinness, etc. Secondary-type
lumbar hernias, are often associated with surgical incisions,
trauma, or lumbar abscess, which are estimated to
represent 25% of lumbar hernias [1, 18]. Normally, after
flank incisions usually for retroperitoneal operations as
in urology or when harvesting a bone graft from the iliac
crest, some patients are more likely to suffer from lumbar
hernia. Consistent with previous reports, our study also
found that some patients had a history of lumbar trauma
and surgery.
The diagnosis of lumbar hernia is often difficult and is
not suspected initially. Firstly, clinical presentation for
lumbar hernias is asymptomatic or variable. Patients may
present with flank pain, back or abdominal discomfort
and painless mass. In addition, the challenge in diagnosis
also stems from a lack of awareness and insufficient
cases. Physical examination may reveal a reducible mass
that may increase in size with coughing and Valsalva
maneuver [5]. A reducible mass with cough impulse,
however, may not always be present due to small defects,
obesity or other factors. Computed tomography (CT) is
exceedingly useful in the diagnosis of lumbar hernias as it
can delineate the location and size of the defect, as well as
delineate the muscular and fascial layers and the contents
within the hernia sac, so as to provide the basis for making
a reasonable treatment plan [19, 20]. Previous study
has shown that abdominal CT scanning was used in 56 of
66 instances and was 98% sensitive for diagnosis of traumatic
lumbar hernias [13]. Moreover, CT can also effectively
rule out the other differential diagnoses of lumbar
hernias, such as lipomas, abscesses, and retroperitoneal
tumors [10, 18].
Lumbar hernias are more often found on the left side
and in the upper lumbar triangle [9]. In the present
study, we also found that a majority of lumbar hernias
located in the left and in the superior triangle. There
were 2 (7.1%) patients having coexisting inguinal hernia
in this study, which was lower than that of reported data
[8]. Moreover, bilateral lumbar hernias are even less frequently
documented, and most of the reports are case
reports so far [15, 21]. Our results have shown that there
were 2 patients with bilateral lumbar hernia who underwent
surgery under general anesthesia, and all hernia
sacs protruded through the superior lumbar triangles.
The contents of lumbar hernia may be extraperitoneal of
intraperitoneal, such as extraperitional fat, colon, spleen,
liver etc.; whereas, in the traumatic lumbar hernia, fat
(42%), colon (41%), and small bowel (32%) were the most
common hernia contents [13].
Most lumbar hernias have a propensity to undergo
slow benign expansion in size over time. Once the size of
defect increases, the difficulty of subsequent surgery will
be increased accordingly [22]. Additionally, the reported
risk of incarceration from lumbar hernias was approximately
25–30.8% [1, 9] and there was an 8% chance of
strangulation [23]. In the present study, a total of 13%
of lumbar hernias had incarceration but no strangulation
occurred. It is likely to be related to the improvement
of patients’ awareness of timely medical treatment.
In addition, it is recommended that these hernias should
not be managed conservatively without surgery [17, 22].
Surgical repair to eliminate the defect, reconstruct and
strengthen the abdominal wall may be the most effective
treatment for lumbar hernias. Hence, surgical treatment
with either open or laparoscopic is both the treatment
of choice. Recently, successful laparoscopic repairs of
lumbar hernia defects have been reported [24]. In laparoscopic
repair, the main advantage is that it seems to
ensure the proper placement of mesh, and also it has
been shown to be more favorable surgical outcomes
(shorter operating time and shorter hospital stay, etc.)
than open repair. However, open repair is the most commonly
used technique for lumbar hernias currently [6].
In the present study, all patients underwent open surgery.
The hernia can be repaired through a transabdominal or
extraperitoneal approach. Generally, repair technique
largely depend on the size of hernia and available facilities.
Primary closure with interrupted tension-free
sutures for lumbodorsal fascia has the potential to be
effective in small hernias, but sometimes the failure rate
is also high [13]. For large hernias, they can be repaired
by using non-absorbable prosthetic material [1, 10]. In
this study, a total of 27 patients underwent mesh repair,
and primary closure was performed in one case with congenital
lumbar hernia. On the whole, with limited cases
to compare surgical approaches and surgical techniques,
the ideal surgical treatment is inconclusive yet.
Currently, there is no relevant study to explore the
feasibility and safety in the treatment of lumbar hernia
under local anesthesia. In the present study, the hospital
stays for the local anesthesia are significantly less when
compared to the general anesthesia, as well as the total
hospitalization expenses. However, further explorations
using a large sample are warranted. The long-term follow-
up and recurrence data are scanty. van Steensel et al.
reported that the 2.0% had a recurrence after surgical
repair for primary lumbar hernia [9]. However, they have
pointed out that an underestimation of the recurrence
rates may be occurred due to publication bias. By comparison,
the recurrence rate was 1 out of 30 (3.3%) hernias
in this study, which is higher than that of their data.
According to the literature, predictors associated with
an increased likelihood for recurrence of lumbar hernias
are those with diffuse ones and a defect size larger than
16 cm [24].
However, our study had several limitations. Due to
the nature of the retrospective study, we can not draw a
convincing conclusion; van Steense et al. have reported
that 2.0% had a recurrence after surgical repair for lumbar
hernia [9]. With a median follow-up duration of
45.9 months, only 3% lumbar hernias recurred for the
entire cohort, which is in line with their results. However,
due to the small sample size of our study, our data may
not reflect real recurrence rates, which is also the chief
criticism of our study. As such, multicenter prospective
researches are warranted in the near future.
Conclusions
In summary, lumbar hernia is a relatively rare entity, and
inferior lumbar hernia is rarer. There are currently no
guidelines for the ideal method of repair. It is feasible to
repair lumbar hernia under local anesthesia.