Researchers and clinicians continually develop new
evidence-based practices to improve clinical care and patient
safety. Relational coordination is a theory about the
relational dynamics of coordinating work within and between
teams and organizations. Implementation of relational
coordination-guided management practices has
positively influenced performance outcomes including
safety, quality, efficiency, client satisfaction, and worker
well-being [1]. In healthcare, relational coordination is a
salient component of delivering effective, reliable, highly
coordinated, patient centered care as well as a key aspect
of high reliability organizing [2, 3]. Assessment of relational
coordination is achieved through the Relational
Coordination Survey (RC Survey), a validated measure of
coordination and team performance. The RC Survey assesses
the quality of communication and relationships
among roles and can be used for research or to support
organizational change [4]. Education and collaboration is
available through the Relational Coordination Research
Collaborative, which promotes the advancement of relational
coordination through a diverse international community
of leaders, researchers, and change agents.
Relational coordination is a promising, evidence-based
practice to enhance communication and relationships in
healthcare. However, there has been limited adoption. A
potential reason for this “research to practice gap” is the
challenge of spreading information about relational coordination
to those who could benefit from its application.
Slow diffusion of information is a known barrier to
rapid adoption of evidence-based practices [5]. Diffusion
is the passive and natural spread of information to a
broad audience, such as through word of mouth [6].
Large healthcare organizations, such as the Veterans
Health Administration (VA), use person-to-person diffusion
of information with some benefit. An alternative to
diffusion is dissemination, defined as planned efforts to
spread practices through targeted, direct delivery of information
to a particular audience, such as healthcare
providers or patients [5]. While no single diffusion or
dissemination strategy is effective for every situation, diffusion
has been shown to be less effective than dissemination
when the aim is to consistently and rapidly spread
best practices to improve patient care [5].
Dissemination strategies selected and crafted to reach
a specific audience can positively impact the adoption of
best practices [7, 8]. Marketing theory offers a valuable
framework to select dissemination strategies for large
healthcare organizations. Marketing is the management
process responsible for identifying, anticipating, and satisfying
customer requirements profitably [9]. Social marketing
applies marketing principles to societal objectives,
such as improving the health and welfare of individuals
and society, rather than corporate ones [10]. Social
marketing is an active process that induces behavior
change through deliberate influence and persuasion by
leaders, compared to more passive marketing approaches
that aim to influence behavior change by bringing
awareness to a topic [9]. In healthcare, social marketing
theory offers a strategy to focus on influencing voluntary,
socially beneficial behaviors and harnessing those
behaviors to enact social change [10]. The social marketing
approach provides dissemination guidance, including
identification of the four Ps of marketing, product, price,
place, and promotion, the target audience and objective
setting, and the creation, testing, and circulation of materials
[10].
The four Ps of marketing can inform decision making
around dissemination of evidence-based practices in
healthcare [10]. Product refers to the practice, process or
innovation being disseminated. The product should be
designed for and by end users who know their local context,
be they an individual provider, a clinical team, a
community, or an organization. Price refers to the cost
in time and money to end users for adopting and implementing
the product. Price is a driving factor in implementation
of evidence-based practices for human and
financial resources are limited in healthcare settings.
Place is how a target audience receives and accesses
product information. The ideal is for audiences to invest
minimal effort to retrieve product information. This is
achieved when the product is pushed to end users
through established and frequently visited communication
forums (e.g., publications, meetings). Promotion
considers the different methods of communication.
These range from low touch methods such as social
media, radio and television, and internet messages which
subliminally promote products through low involvement
processing [11]. High touch methods include distribution
of branded promotional materials such as pens,
folders, and toolkit binders or academic detailing, which
allows face-to-face interaction and discussion [12]. Identification
and optimization of the four Ps can inform
healthcare dissemination plans and may increase the uptake
of evidence-based strategies [10].
This paper details the dissemination strategy for The Relational
Coordination in the Veterans Health Administration
(RC in VA) program, a national project designed to
educate and motivate VA research and operational staff to
study and implement relational coordination [13] within
their programs of research or areas of operation. The VA
Health Services Research & Development (HSR&D) program
funded the RC in VA as a one-year pilot with hopes
of understanding the impact of team communication and
relationships on organizational performance. Given the
size and geographic dispersion of VA healthcare facilities,
the RC in VA program prioritized bringing together VA
researchers and operational leaders to establish processes
to study relational coordination across settings, conditions,
and populations. The goals of the RC in VA program were
to develop knowledge and understanding of relational coordination
that results in implementation projects that
positively impact patient and provider health and safety.
The work supports current VA priorities including a focus
on patient centered care, learning healthcare systems and
high reliability organizing [14–16].
In line with social marketing theory described above,
dissemination of the RC in VA program involved multicomponent
strategies. This was important given the
unique needs of individual VA research and operational
teams, the institutional structure of the VA, and the fact
that relational coordination is novel, and a less well understood
approach to study team relationships and communication.
Once the objectives for the RC in VA program
were identified, the question remained as to optimal dissemination
products, price, placement, and promotion
techniques. To determine best practices for dissemination,
we considered many factors, including the available resources
within the VA, the ideal target audience, and the
variable involvement of VA researchers and operational
staff in team focused assessment and improvement.
This paper describes dissemination of the RC in VA
program, including the successful dissemination efforts
that led to adoption of relational coordination into currently
funded VA research and operational projects. We
also present the dissemination strategies that failed to
garner lasting engagement. The value of understanding
dissemination of the RC in VA program is not exclusive
to this project. Rather this paper highlights the useful
lessons and strategies that may be applied to the broad
dissemination of a theoretically driven team communication
and relationship theory and assessment tool
through a large healthcare organization.
Methods
The RC in VA program was disseminated and implemented
over two phases. The dissemination phase focused
on creating and distributing relational
coordination informational materials nationally to hundreds
of VA researchers and operational staff and inviting
participants to join the Relational Coordination
Research Collaborative. The implementation phase focused
on engaging a small group (e.g., 10–40) of VA researchers
and staff to establish processes to study
relational coordination in healthcare teams through use
of the RC Survey in their currently funded research or
operations programs. Methods for the two phases are
described separately.
Planning and dissemination phase
The target audience for the initial phase were the hundreds
of VA researchers and operational staff from all 50
States. The objective was to introduce relational coordination
concepts and research to a broad audience. Informational
materials were created by the PhD-trained
VA study researcher (HG) and tested on relational coordination
experts and local researchers. The group
identified the need for creativity in these materials and
suggested the inclusion of infographics and logos on all
products. Active dissemination occurred by the study
lead (HG) who scheduled time to speak on monthly
cyberseminars hosted by VA HSR&D and operational
programs (e.g., VA Office of Nursing Services) and
weekly distribution of informational materials via email
or phone to VA change agents [17]. Passive dissemination
occurred through sharing of content bi-weekly via
VA and Relational Coordination Research Collaborative
twitter feeds and posting RC in the VA information on
the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative webpage.
Social media impact was tracked using Twitter
analytic measures (impressions and engagement). Visits
to the RC in VA webpage were not tracked. Interested
colleagues were to follow instructions included in social
media messaging to contact the study leads and/or join
the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative. Active
and passive dissemination of RC in VA content and
membership in the Relational Coordination Research
Collaborative was paid by the RC in VA program funds
and delivered through existing VA communication
channels. A promotion calendar was established to deliver
social media content weekly, virtual presentations
monthly, and newsletters quarterly. Dissemination and
engagement data from the dissemination phase were
captured as invitations to present RC in VA content,
number of email and phone contacts by study leads, social
media impressions and engagements, and new VA
members to the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative.
These metrics were feasible to collect and are
common measures to assess the impact of social
marketing-based efforts [11].
Implementation phase
This phase involved partnering with a small group (e.g.,
10–40) VA researchers and operational staff to establish
processes to study RC in VA. Initial efforts required the
creation of relational coordination language and RC Survey
information for regulatory bodies such as local research
review committees and institutional review
boards. Subsequent efforts focused on garnering support
from executive leadership within VA facilities to approve
RC in VA research focused on Veterans and employees.
The target audience for the implementation phase included
researchers and operational staff who were VA
employees (as noted by a va.gov email address), were
current members of the Relational Coordination Research
Collaborative and could incorporate relational
coordination into current projects. Trainings were
planned for VA staff to learn about relational coordination
assessment and interventions and apply them to current
projects. Trainings were provided through attendance at a
relational coordination workshop at the VA HSR&D annual
meeting and the 9th Annual Relational Coordination
Roundtable. In addition, these conferences provided VA
researchers and staff opportunities to network and present
their relational coordination work.
The objective of phase two was to support teams to
study relational coordination in their research or operational
projects using the RC Survey. The RC Survey is a
proprietary instrument administered through RC Analytics
[18]. The survey was available to five VA teams. Administrative
and copyright costs were paid by RC in VA
program funds. Implementation products shifted to individual
support for researchers and operational staff
submitting a RC in VA application and RC Survey measurement,
analytic and reporting support for selected projects.
An RC in VA application was placed on the
relational coordination website and shared via email with
interested parties. Promotion of the RC in VA application
occurred using the methods described in the dissemination
phase. Adoption data from the implementation
phase included the number of applications requested, submitted,
and funded, as well as training attendance.
An end of project survey was sent to the five RC in
VA research project leads 1 year after program implementation.
The survey included options to select from a
list of items or respond with text to understand the impact
of the dissemination efforts, how participants heard
about the RC in VA and reasons for participating. The
text items were included to allow participants to expand
or offer new information on the RC in VA program. The
survey requested suggestions on how to build a community
of relational coordination work in the VA, information
on the early findings from their RC in VA studies,
as well as additional application of relational coordination
in the VA. Eighteen months after the RC in VA
pilot program was launched, we gathered information
on current and future VA projects that are or will be
using relational coordination via VA funding lists and
communication with RC in VA program participants.
Analysis
Two researchers (BC and HG) collected the dissemination,
engagement and adoption data from VA researchers
and operational staff during both phases of the
project. Quantitative data were calculated using descriptive
statistics. The text responses in the survey were analyzed
using deductive content analysis in Microsoft
Excel 16.3. A structured categorization matrix [19] was
developed to code the responses based on the survey
questions. Only content that fit the matrix of analysis
were summarized and reported. Sociodemographic variables
of participants were not collected.
Results
Dissemination - phase one
During the initial dissemination phase, 51 instances of
email and phone communication were exchanged between
the study lead (HG) and VA researchers and operational
staff. Fifteen separate relational coordination
presentations were conducted. Content was shared via
Twitter 47 times, receiving 62,139 impressions and 398
instances of engagement. Four articles were written for
VA newsletters. In total, 47 VA staff members signed up
for the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative
and 27 (55%) participated in monthly educational webinars
(Table 1).
Implementation - phase two
The implementation phase resulted in 13 requests for
RC in VA applications; six (46%) applications were submitted,
and five (38%) submissions were selected. Fifteen
VA researchers and staff were trained in relational coordination
assessment and interventions through workshop
attendance. Information on the RC in VA
programs were shared at five conference podium presentations
and in two publications [20, 21]. Five projects
submitted additional grants to continue their work. As
of April 2020, 14 VA studies are currently using relational
coordination as a guiding framework and 15 projects
have written relational coordination assessment
into future research proposals (Table 2).
Survey findings from the five RC in VA projects (n =
9) indicated most participants (n = 5; 56%) learned about
the RC in VA project through word of mouth. One participant
read about it on Twitter while three found the
program through a VA presentation. Three participants
heard about the project through other means. Reasons
participants applied for the RC in VA project were to assess
how current teams were working together and how
relational coordination might affect future work (n = 3;
34%), assess for relationships between relational coordination
and implementation and evaluation of projects
(n = 3; 34%), and relational coordination’s ability to support
complex and large-scale studies and assist in
organizational transformation (n = 2; 22%).
Participants saw additional applications of relational
coordination assessment and interventions in VA operations
(n = 8; 88%). Specifically, participants felt relational
coordination could help understand team dynamics, help
implement VA initiatives, and improve workflow (n = 5;
56%). Two participants felt, given the large, siloed nature
of VA hospitals, relational coordination could increase
communication and introduce new initiatives or transformations
throughout the VA. All participants indicated
they saw additional application of relational coordination
assessment and interventions in their own programs of
research. This included using relational coordination to
evaluate implementation of programs with operational
or frontline staff and to assess and improve staff
engagement.
Participants were asked if the price of the Relational
Coordination Research Collaborative annual partnership
($125/year) and administrative costs to use the RC Survey
($500+ per project) would have influenced their
plans to use relational coordination. The respondents
were split in that 45% (n = 4) indicated they would not
have used the RC Survey if there was a cost, while 56%
(n = 5) indicated they would have used the RC Survey
and support from RC Analytics had there been a cost.
They added it would have depended on the price and if
they could have written the cost into existing grants.
The majority (89%; n = 8) indicated they would not continue
with the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative
partnership for the VA does not reimburse staff
for memberships, meaning individuals would be required
to pay for membership in the Relational Coordination
Research Collaborative themselves.
Discussion
This paper described dissemination of the RC in VA
program to researchers and operational staff across the
United States. Guided by social marketing theory, we
presented the dissemination efforts that led to adoption
of relational coordination into five currently funded VA
research and operational projects. Using the social marketing
elements of product, price, place, promotion, we
highlighted lessons and strategies that can be applied to
the broad dissemination of a theoretically driven team
communication and relationship theory and assessment
tool through a large healthcare organization.
The products created for the RC in VA program were
designed for and by end users who knew the VA context
[22, 23]. These included informational content that
could be delivered during phone calls, in-person
meetings, over cyberseminars, and via social media. We
offered VA researchers and staff membership into a
worldwide community of relational coordination researchers,
access to ongoing education, use of a validated
survey tool and analytic support. These products were
designed to fit the diverse needs of VA researchers, giving
them flexibility in the level of engagement with relational
coordination. The success of this approach is
supported by the results of our project.
Literature on healthcare interventions suggests that
tailoring evidence-based practices or interventions to an
individual’s preference or need is likely to improve professional
practice or patient outcomes [24]. This is in
contrast to the “one size fits all” approach, which has
been found to be inconsistent with goals of maximizing
patient outcomes, quality of care, and intervention adherence
[25]. In the RC in VA program, we split the
work into dissemination and implementation phases,
which allowed people to ease into the relational coordination
work and stop at their level of interest. Some
stopped at learning and information collection or engaged
in the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative,
while others studied the concept and continued
to use it in their research.
A useful lesson from our experience was the price of
participation in the RC in VA program was a significant
factor that influenced both the dissemination and implementation
phases. While perception of price fluctuates
depending on the value and need of an intervention,
price is a significant consideration in the overall determination
of whether to implement an evidence-based
practice [26]. High prices for any product has been reported
as a major barrier to implementation and adoption
[27]. We proactively obtained grant funding to
support the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative
partnership and use of the RC survey, so price was
not a barrier. This was a successful dissemination strategy,
as noted by respondents’ hesitancy to continue as a
partner and use the RC Survey in future work due to
cost. However, one respondent indicated they would
consider ongoing Relational Coordination Research Collaborative
membership and others reported they would
continue to use the RC Survey if it could be covered by
grant funds. Suggesting the initial no-cost option was
necessary to draw researchers to relational coordination
and allow them to experiment with the concept and
assessment tools at minimal risk. Of the four Ps, addressing
the price of a product is the most useful dissemination
and implementation strategy. However, even
for a low-price product, one must attract an audience
through consideration of the place and promotion of
materials.
The strategic placement of RC in VA products using
established communication channels for this population
was another useful dissemination strategy. RC in VA
products were pushed to researchers and operational
staff during the workday, in meetings they already
attended, and through VA communication newsletters
and social media they routinely reference. We housed all
content on the Relational Coordination Research Collaborative
website, so participants could find all program
materials in one place [28, 29]. The push marketing approach
was effective for it targeted new customers who
hadn’t heard about the RC in VA product [30]. This dissemination
approach focused on piquing researchers’
interest in a manner that took very little effort on their
part. Push marketing as a dissemination strategy can
apply in any setting and should utilize multiple platforms
(e.g., social media, newsletters, presentations) to
ensure communication saturation is achieved and the
target audience is reached.
The promotional efforts and results of RC in the VA
suggested that, while low-effort promotion via social
media and newsletters was effective in reminding the
target audience of the program, the most impactful promotional
effort was active outreach through personal
contact via email, phone calls, presentations, and discussion
with change agents. Though time consuming and
more effortful, these promotional methods built off
existing relationships and created new ones. They facilitated
dialogue and moved many from inquiry to action.
Our finding is in alignment with previous studies that
found that information spreads more rapidly and more
accurately through high-trust individuals and many are
only willing to distribute online information coming
from trusted peers [31–33]. We encourage both low and
high touch promotional efforts in any large-scale dissemination
effort, for in our case study the two approaches
were complementary.
While our case study contributes to the understanding
of successful dissemination strategies across a large
healthcare organization, the study design was observational
with no control group. Due to this, our conclusions
are based on the opinion of researchers who
utilized the RC in VA resource. We did not engage researchers
or operational staff who did not participate in
the RC in VA program. Additionally, some of these researchers
had been exposed to relational coordination in
their research prior to our dissemination efforts.
Conclusion
Dissemination focuses on spreading information widely.
Our findings, which align with social marketing theory,
suggest dissemination within healthcare settings should
consider product design and price, in addition to placement
and promotion. Dissemination of the RC in VA
program was successful for we proactively designed the
product and pricing to our target audience and local
context. Our products were flexible, adaptable, and available
at no-cost. Placement of products on established
communication channels and promotion using loweffort
and relationship-based methods were effective.
Our dissemination efforts developed knowledge and understanding
of relational coordination that have resulted
in multiple Veteran-focused implementation projects
that hold potential to positively impact patient and provider
health and safety.
