Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) represent the gold
standard for determining the clinical and cost effectiveness
of health care interventions [1]. However, RCTs
often fail to meet their recruitment targets: a review of
trials funded by two UK bodies looked at 114 trials and
found that less than a third reached their recruitment
target, while half had to extend the recruitment period
[2]. As an example of the problems that trials can face,
one RCT of aromatherapy in advanced cancer found
many patients were too ill to approach, a higher number
than anticipated declined, and referrers acted as gatekeepers
due to scepticism about treatment and the wish
to reduce patient burden [3]. Failing to reach recruitment
targets results in underpowered trials, with poor
generalisability of findings [4].
Recruitment into trials in palliative care are beset by a
unique combination of problems [4, 5], including those
common to all types of trials such as care providers
being too busy and “gatekeeping” by care providers, and
those unique to palliative care such as patients’ disease
burden. Gatekeeping refers to actions that control the
provision of eligible patients [4]. Gatekeeping by care
providers may be a problem in palliative care research
because of the desire to protect patients, and a reluctance
to ask them to spend their remaining time participating
in research [6]. Data from an observational
palliative care study suggests 24 % of palliative patients
were excluded from research because of gatekeeping [7].
A survey of healthcare professionals views towards referring
patients to palliative care trials suggests this desire
to protect end of life patients is widespread [8]. However,
this may be discordant with the wishes of palliative
patients. A review of studies looking at the views of patients
or carers towards participating in palliative care
trials or research studies suggests palliative care patients
are generally happy to be invited to participate in research,
experience direct and indirect benefits (such as
feelings of altruism) from participation, and are averse to
others saying “no” on their behalf [9]. Similarly, patients
with advanced cancer who had participated in symptom
control trials generally regarded participating in the trial
as a positive experience, irrespective of whether the trial
had improved symptoms [10].
Trials of psychosocial interventions in cancer patients
have also been noted to face unique recruitment issues.
Firstly, cancer patients may be preoccupied with treating
the physical disease, and therefore may not make use of
psychosocial services [3, 11]. Secondly, participants that
do want support may feel deterred by the prospect of
randomisation to a non-preferred group [3]. Given the
difficulties faced in recruitment to palliative care RCTs,
it is important to establish what barriers hinder recruitment,
and explore potential methods of enhancing
recruitment.
In this paper, we present qualitative findings from our
experience of recruitment to the CanTalk study, a RCT
comparing cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) to usual
care for treating depression in people with advanced
cancer [12]. Despite successfully recruiting 230 participants
out of a target of 240, individual participating sites
struggled with achieving recruitment targets. To meet
recruitment targets expansion in number of sites (from
an initial 4 hospices and oncology centres to 17) and extension
of the recruitment period (from a 24 month recruitment
period to 40 months) were required, and
university employed researchers were deployed in research
sites located close to the university to increase recruitment.
Our objective in the present study was to
explore the views of those involved in recruitment into
the CanTalk RCT, what they perceive the barriers to recruitment
to be, and what they think would facilitate increased
recruitment.
Methods
Design
The study comprised qualitative interviews of healthcare
professionals involved in recruiting to a RCT, the Can-
Talk study [12] (Controlled Trials ISRCTN07622709,
registered 15 July 2011). The CanTalk RCT recruited
participants with advanced cancer and depression from
oncology centres and a hospice located in areas where
referral to Improving Access to Psychological Therapy
(IAPT) centres for depression was possible. It compared
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy with Treatment as Usual
for depression in these patients. Only patients living
within the catchment areas for these IAPT centres were
eligible to participate.
Ethical approval was provided by the London – Camberwell
St Giles NRES committee, reference 11/LO/
0376. The study was supported by the National Cancer
Research Network clinical trials portfolio.
Participants, recruitment and setting
Participants were healthcare professionals (n = 14), selected
through purposive sampling to include a range of
clinical and research focused occupations, to reflect the
range of occupations involved in recruitment to the
CanTalk trial. These participants were recruited through
an email invitation, followed up by a phone call. Recruitment
was conducted by researchers from University College
London, employed on the CanTalk trial.
Participants were recruited from the Christie NHS Foundation
Trust, Barts Health NHS Trust, North Middlesex
University Hospital, Weston General Hospital, Princess
Royal University Hospital, South Tyneside NHS Foundation
Trust, University College London Hospital, Whittington
Health NHS Trust, and Marie Curie Hospice
Hampstead. Participants’ involvement in the CanTalk
RCT involved identifying relevant patients, approaching
and discussing the study with patients, and screening for
eligibility for the study.
Topic guide
The experience of researchers employed on the CanTalk
trial to recruit in oncology clinics suggested that some
staff were reluctant to refer patients to the trial. With a
view to exploring possible reasons for this, and attitudes
of staff towards psychosocial research trials in general, a
qualitative topic guide was developed [13], asking about
(1) role in the oncology clinic; (2) previous research involvement;
(3) views on trials other than clinical trials of
investigational medicinal products (CTIMPs); (4) views
about the CanTalk trial; (5) factors influencing recruitment;
(6) feedback about the CanTalk trial; and (7) future
research involvement. This topic guide is
summarised in Table 1. The guide was structured to
begin with broad open questions and progress to
narrower more specific questions. We kept open the option
of adapting or expanding the topic guide if new
topics emerged during the interviews. However, as all
topics arising appeared to fit well within the existing
structure of the guide, no alterations were made.
Interviews
Interviews took place between December 2015 and
March 2016, after recruitment closure but within three
months of recruitment ending. Informed consent was
obtained prior to each interview. Interviews were conducted
by researchers employed on the CanTalk study
and trained in qualitative techniques, in a private room
at the participants’ place of work, and lasted between 16
and 66 min. Interviews were recorded using a digital recording
device. Interviews were conducted using a semi
structured interview technique, based on the topic guide.
This allowed for the interview to be directed by the topic
guide, while also allowing for divergence from the guide
to explore topics in greater depth or to explore issues
raised by participants that were not specifically covered
by the guide.
Analysis
Recordings of interviews were transcribed verbatim.
Data were analysed using thematic analysis based on
commonly used guidelines [14], using Nvivo 11 software.
We chose to use thematic analysis as it is not tied to any
specific theoretical standpoint, and provides a flexible
method that can be tailored to the research questions
[14]. After familiarisation with the data, two researchers
(TA and MA) independently coded the data and identified
themes. These researchers then met to discuss the
themes. Any differences were resolved through discussion.
The analysis throughout, including the selection of
text for coding and the search for themes, was guided by
the study’s research questions. The analysis consisted of
the following stages:
1) Familiarisation with the data. Researchers
familiarise themselves with the data set.
2) Generate codes. Text considered relevant to the
research questions was coded. Text could be coded
once, or multiple times.
3) Search for themes. Codes were sorted into themes.
Each theme comprised one or more codes of
similar meaning.
4) Review themes. Themes were refined. First, codes
within each theme were reviewed for coherence.
Secondly, themes were reviewed to ascertain:
validity of individual themes in relation to the data;
a clear distinction between themes; and that the
thematic map generated reflects the meaning in the
data.
5) Define and name themes. For each theme, collated
codes were read in order to derive a definition.
6) Produce a narrative account. A narrative account of
the thematic map of the data was produced.
Reflexive statement
The chief investigator [MS] and the trial manager
[TA] of the CanTalk trial set up this qualitative
study to understand the reasons for the difficulties
with recruitment. It is therefore possible the researchers
had preconceived ideas about why recruitment
was challenging, and pre-existing biases and
assumptions of researchers may have influenced the
interview process. However, researchers had experience
in exploring a topic in-depth through interviews,
and every effort was made to develop an open
and unbiased interview schedule. To ensure the analysis
of the data was as unbiased as possible, another
researcher [MA] not involved in the CanTalk study
also independently analysed the data, and agreement
was reached between the whole team about the identified
themes.Results
Of 50 healthcare professionals invited, 14 agreed to participate.
The most common reason for non-participation
was a lack of response to the invitation to participate.
All participants worked within either hospital oncology
clinics or a hospice and all were involved in participant
recruitment for the CanTalk study. Participants came
from a range of sites, including those that struggled with
recruitment for the study, and some that recruited well.
Occupations and sex of participating healthcare professionals
are provided in Table 2.
Five main themes emerged from the data: (1) Factors
limiting recruitment (2) Attitudes to research and randomisation;
(3) Attitudes towards trials not of medicinal products;
(4) Views on study team vs. in house researchers; and
(5) Factors facilitating recruitment. From these, 11 subthemes
were identified. Saturation was reached in this
analysis. A thematic map is provided in Fig. 1.
Factors limiting recruitment
Gatekeeping
A number of healthcare professionals discussed preselecting
patients. This included avoiding people at the end
of their life who are struggling (P03), who were in a hospital
bed and looking pretty sick (P03), and avoiding people with
really difficult personalities (P14). Reasons suggested for
gatekeeping included not wanting to upset their patients
(P06) or to give them any extra burden (P10):
… you’re not really going to be offering a therapy
that they may not be around to benefit from …. and
also put them to the inconvenience of going and sorting
all this out … (P03).
Some Healthcare professionals displayed an awareness
of their tendencies to gatekeep:
… if you could be a bit more objective about it and
think ‘they meet the criteria I can go and speak to
them’, I think maybe sometimes it, it stopped us from
approaching people … (P10).
One healthcare professional suggested that a researcher
who is “blind” to the patients (i.e. who has no
existing knowledge or preconceptions of the patient
from previous contact with them) may be less likely to
gatekeep:
… sometimes coming in blind and not knowing all
that information is fine because you can just discuss
it with somebody and they can say yes or no… (P03).
Resource limitations
Limitations in time (P02) and space (P10) were noted to
limit recruitment. In terms of time, competing priorities
(e.g. always something more pressing to do; P03) and demands
of a two hour wait in clinic (P14) were noted. In
terms of space, limited availability of clinic rooms (P10)
was noted as a limiting factor:
… they were welcoming for us to come in a see
the patients um, but again its busy clinics its
clinic time its clinic rooms, its finding that space
… (P10).
One individual expressed the view that I don’t have
dedicated time for research (P11) and another noted
the added burden of research on top of existing
pressures:
…they’re [the oncology clinic] understaffed at the
moment so they feel it’s, research is like an added …
it’s added work for them … (P02).
Eligibility criteria too narrow
This theme encompassed the notion that the eligibility
criteria were too narrow overall. Broadening the patient
eligibility (P08) criteria or providing the trial intervention
on site [P08] were noted as factors that would increase
recruitment. This theme largely focused on the
catchment area, with a number of healthcare professionals
noting that the catchment area for treatment
centres limited the number of eligible patients, restricted
what clinics we screened (P09) and constituted a postcode
lottery (P03).
… we had a spreadsheet of nearly, I think it got to
point where we had about eighty or ninety patients
we had on that list, but then as these, like the barriers
kept coming in we had to keep cutting out
people …. cutting out people and the screening and
then that got cut out, so the list just kept going
smaller and smaller and smaller … (P02).
Patients do not want or need support
This theme comprised the concept that many patients
did not need (P01) or want (P08) support, including the
rejection of formalised psychological support:
…we had plenty of patients who both myself and the
clinicians, like the consultants, really thought needed
talking therapy because they would literally take up an
hour of the medical oncologist’s time but when it came
to offering the study they didn’t need any help …. (P01)
Some patients were noted to choose church over study
(P01). It was also noted that there may be less hopelessness
among cancer patients and they don’t feel as hopeless
now as they maybe did five or ten years ago (P07).
Attitudes to research and randomisation
Attitudes towards research
Attitudes towards research were largely positive, for example
commenting on the usefulness of research:
… according to the results it might help many more
in future so it’s like I’m being part of the future research
evidence base that would be used probably
five, ten years to come… (P05).
Several participants commented that research helps to
build up the evidence base (P12), is the way forward (P03),
and that randomised controlled trials are the gold standard
(P01). Other participants attitude towards research
were more factual, noting that research and recruitment
were part of my job (P05), or remit, for example:
… certain groups of clinicians don’t want to get involved
in research …, whereas … most oncologists I
know wouldn’t feel like that cause they know that research
is part of our work… (P14).
Views on randomisation
Several healthcare professionals expressed that randomisation
is necessary to answer the question, that it is the only
way that we can compare things (P10), and provides a scientifically
robust test (P08). However, along with this acknowledgement
of the necessity and benefits of research
there was also a view expressed that randomisation is a
short term sacrifice [to patients allocated to usual care] for
long term gain (P01). This suggests that while health care
professionals understand the benefits of randomisation, it
may be difficult for them to maintain a sense of equipoise:
… though I’ve got patients at the moment who didn’t
get the active arm, perhaps I, I say to myself ‘well in
two years all of my patients will be getting this as
standard treatment’ … (P01).
Some healthcare professionals commented that randomisation
to an intervention or usual care group was
no particular concern (P03) because the patient could
still get help if they needed it (P05):
… it wasn’t like if they were, if they were randomised
to that and they didn’t get any, the CBT it wasn’t that they couldn’t then have anything through the
hospital … (P10).
However, a number of healthcare professionals noted
that it can be difficult (P13) or hard knowing that … patients
aren’t going to get what we really want them to get
(P01). Healthcare professionals also spoke of worry (P12)
and feeling guilty about patients with depression being
assigned to standard care:
… it can be quite hard letting people know that
they’ve not got the intervention and, if you know that
people are you know really keen for it you can feel
quite guilty … (P10)
Attitudes to trials other than Clinical Trials of
Investigative Medicinal Products (non-CTIMP trials)
Positive attitudes to trials not of medicinal products
There was a commonly expressed theme that non-
CTIMP trials are very important (P11, P12) and help
meet patients’ holistic needs:
… I think if were looking at trying to, uh improve patient
care from a kind of a holistic perspectives …
these kind of studies and other similar ones are
vital… (P08).
Some health care professionals also expressed the notion
that both CTIMP and non-CTIMP trials hold equal
importance, and recruitment centres need a balance
(P13):
… we need to do both, ‘cos we’re paid for both (yeah)
and we need to give patients the chance for both …
(P02).
Several healthcare professionals noted advantages to
non-CTIMP trials, such as being more straightforward
so you weren’t involving any drugs or treatment (P03):
… non-CTIMPs actually suit a hospital like the
[name redacted] hospital very well, because they’re
not so resource intensive… (P01).
As well as noting that trials not of medicinal products
could be more straightforward, healthcare professionals
also noted that psychosocial research studies, which
commonly involve completing outcome questionnaires
with participants, can allow staff to spend more time
with, chat with (P07), and better understand patients:
… I like the fact that the questionnaire studies in
particular enable me to spend time, more time with
the patients actually understanding them as people
(mmm) so they are much more people than they
are drug trial subject … (P01).
Bias towards trials of medicinal products
Several healthcare professionals reported a bias towards
recruiting for trials of medicinal products. Consultants
were noted to be involved more with CTIMP trials (P02),
to be just interested in medical oncology really (P11),
and to favour their own studies (P01),
… you only had one haematologist who’d think of
CanTalk but the other would think about all the other
CTIMP trials and then, you say, oh what about Can-
Talk, they’re like, ‘um, no, no, no’ as in they push it to
the back, that would be like the last resort … (P02).
This bias was accompanied by a perception that the clinical
trials points system gives more … funding point to trusts
for … patients that are recruited into drug trials (P01):
… they were probably told that we get more money
for the CTIMP trials … so it’s all I suppose funding
…, so originally that’s what it was, so that’s what
they would concentrate on, ‘cos they need to bring
more money to the Trust … (P02).
It was also noted that non-CTIMP trials could get
pushed [out] (P01), and that if there were treatment trials
patients will always get offered that first … as they
might potentially improve their outcomes (P10). Related
to this preference for drug trials, there was a notion that
time recruiting to non-drug trials could be frowned
upon:
… I was pushing it saying yes we should take part,
this is something we can do cause at the time there
were very limited breast studies … but yes the time
was um, perhaps a little frowned upon… (P03).
Views on study team vs. in house researchers
Mixed views on advantages of UCL or in-house researchers
recruiting for the study
Views on staff from the university trial team conducting
recruitment, as opposed to staff employed by the recruitment
site, were mixed. Advantages of in-house clinical
staff recruiting included the advantage from us being actually
embedded within [the clinic] (P13), having an
established relationship with a clinician (P13), and sometimes
they [the patient] do it [participate] because they
know you (P3):
…they know us well enough to know that we are not
going to offer them something that they don’t think
might help… (P14).
Several healthcare professionals expressed advantages
to researchers employed directly on the trial
recruiting, noting that when trial researchers became
involved it felt like an enormous weight off (P03), that
we just wouldn’t of had the resource (P04), and that
UCL researchers were more objective (P10) in selecting
patients. For example:
… when your colleagues came from UCL the numbers
went up again … because they looked, person,
or this person is official and actually taken time to
come from the University … (P02).
Factors facilitating recruitment
Engagement
It was deemed important for successful trial recruitment
to maximise engagement with sites:
… just really more engagement to stakeholders so
that they are aware (yea) of what the study is what
it involves … (P12).
It was also deemed important to meet people face to
face and involve all interested parties:
… really meet somebody face to face and to explain
the study personally, because on paper it might not
very interesting and um then to involve all the
people that may or may not have views on this matter…
(P03).
Expanding on the theme of engaging with all interested
parties, it was suggested that presenting the research
at pan London meetings (P03) of nurse
specialists or organisations such as the London Cancer
Alliance (P04) would be useful. Presenting at meetings
of nurse specialists and similar meetings will
help ensure that those actively involved in recruitment
are aware of the trial and have the opportunity
to provide their feedback.
Engaging regularly was deemed important, for example
through regular site visits (P01).
… I think just engagement centrally umm you know
keeping the clinicians who are involved in the trial
up to date means not just it doesn’t just mean having
a newsletter … (P12).
This theme can be summed up as the importance
of maximising engagement, including face to face engagement
and engagement with all interested parties,
and maintaining regular engagement with recruitment
sites.
Regular presence of researcher
The regular presence of a researcher in clinics and in
multi-disciplinary team meetings was noted as a key factor
in facilitating recruitment:
…I find our MDT’s every week a really useful time
for people to make their presence remembered even
if it can’t be every-, it doesn’t have to be every week
it’s just as long as it’s often enough (yeah), s-, so that
we keep a, thinking it through, remembering that we
need to ask patients… (P06).
It was deemed useful to have somebody there to catch
all the patients that come into those clinics (P03), and to
have a trial researcher who forces themselves on the site
(P01):
… that’s absolutely the key to recruitment, unless
people jog us as clinicians regularly …. or sit and
embed themselves in our meetings …. we are not going
to be avid recruiters because there’s so much else
to think about… (P11).
Discussion
Given the problems recruiting into RCTs, particularly
within palliative care and trials of psychological interventions,
it is important to explore why trials may underrecruit.
The present study conducted qualitative interviews
with health care professionals who had been involved
in recruitment for a trial of a psychosocial
intervention in an advanced cancer population. Overall,
the study identified 5 main themes and 11 subthemes.
Our findings suggest that whilst health care professionals
felt that research was important, they did not
have the time to engage in recruitment, and that trials of
medicinal products were often prioritised over trials of
psychosocial interventions.
Gatekeeping was identified in the present study as one
of the barriers to recruitment, consistent with previous
research which has identified a widespread desire to protect
palliative patients from research [8]. Reasons for
withholding patients from research have been described
in previous research into the views of healthcare professionals
involved in recruitment to trials [15]: doctors described
being uncomfortable recruiting particular groups
or individual patients, and nurses can make ‘clinical’ decisions
about whom to approach based on personal
viewpoints and avoid bothering certain patients [15].
Reasons that healthcare professionals in the present
study gave for withholding patients included not referring
patients who were too sick, avoiding patients with
difficult personalities, and not wanting to increase patient
burden. Not wanting to increase the burden on palliative
patients has emerged as a reason for gatekeeping in several previous studies [6, 8, 16]. The consequence is
that these patients are denied the opportunity to participate.
Indeed, a review of palliative care patients attitudes
suggests they are generally happy to be asked to participate,
that they experienced both direct and indirect
(such as feelings of altruism and meaning gained from
helping to improve services for others in the future) benefits
from participation, and that they are adverse to having
other people say “no” on their behalf [9]. Thus, what
is viewed by health care professionals as protecting a patient
may be viewed by the patient very differently, as
denying them the opportunity to make their own autonomous
decisions.
Among factors influencing recruitment a primary
theme was resource limitations, including time and
space constraints and the competitive nature of recruitment,
in which a number of trials typically compete
for the limited time of staff. This theme is
consistent with previous studies in which healthcare
professionals stated that time is a factor limiting recruitment
(e.g. [17–19]). As site resources are finite,
one way to facilitate recruitment is for university researchers
to recruit in clinics. This is noted to increase
recruitment in the Views on study team vs. in
house researchers theme, and our experience in running
the CanTalk trial suggested that deploying university
researchers to recruit in oncology clinics was
essential in meeting the trials recruitment targets.
Narrow eligibility criteria was perceived as a key barrier,
and has previously been noted as one of the main
reasons for under recruitment into RCTs [20–22]. Indeed,
researchers sometimes have to broaden the eligibility
criteria in order to reach recruitment targets (e.g.,
[3]). Furthermore, healthcare professionals stated that
those who are eligible often reject psychological support.
This finding is consistent with previous research showing
that patients declining to participate in trials of psychological
interventions often feel they do not require a
psychological intervention [3].
Attitudes towards research in general were mainly
positive, and healthcare professionals stated that psychosocial
trials are worthwhile. However it was noted that
research was extra work, and not part of their remit.
Additionally, there was the notion that consultants prioritise
trials of medicinal products. This bias towards trials
of medicinal products, which are perceived to “count
more” and provide more reward to the recruitment sites,
may partly explain why trials of psychosocial interventions
can be particularly problematic to recruit to [23].
Although the UK Clinical Research Network does not
prioritise drug trials, the present research suggests that
consultants’ preference for trials which may affect physical
outcomes may encourage recruitment efforts to be
focused on drug trials.
The theme Engagement is consistent with research
demonstrating that sites receiving regular updates on the
trial is useful [22]. Several trials have documented attempts
to maximise engagement (e.g. [24]). Healthcare
professionals in the present study also noted that the
regular presence of the researcher in clinic and meetings
maximised recruitment, which was consistent with our
observation that recruitment increased at sites when
university researchers were deployed to them.
While the paper looked primarily at themes across the
whole group of participants, some differences between
the main subgroups of participant occupation can also
be observed. As can be expected given the nature of
their roles, participants whose careers were focused on
research (research nurse/practitioner/coordinator) spoke
in greater detail and more frequently about the importance
of the randomisation process in providing an evidence
base. In contrast to those with a research focused
role, clinical practitioners (clinical nurses/consultants)
noted not having dedicated time for research, and also
time spent on research being frowned upon. This can be
an important consideration during trial set-up, as agreements
may sometimes be made for participant identification
or screening to be conducted by clinical staff,
who may not subsequently have the time for these activities
in a busy clinical setting.
Recommendations
Based on the present research, a number of recommendations
can be made which should be considered during
the design, set-up and running of clinical trials of psychosocial
interventions, particularly those conducted
within advanced cancer populations.
Firstly, during trial design, formulating a realistic estimation
of the time that identification, screening, and referral
of patients will take, and establishing whether
healthcare professionals in referral sites will have dedicated
time for these tasks, may help to ameliorate potential
recruitment problems. This is particularly important
given the competitive nature of recruitment, with multiple
studies competing for staff time, and especially
given that psychosocial research may be “pushed out” in
favour of trials of medicinal products. Ring-fencing staff
time dedicated to the study is required.
Secondly, educating staff involved in trial recruitment
about the importance of RCTs may be beneficial to reducing
gatekeeping. This could be done initially in setup
meetings. Providing information on the phenomena
of gatekeeping, how the wish to protect patients is common
among healthcare professionals [8] while being inconsistent
with the views of palliative care patients [7],
and possibly providing some quotes from the research
literature on the benefits that palliative care patients 
experience from participating in research, may be beneficial
in reducing gatekeeping.
Thirdly, as recruitment is notoriously difficult
within palliative care trials and trials of psychosocial
interventions, it will be important during trial design
to make the eligibility criteria as broad as possible.
We suggest that it is good practice to carefully review
each criteria to see if there is any way to broaden
eligibility.
Study limitations
We approached 50 potential participants, out of
whom 14 (28 %) agreed to participate. As this is a
relatively low uptake, there may be selection bias,
and individuals who participated may have more
positive attitudes towards psychosocial research. The
interviewers were researchers employed directly on
the CanTalk trial, and in some instances would have
had previous interactions with the interviewees during
the course of recruitment. While this may potentially
have influenced responses, we have no
evidence to indicate that it did, and health care
workers seemed to open up freely about their own
biases and tendencies, such as gatekeeping. We did
not seek the views of patients in the present study,
which would provide valuable viewpoints on the
topics explored. The topic guide used in this study
did not explore what healthcare professionals said to
patients about the study, which may have influenced
recruitment into the CanTalk RCT. Actively testing
these recommendations, for example through the use
of embedded trials [25], is needed before we can be
sure of the efficacy of any of these
recommendations.
Notwithstanding these limitations, this study is the
first to have investigated the views of health care professionals
recruiting to a trial of a psychosocial intervention
in an advanced cancer population. It has broadened our
knowledge on factors facilitating and hindering recruitment
into trials of psychosocial interventions in palliative
care, and on the views held by the healthcare
professionals tasked with recruitment into these trials.
The findings will hopefully facilitate recruitment into
RCTs, and reduce the chance of these requiring extensions
in time and costs.
Conclusions
The views of those recruiting to randomised controlled
trials provide insight into what may block or facilitate
recruitment. Our findings suggest that whilst health care
professionals felt that research was important, they did
not have the time to engage in recruitment. Healthcare
professionals also describe withholding participants from
research (gatekeeping). Realistically estimating the time
involved in recruitment and protecting or “ring-fencing”
recruitment time, educating recruitment staff about the
importance of RCTs, and keeping inclusion criteria as
broad as possible are recommended. These findings can
help inform those setting up randomised controlled trials
to minimise potential hurdles.