Introduction
Many countries in Europe have long humanitarian tradition
of receiving and resettling forcibly displaced individuals
[1] and should provide equitable healthcare
services to an increasingly diverse population [2].
Responding to changes in demographics and attaining
equity in health can be viewed as a public health investment.
However, for many European countries this is
hampered by the lack of reliable knowledge of the health
status and health needs of forced migrants in the early
phase of resettlement [3]. Without adequate information,
many resettlement-countries are unable to assess
whether services are accessible for forced migrants and
if needs are efficiently met [2].
The utilization of healthcare services is a multidimensional
process that combines need for, and access to
care. In an optimal scenario, use of services should be
proportional to ones need [4]. Even though access of
and use of services are inter-related, they are distinct
parts of the health delivery process where utilization presumes
access [5]. Factors related to access to services
have been conceptualized in many ways, and commonly
includes aspects on both the provider side and the user
side such as accessibility, affordability, availability and
appropriateness [6]. Both access and use of healthcare
services is hence influenced by context, meaning that
even where entitlements are formally established and financial
barriers are lifted, access and use are influenced
by resources required for good health, such as social
support, education, and health literacy. Likewise, one
might argue that additional factors related to the migration
experience affect the use of health care services for
forced migrants given the risk of exposure to external
factors such as persecution, food insecurity, and violence.
Exposures that can shape the forced migrants’
health profile and subsequently their need for care [7].
This, however, has scarcely been researched.
The Syrian refugee crisis remains the largest displacement
crisis in the world, with 5.6 million registered refugees
seeking transient safety in neighboring countries
[8]. While in transit, healthcare services are often characterized
by high privatization, fragmented between
many different providers, making access to care difficult
and costly [9]. For undocumented migrants, economic
barriers are further aggravated with fear of detention or
deportation if seeking healthcare [9]. Upon arrival in
Norway, refugees are invited to a general health assessment,
and have the same rights and entitlements to services
as the resettlement country population. The
Norwegian health care system offers universal coverage
with relatively small out-of-pocket expenses. The general
practitioner (GP) serves as a gatekeeper to secondary
care, regulating the access to specialist and hospital care
[10]. Primary care services are thus patient-driven while
influx into secondary care is managed by healthcare
providers.
Through the resettlement process, refugees move from
one set of health risk factors to another and can face
multiple additional healthcare challenges along their
journey. Few studies have focused on this change of context
and environment, how it affects subsequent use of
health care and whether adverse conditions affecting
health and the use of health care services pre-arrival persists
post migration. Applying a longitudinal design
allowing a trajectory perspective, our study aimed to: (a)
describe patterns of health care service use in Lebanon
and Norway, (b) identify pre-arrival sociodemographic
and migration-related predictors of health care service
use post migration and (c) identify post-arrival factors
associated with health care service use in the resettlement
country.
Methods
Study design, participants, and data collection
This is a two-time points follow-up study which is part
of the Changing Health and health care needs Along the
Syrian Refugees’ Trajectories to Norway (CHART) project
[11], assessing health of Syrian refugees in Norway.
Methods were carried out in accordance with the
Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in
Epidemiology (STROBE) Statement guidelines and with
national and European privacy legislation.
In this paper, we focus on persons recognized as refugees
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) accepted for third-country resettlement
[1]. The methods have already been described elsewhere
[12]. In brief, a baseline self-administered survey was
conducted in Lebanon in 2017–2018, followed by a
follow-up survey in Norway after one year. A total of
514 Syrian nationals from 16 and above attending the
mandatory Norwegian Cultural Orientation Programme
(NORCO) in the given period were included in the study
in Lebanon. The Arabic baseline questionnaire was distributed
during course time under the guidance of crossculturally
responsive bilingual trainers. Follow-up measurements
post-arrival were gathered through structured
telephone interviews in Arabic. A total of 506 eligible
subjects completed the baseline survey (98 %), of which
464 (92 %) were confirmed resettled in Norway and 353
completed the second questionnaire (70 %) (Supplementary
Fig. 1).
Dependent variables
The main outcomes for this study are the utilization of a
GP, emergency care (EC), outpatient and/or specialist
care as well as hospitalization during the previous 12
months. These four main outcomes were assessed
through the following questions: ‘During the last 12
months, have you visited any of the following: a general
practitioner, emergency care, outpatient care, specialist
care (yes/no)’ and ‘Have you been admitted to the hospital
the last 12 months? (yes/no)’. Given similarities in
outpatient and specialist care in Norway, where the main
point is to be assessed by a medical specialist, these two
variables were merged into one. The two items are based
on questions from The Nord-Trøndelag Health Study
(HUNT) [13].
Independent variables
Self-rated health (SRH) was measured as an indicator of
the need for healthcare at both time points. We used a
validated single-item question: “How do you consider
your health at the moment?”, with a five-point Likert
scale ranging from very poor to very good. The item was
dichotomized merging ‘very poor’ and ‘poor’ indicating
poor SRH versus non-poor SRH. The SRH-item has
shown acceptable validity and reliability among Arabic
speakers and in refugee populations [14, 15]. Additionally,
we measured quality of life (QoL) using the WHO
Quality of Life Scale (WHOQOL-BREF), a transcultural
instrument previously validated in Arabic [16], which includes
a total of 26 questions on physical health, mental
health, social relationships, and environment [17]. Each
item is rated on a five-point Likert scale with a higher
score indicating a better QoL. Raw scores were transformed
creating domain scores within the range of 4–20
by multiplying the average of the items in each domain
by four, in accordance with the user’s manual [17].
Perceived social support was measured with the 7-item
ENRICHD Social Support Instrument (ESSI) [18]. A total
score is the sum of all items with higher scores indicating
better social support. A binary measure for high social
support defined as having answered > 2 on at least two
items and a total score of > 18 was created, based on the
definition of low-social support [18]. ESSI has previously
been validated among Syrian refugees [19].
Sociodemographic variables encompassed age, gender,
primary language spoken, marital status and level of
education. In addition, we assessed Health Literacy
through the single-item literacy screener (SILS): “How
often do you need help reading written material from
your doctor or pharmacy?” With a five-point Likert
scale. Scores higher than 2 point to difficulties with
reading health-related material. We also inquired on
migration-related factors such as time since the flight
from Syria, migrating alone or with family, residence
permit in Lebanon, and possible exposure to traumatic
events with The Single General Trauma Item [20].
The entire questionnaire was in Arabic; it contained
questions already translated and validated and those sections
that were not went through a standardized translation
process [21].
Statistical analysis
We present sociodemographic and migration-related
characteristics as counts and proportions for categorical
variables, medians, and interquartile ranges (IQR), and
means and standard deviations (SD) for continuous variables
(Table 1). Selection bias between the cohort and
the loss-to-follow-up group was assessed using χ2-statistics
and independent group’s t-tests (Supplementary
Table 1).
We used a Sankey chart to visualize the changes in use
of services before arrival and after resettlement by creating
trajectory variables with the proportions going from
use to no use and vice versa or no change in outcomes
(Fig. 1). Changes in the use of health services from baseline
to follow-up were also analyzed using generalized
estimating equations (GEE) with data in long format
with two observations per individual and “wave” as a
binary covariate (Table 2). We applied a log-link and binomial
distribution and reported exponentiated regression
coefficients as risk ratios (RR) with 95 % CI.
We used multivariate analysis to evaluate factors associated
with the use of healthcare services in Norway
looking at selected sociodemographic and migrationrelated
factors as well as self-perceived health status and
QoL at baseline and follow-up. First, we looked at baseline
characteristics in Lebanon as predictors for the use
of services after arrival in Norway. Thereafter, we looked
at characteristics while in Norway and associations with
the use of services in Norway. We used log-binomial regression
analysis reported as risk ratios with 95 % confidence
intervals in two models; (1) unadjusted (2)
adjusted for potential confounders for the total effect of
each characteristics on the outcome based on results
from a directed acyclic graph (DAG) depicted in supplementary
Fig. 2. The DAG was constructed using the
software DAGitty [22]. For instance, for the total effect
of health literacy at baseline on use of health services in
Norway, age, gender, and education were potential confounders,
while SRH at baseline was considered as a mediator
and not adjusted for. In cases where convergence
was not achieved in log-binomial regression analysis,
Poisson regression was used with robust error variance
(Table 3) [23].
Missing values were handled through listwise deletions.
An alpha value of 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. We analyzed the data using STATA/IC software,
version 16.0, (StataCorp LLC, Texas, USA).
Results
Characteristics of the study population
Sociodemographic characteristics and self-perceived
health and QoL of this cohort has been published elsewhere
but are stated in Table 1 for the sake of clarity.
We included data from 353 participants in the final
analysis (supplementary Fig. 1). The respondents did not
differ from the loss-to-follow-up group in terms of age
or gender but had higher health literacy (supplementary
Table 1).
Use of healthcare services and changes in use from
Lebanon to Norway
Of the 353 participants, 33 % visited a GP in Lebanon,
32 % visited outpatient/specialist care, 16 % were hospitalized,
and 10 % used EC in the 12 preceding months at
baseline (Table 2). In Norway, the use of a GP increased
to 85 % and the use of EC to 18 % while hospitalizations
remained the same and outpatient/specialist care visits
dropped to 16 %. In Fig. 1, we present Sankey charts
showing trajectories of healthcare service use. Most participants
did not use EC, outpatient/specialist care, or
hospital care neither at baseline nor at follow-up. There
were 16 % new reports of EC use at follow-up, while 9 %
used this in Lebanon but not in Norway. For specialist/
outpatient care, 10 % reported new use while 26 % reported
using this in Lebanon but not in Norway. The
biggest change in trajectory is the increase in the use of
GP from pre-arrival to after resettlement with 58 % new
reports of use.
Pre-arrival predictors of use of health care services in
Norway
Increasing age was significantly associated with the use
of EC services and hospitalization after arrival (Table 3).
No other significant associations between pre-arrival
sociodemographic factors and the use of healthcare services
at follow-up were found. With regards to health status pre-arrival, we found that poor SRH was significantly
associated with increased risk of EC use after arrival,
while lower scores in the social relationships’
domain of QoL (i.e., poorer social relationships) were
significantly associated with use of EC after arrival. With
regards to migration-related factors, not having a residence
permit in the transit country was significantly associated
with the use of EC after arrival.
After-arrival factors associated with the use of health care
services in Norway
When in Norway, increasing age was still significantly associated
with use of EC services and hospitalization
(Table 3). Likewise, increased health literacy was significantly
associated with use of GP, EC and hospitalization.
Similarly, high social support (ESSI) was significantly associated
with increased risk of EC use, use of outpatient/specialist
care and hospitalization, and increasing education
level was associated with hospitalization. When looking at
health status, we found that poor SRH was significantly
associated with the use of both EC and hospitalizations.
Generally, lower scores in the different QoL dimensions
were associated with higher use of services. However,
higher scores in the environmental domain of QoL were
significantly associated with use of a GP.
Discussion
This study provides data on health care utilization before
and after resettlement assessed at two different locations
and time points following the journeys of the same participants
and therefore incorporates factors from the
pre-arrival context as possible predictors for later use.
We find that not having a residence permit and having
poor health status pre-arrival predict the use of services
after resettlement. Poor SRH was significantly associated
with use of services both in Lebanon and in Norway suggesting a stable association along the migration path.
For the post migration stage, we find a significant association
between the use of healthcare services and increasing
health literacy (SILS), high social support (ESSI),
education and poor QoL. These factors did not seem to
influence future health care behavior while in transit,
suggesting phenomena subjected to change with time
and context. Also, we find an increase in GP and EC use
after resettlement and a decrease in outpatient/specialist
care while hospitalization rates do not change pre- and
post-resettlement, probably mirroring the health care
system in the country of stay at each period.
Use of GP services more than doubled pre- and postresettlement.
This rate (85 %) is slightly higher than that
of the resettlement country population in Norway, where
75 % reported use of GP in the last 12 months in
population-based data [24]. Comparing numbers between
surveys is encumbered with uncertainties, but we
believe some of the differences in GP utilization between
our sample and the resettlement country population can
be explained by the fact that in some Norwegian municipalities,
the general health assessment upon arrival is
performed by a GP. Despite having a separate question
for the general health assessment, we assume some participants
might have had difficulties distinguishing between
the two alternatives as both entails contact with a
primary care doctor. Another possibility is that some refugees
were derived to a second visit by the GP at the
first encounter for their general health assessment. In
any case, it is important to acknowledge the key opportunity
GPs have in responding to the need of the refugee
patient in early resettlement as the first point of contact.
Previous studies have argued that refugee primary care
services might reduce unnecessary EC use [25], showing
that refugees who receive a health assessment shortly
after arrival will be less likely to have an acute care visit
in this period [26]. Furthermore, we found an increase
in EC use from 10 % before arrival to 16 % after resettlement,
which is similar to the utilization rates of the resettlement
country population [27].
On the other hand, the use of outpatient/specialist
care dropped from 32 % in Lebanon to 16 % in Norway.
This decrease might be explained at the system level,
since outpatient/specialist care services in Norway require
a referral, usually from a GP, while other routes
are available to access such care in Lebanon given a
highly privatized health sector. When comparing with
population-based data from the Norwegian population,
36 % reported having had contact with outpatient/specialist
care the last 12 months [24]. A number twice as
high as that of our population, but not adjusted for morbidity,
so potential under-or overuse is not possible to
determine with certainty. Furthermore, some of our respondents
might have been referred by their GPs to
secondary care, but still waiting for their appointments
with a specialist at the time of the follow-up survey.
However, the doctor-patient interaction is key in identifying
patients needing a referral [28]. Previous research
has shown that not speaking the same language is associated
with decreased symptom reporting, fewer referrals
to specialist care [29] and shorter consultation time [30],
which also could explain our results. An inverse socioeconomic
gradient in terms of utilization of outpatient/
specialist care has also been documented in Norway [31]
that confirms privileged groups are those that avail most
of services [32]. However, utilization of GP and hospital
admissions, which is easier to access, was found to be
equitable [33]. Similarly, a systematic review across Europe
showed that outpatient visits for specialized care
were generally used less often by migrants [34]. In our
sample, hospital admissions did not change pre- and
post-resettlement, which could point to hospital admissions
having similar access thresholds across countries.
Finding pre-migration predictors for use of health care
in Norway can be of key importance to adequately prepare
health services to the new migrant population. One
novel finding in this study is that not having a residence
permit in the transit country and having poor social relationships
in transit was associated with higher use of
emergency care the first year after resettlement. Generally,
the lack of recognized documentation in a country
complicates the availability of healthcare and one can assume
that acute and/or chronic diseases left uncared for
contribute to higher use of care post-resettlement.
Hence, securing minimum acceptable living conditions
for refugees in transit countries should be a priority concern
globally.
The strongest correlation we found was the one between
poor SRH and health care utilization, signifying
the concordance between need for care and use of care.
Perceived poor health status seems to be a stable factor
as it holds for both pre-arrival health status and after resettlement,
even though the association after resettlement
is stronger. While the association between health
need and health care utilization is well-known [35], our
study highlights the stability of this association along the
migration trajectory. Post-migration, we found associations
between use of services and higher health literacy,
higher education, higher social support (ESSI), and low
levels of QoL. High health literacy drops from 56 % in
Lebanon to only 7 % in Norway, pointing to challenges
with a new language and a different health care system,
while high social support (ESSI) somewhat unexpectedly
increases from 35 % in Lebanon to 60 % in Norway. This
increase might be explained by the fact that most quota
refugees are resettled as families and some are re-united
with extended family members preceding them to the
resettlement country. Easier access to online communication and established support networks upon
arrival can also explain this increase. Why persons with
high health literacy, higher education and high social
support have increased probability of use while in
Norway but not in transit is difficult to answer but we
assume these factors become more important in a context
where there is universal health coverage, and no
economic barriers to health care.
For the concept of social support and social relationships,
we found associations pointing in opposite directions.
Poor social relationships measured with
WHOQOL-BREF while in Lebanon was associated with
use of EC after arrival. When in Norway, high social
support (ESSI) was associated with use of EC, outpatient/
specialist care and hospitalizations. Likewise,
poor social relationships (WHOQOL-BREF) were associated
with outpatient/specialist care and hospitalizations.
We believe some of this can be explained by measurement
differences in social support instruments, not capturing
the exact same phenomenon. The social
relationships domain in WHOQOL-BREF as part of
QoL only consists of three questions (satisfaction with
relationships, satisfaction with support from friends and
satisfaction with sexual relationships) and has the concept
of satisfaction in it while ESSI consist of 7 questions
and asks directly if you have someone available to talk
to, receive advice, emotional support, receive help with
daily chores etc. without assessing satisfaction.
The environmental domain of QoL describes feeling of
safety, satisfaction of living place, enough money to meet
needs, and satisfaction with transportation. Interestingly,
we found that higher scores in this domain were associated
with use of a GP. This also confirms the inverse
care law [32].
Strengths and limitations
Working with a cohort with similar background arriving
at the same time minimizing influence of contextual factors
as well as a high response rate and the use of validated
instruments add to the strengths of this study.
However, certain limitations need to be considered when
interpreting our data. We did not assess frequencies of
contact with the healthcare services, only yes/no for use
at least once. Because of this we are not able to separate
between frequent users and persons who have only used
the service once. This study has an explorative nature
with a high number of statistical tests, which increases
the risk of Type 1 error. We can therefore not rule out
that some of the significant results are chance findings,
especially those with p-values close to 0.05 (marked with
one asterisk in Table 2). In addition, the variable health
literacy is assessed with only one question (SILS) which
is limited and has to our knowledge not been validated
in a refugee population with poor language skills upon
resettlement. Moreover, we deliberately changed mode
of data collection from self-completion to structured interviews
between the two time points which can introduce
a possibility of interviewer bias, but in that way, we
achieved a high response rate. Further, we should ideally
have had a longer follow-up time to better assess
changes with time. However, previous research has
highlighted that we especially lack data on the first 5
years after resettlement [36]. Last, utilization of care is
not equal with appropriate care or equality in quality of
care, which we are unable to evaluate with the current
study design.
Despite these limitations, we believe our findings add
important knowledge to the field of health services research
for refugees, a group that is understudied in
health system research. Based on our findings, we encourage
resettlement countries to enhance primary care
services in providing diversity-sensitive care given their
role as first port of call. Possible under-use of specialist/
outpatient care among refugees and reasons for such differences
warrants further research. People with undocumented
status before arrival should be subjected to extra
awareness to secure healthcare needs being effectively
met at the primary care level. Social support and health
literacy can be possible targets for future interventions
to enhance accessibility of care. In conclusion, the use of
healthcare for refugees clearly changes from the preand-
post resettlement phase. Apart from entitlements
and need, health care utilization is impacted by sociodemographic
factors and migration-related factors.