Key points
– To deliver patient-centred care, it is important to
know what matters to every patient. Nevertheless,
our study showed that a large group of patients felt
that their treating physician did not know what mattered
most to them at that moment.
– Although the majority of patients initially indicated
disease- and care-related matters to be most important,
they shared diverse personal stories when asked
about their motivations and why these were important.
These stories show the person behind the
patient.
– The questions “What matters most to you?” and
especially “why does this matters most?” are
questions that can provide healthcare workers with
personal information about the patients’ preferences,
needs, goals, values and emotions, necessary to
deliver patient-centred care.
Introduction
Effective patient-doctor communication and patient involvement
can lead to increased patient satisfaction, better
health outcomes, and is essential to the delivery of
patient-centred care [1, 2]. However, with growing
worldwide pressure on acute healthcare systems and the
resultant limited time available per patient [3, 4], it is increasingly
challenging for healthcare providers to have
comprehensive conversations with patients. As a result,
they may not have adequate psychological and emotional
insights into the patients’ priorities [5, 6]. Research
shows that many clinicians’ conversations are about patients
and not with them [7], and that patients are seen
as their disease(s) rather than as individuals [6].
The goal of patient-centred care is to customize care
to the individual patient, taking into consideration their
preferences, needs and values. To achieve this, Barry and
Edgman-Levitan (2012) proposed asking the patient
“what matters to you?”, in addition to “what is the matter?”
[8]. This topic has received increasing attention
over the years, and an annual international “What Matters
to you?” day was launched in 2016 to promote
meaningful conversations between healthcare providers
and patients [9]. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement
(IHI) states that the “what matters to you?” question
is a quick, simple, but yet profound way to start
deep and personal conversations with patients [10]. It
encompasses discussing the patients’ priorities and
values alongside potentially revealing unanswered questions,
which could provide input for a personalized care
plan [11].
Much research has been conducted to investigate the
priorities and preferences of patients with specific diagnoses
[12–14], treated in the Emergency Department
[15] or in chronic disease programs [16–20], which has
resulted in the development of multiple frameworks (e.g.
Lim [21] and Picker experience [22]). However, little is
known about what is most important to the heterogeneous
group of patients (with regards to morbidity, basic
characteristics, culture, health and socio-economic status)
during the acute phase of a hospital admission. The
first 24 h of an acute admission will often determine the
course of the hospital stay. In this phase many diagnostic
tests are carried out, care plans are created, and key decisions
made. It is crucial that during this time-period
the priorities of the patient are clear to the healthcare
team [12]. Therefore, the primary objective of this study
was to identify and categorize what matters most to the
diverse group of patients in the first 24 h of an
admission.
Not only must doctors converse with patients, it is important
that patients feel that they have been listened to,
have been understood, and that their concerns will be
considered and addressed [5, 8, 23]. As such, the secondary
objective of this study was to assess the patient perspective
on whether they felt their doctor knew what
mattered most to them.
Methods
Study design and setting
A large-scale qualitative international study was conducted
using the flash mob research design [24, 25]. The
flash mob research design is based on the concept of
flash mobs, where groups of people suddenly meet in a
public place, briefly perform a specific act and then
quickly disappear. This allowed us to collect structured
qualitative data from a large number of patients within a
short time-period. To get an overview of what matters
most to patients in a wider socio-cultural context, the
study was conducted across a wide range of countries,
regions and cultures.
The study started on November 14th, 2018 at 10AM
local time, and ended 50 h later on November 16th, 12
PM local time. Patients in 66 hospitals were recruited
simultaneously in The Netherlands, United Kingdom,
Ireland, Denmark, Switzerland, Hong Kong and
Singapore. Data were collected in acute medical units
(AMUs, short stay departments [26]) and other medical
wards (i.e. observation units, cardiology, geriatrics,
gastroenterology, haematology, internal medicine, nephrology,
neurology, oncology, pulmonary medicine and
rheumatology).
The Executive Committee of the Medical Ethics Review
Committee of VU University Medical Center
(IRB00002991) reviewed the research proposal, approved
the project and decided that the Medical Research involving
Human Subjects Act did not apply (reference
No. 2018.318). In all other countries, approval of national
ethics committees and executive boards was
sought in line with local research policies.
The acute medicine research team of Amsterdam University
Medical Center (located at VUmc, the
Netherlands) coordinated the project. Collaborators
from the Safer@Home research consortium were involved
in the design of the study and acted as coordinating
researchers, responsible for the recruitment of
hospitals in their country [27].
Research team and responsibilities
The coordinating investigator in each country was responsible
for translating the English datasheet into the
local language (using forward- and backward translation,
according to the ISPOR guidelines [28]) and translating
the open text answers to English (with a forward- and
backward translation of a 10% convenience sample).
Every hospital had one ambassador responsible for
appointing interviewers for data collection, recruitment
of patients and entering the data into the digitalized secured
database (Castor EDC). Interviewers were physicians,
(research) nurses, medical students, or
psychologists, all trained in communication skills.
Recruitment of patients
Consecutive sampling was used to recruit a broad range
of participants which would be largely representative of
the acute patient population. All patients were 18 years
or older, were unplanned admitted to hospital in the
previous 24 h and able to give informed consent.
Patients presenting with surgical, trauma and obstetric
conditions and patients unable to give informed consent,
as judged by the medical team, were excluded. Patients
were asked for oral or written informed consent, depending
on national research policies. Patients were
approached face-to-face and assured that their decision
to participate or not participate would have no consequences
for their care.
Questionnaire
In the questionnaire we used the classic ‘what matters to
you?’ question [8, 10, 29, 30]. After a pilot study in ten
patients, we found that adding a probing question (‘why
is this important to you?’) was necessary to grasp the full
concept. The data from these patients were used purely
for the purpose of pilot testing the questionnaire, and
not included in the data analysis.
The question ‘does your treating doctor in the hospital
know what matters to you most?’ was added to find out
about the patients’ perception regarding this subject.
The questionnaire was complemented by questions concerning
basic characteristics, living conditions, social and
work situation. To find out how patients interpreted all
questions, we used a cognitive interviewing style [31]
during the pilot (e.g. by asking their opinion about the
content and relevance of questions).
All questionnaires were available in each country’s
local language.
Data collection and privacy
Interviewers solely introduced themselves by name and
had no prior relationship with the patients. Each interview
took approximately 5 min. Data were collected at
the bedside, and either entered directly into the digital
database or transcribed from a paper datasheet, without
the use of audio or visual recordings. Patients’ responses
were not recorded verbatim, but paraphrased by the
interviewer. Paraphrased answers were not returned to
patients for review.
All interviewers had their own personal Castor EDC
account for data input and were trained by both video
tutorials and written instructions. Measures and warnings
were built into the database to minimize the potential
for errors. Interviewers transcribed the patient’s
answers into the Castor EDC database. All records were
labelled with an individual number. The key list with
record numbers could only be accessed by the local coordinating
researcher. No directly identifiable data were
entered into the database.
Data translation and development of the conceptual
coding framework for content analysis
Danish, Swiss and Dutch data were translated to English;
back-translation was conducted on 10% convenience
samples and checked by independent assessors. No essential
differences between the original data and backtranslations
were found.
To analyse the large number of open-text answers, a
framework needed to be developed that could be used
for coding both the answers to the ‘what matters most?’
and ‘why?’ questions.
An inductive approach of content analysis was used to
identify categories and sub-categories in the data, leading
to the development of a conceptual framework on
what matters most to acutely admitted patients and why
[32]. This framework was developed through five phases
(using open coding, grouping, categorization and abstraction
throughout each phase [32]), by four researchers
(two medical doctors and two psychologists).
A detailed description of the process can be found in
Figure S1 in the Supplementary Material.
Coding and data analysis
All 3700 answers (100% of data) to the ‘what matters
most?’ and ‘why?’ questions were independently coded
by both a medical doctor (EE or MK) and a psychologist
(BS or HM), using the developed framework. Multiple
categories could be assigned to one answer, without
hierarchy. When there were discrepancies in assigned
categories, an extensive consensus procedure followed
(resulting in 100% agreement regarding the final categories).
Composition of teams rotated to account for
differences in interpretation (i.e. EE + BS, EE + HM,
MK + BS, MK + HM).
As the qualitative data were large-scale, the frequency
of categories was analysed and visualized in word clouds.
Moreover, we analysed the combined occurrence of answers
to the ‘what matters most to you?’ and ‘why?’
questions to identify patterns. We did this by counting
which combinations of categories occurred most between
the ‘what matters most?’ and ‘why?’ question (for
example; patients often wanted to go home because they
missed family members). Finally, we performed multiple
subgroup analyses.
Coding was performed in Excel (Microsoft Office Professional
Plus 2016). Word counts and word clouds were
generated using Atlas.ti8 (Atlas.ti Scientific Software
GmbH). Descriptive statistics were performed with SPSS
for Windows, version 24 (SPSS Inc).
Results
During the inclusion period, 2798 patients had been
admitted to the participating units for 24 h or less,
and were therefore eligible for inclusion. However,
866 (31%) patients were excluded because they were
not able to give informed consent or were unwilling
or unable to participate (Fig. 1). Eighty-two patients
were interviewed but later excluded because they had
been admitted for more than 24 h prior to their questionnaire.
Therefore, the interviews of 1850 (66%)
acutely admitted patients were analysed. Figure 1
provides an overview of the inclusion process and
numbers of included patients per country. Table 1
shows the patient characteristics of the included
patients.
What matters most to patients and why?
The coding framework included twelve categories (health,
getting home, symptom relief, functioning, medical issues,
hospital experience, patient values, reassurance, possessions,
emotions, urgency, and other). These categories were
divided into 38 sub-categories (e.g. ‘symptom relief’ was
divided into pain, dyspnoea, fatigue, nausea). Table S1 in
the Supplementary Material shows the categories and subcategories,
illustrated by explanations and quotes.
To most answers, two to four categories were assigned.
Of all patients, 29.6% answered that being in good health
or getting better was most important at that moment,
17.4% said they wanted to go home and 16.1% considered
knowing the diagnosis was most important. These categories
were assigned notably more often than others
(see Fig. 2 and Table S2 in the Supplementary Material).
Compared to the answers to the ‘what matters most?’
question, the answers to ‘why does this matters most?’
showed a broader range of categories, with no clear top
three (see Fig. 3). Health was mentioned less often as an
underlying reason compared to the ′what matters′ question
(Supplementary Material: Table S3). Many issues
were mentioned by comparable numbers of patients (e.g.
family and friends (11.8%), psychological functioning
(11.2%), fear, anxiety and insecurity (10.4%)).
Combined occurrence of what matters and why
Underlying reasons for ‘what mattered most?’ were given
when asked ‘why this mattered most?’. Analysis of answers
to the ‘what matters most?’ and ‘why?’ questions, revealed
combinations of answers that occurred frequently together.
Illustrations of apparent combinations observed in the top
three ‘what matters most?’ categories are shown below.
Getting better
Most patients wanted to get better to be reunited with their
loved ones (usually partner or children, sometimes friends or
other family members): “I miss my two-year-old son and
sense that he is missingme a lot too. I want to get better so I
can take care of my son and to have the energy to do fun
things with him.” (Female, age-group 31–35 years, The
Netherlands), “To get rid of my alcohol problem. It is important
because it is destroying me and my family.” (F, 56-
60Y, Denmark), “It’s important for me to recover as my children
and grandchildren depend on me for money.” (M, 61-
65Y, United Kingdom) Other patients wanted to get better
to get back to their normal life: “That I will be able to do
everything I feel like again.” (M, 71-75Y, The Netherlands).
Getting home
Most patients mentioned the familiarity of the home situation,
their role as an informal caregiver or relationships
as the main reason to strive for a return to home. Examples
include: “I feel better at home, having your own stuff
around.” (M, 71-75Y, The Netherlands), “At home I feel
most comfortable, they have no dark beer here.” (M, 86-
90Y, The Netherlands), “To get home to my wife and our
3-year old daughter. My wife is expecting, I just cannot
bear the thought of her giving birth without me.” (M, 41-
45Y, Denmark), “My husband is 80. It is more difficult for
him to visit me in hospital now.” (F, 67-80Y, United kingdom),
“Wish to get home to my daughter- in-law’s 50th
birthday on Friday.” (M, 66-70Y, Denmark).
Getting a diagnosis
The wish for an established diagnosis was most often
expressed in combination with fear and insecurity. Patients
wanted reassurance and felt having a diagnosis
would make them function better psychologically. “To
know what is wrong for peace of mind.” (M, 46-50Y, The
Netherlands), “I want to be able to do my own research or
reading about the diagnosis.” (F, 66-70Y, United Kingdom),
“It is unsafe to be sent home without clarification.”
(F, 31-35Y, Denmark), “That I get my diabetes management
optimised, even though I’m admitted with a COPD
exacerbation. I’m scared thatmy legs will need amputating
and then I can’t live in my apartment and keep my 11-
year-old dog anymore.” (M, 51-55Y, Denmark), “To find
peace of mind and closure. I’m afraid of Alzheimer’s and
aging, it is affecting work.” (F, 56-60Y, Ireland).
Patient perspective: does your doctor know?
More than half of all patients (51.9%) felt their treating
doctor did not know what mattered to them most. Of this group, some patients (21.3%) reported to not have
seen a doctor yet. Other reasons included “it did not
come up in the conversation”, “the doctor does not need
to know”, “there was no chance or no reason to tell”, or
“the doctor did not listen” (Table 2).
Subgroup analysis
Women more frequently considered the way that they
were approached by healthcare staff (e.g. a kind approach,
personal attention, honesty, openness, feeling
supported, being treated with respect and dignity) as
most important (12.2% of women, 5.6% of men). We
found no major differences in both ‘what matters most?’
and ‘why?’ between different age groups (18–40, 41–70,
71+), patients with different length of stay (≤6 and > 6 h),
and those who felt that the doctor knew (or not) (Supplementary
Material: Table S4). In Asian countries we
found a relatively high percentage of patients mentioning
getting better/ good health as being most important
(47.8–65.8% in Asian countries, 18.3–39.0% in Western
countries). Patients in Singapore mentioned their work
as the reason why things mattered more often than patients
in other countries (17.1% and ≤ 7.2% respectively)
(Supplementary Material: Table S5).
Discussion
In this study 1850 patients admitted acutely to sixty-six
hospitals in seven countries were asked what mattered
most to them and why. Irrespective of the country, disease-
and care-related issues were predominant in reply
to the ‘what matters most?’ question: getting better,
knowing the diagnosis and being able to go home. This
is in line with the main function of an acute hospital admission
and the motivation and focus of clinicians: diagnosing,
treating and timely discharge [33]. However,
when asked why they answered the way they did, patients
provided more personal answers, often mentioning
relationships and psychological well-being. Whereas
many patients mentioned the same issues to the question
‘what matters most to you?’, the underlying reasons
as to ‘why is this important?’ differed significantly from
patient to patient. This probably reflects the heterogeneity
of acutely admitted patients with regards to morbidity,
baseline characteristics, culture, health, socioeconomic
status and phases of their lives. It demonstrates
the challenges of providing patient-centred care
without discussing what is most important with each individual
patient.
Although certain combinations of what matters? and
why? were more common than others, and some categories
were mentioned more frequently within certain
subgroups of patients, individual priorities are not predictable.
Knowing what matters to each individual patient
is key [34–36] because, as our data shows, it is a
reflection of personal goals and preferences.
A large group of patients felt the treating doctor was
unaware of what mattered most to them, partly because
it did not come up during the consultation. Doctorpatient
communication is crucial to the doctor-patient
relationship [37], and essential in delivering high quality
care, since the priorities of doctors and patients can differ
[38]. It is conceivable that doctors focus mainly on
diagnosing and treating the underlying medical condition.
However, since the data represents the perception of patients, it is also possible that doctors do know what
matters most, without the patient consciously realizing
this. As the feeling of being heard and understood is essential
in the process of patient-centred decision-making
[39], it is recommended to have explicit conversations
about what matters most and why, even if the doctor believes
they already know this. Feeling heard and understood
is known to alleviate suffering [40, 41], reinforce
dignity [42, 43] and is one of the key factors in patient
reported quality of care [44, 45]. It could help making
patients feel that doctors see them as a person instead of
a disease to be treated.
In healthcare settings with limited time per patient,
these two simple questions (‘what matters most to you?’
and ‘why?’) may be a feasible way to quickly get to know
the person behind the patient. The conversation will give
insight into the personal situation of the patient, stimulate
patient involvement and ultimately could facilitate
more patient-centred care [46]. Having these conversations
early in the admission will help set the agenda and
design a tailored care plan [8, 47, 48].
Strengths and limitations
The flash mob research design enabled us to include
many patients within a short timeframe in seven different
countries and 66 hospitals, across cities, towns and
rural areas. It provided data from a large heterogeneous
patient population representative of the wide diversity of
acutely admitted patients. There were no missing data in
the main questions. The scale of the study has enabled
us to create awareness among many healthcare providers
and patients. Lastly, we developed a new conceptual
framework based on multiple perspectives using an iterative
process. Answers were coded by both a medical
doctor and psychologist, which ensured capturing the
medical as well as the psychological component. The
framework is comprehensive and suitable for the broad
concept of ‘what matters most?’ and ‘why?’. Therefore,
we believe the framework will be suitable for use in
other patient groups and settings as well.
The results of our study need to be interpreted in the
light of a few limitations. Firstly, answers from patients
might have been paraphrased, which may have simplified
patient answers. Secondly, due to the large number of
interviewers, it is possible that there were differences in
interview styles. However, as there were only two, highly
standardized main questions, we believe this would not
have had a significant influence on our results.
Future research might focus on how ‘what matters
most’ to patients might change over the course of a hospital
admission. Although no large differences were
found between patients that had only spent up to 6 h in
hospital and those in hospital from six to 24 h, we do
not know whether the findings are representative for
what matters most to patients in later phases of their admission.
Furthermore, it would be interesting to conduct
a study where both the patient, the doctor and all other
professionals in the healthcare team are interviewed
about what matters most to the patient in order to compare
and align their views.
Conclusions
Patients most frequently mentioned the importance of
getting better, having a diagnosis and going home in the
first 24 h of an admission. ‘Why’ this matters is strongly
determined by each individual patient and often goes
well beyond the medical targets of healthcare professionals.
When asking for the patient perspective, a large
group of patients felt the treating doctor did not know
what mattered to them. Explicitly asking ‘what matters
most?’ and especially ‘why?’, may help the healthcare
team to obtain a more holistic picture and to see the
person behind the patient. Having conversations regarding
what is important to the patient should assist with
the design of a personalized care plan and will help the
patient to feel heard, which positively effects the patient
satisfaction, health outcomes and the overall quality of
care.