Background
Dengue fever (DF) is the most prevalent arboviral disease
worldwide [1]. Dengue virus (DENV) is transmitted
to human through the bite of infected mosquito
vectors of Aedes genus [2]. More than the third of the
world’s population is at risk of DENV infection [1].
Over the past 50 years, DENV incidence has increased
30-fold, associated with continued geographic expansion
[3]. Approximately 3.6 billion people are estimated
to be at risk of dengue infections worldwide [4], apparent
cases overally range from 50 to 100 million per year
[5]; fatality is estimated in 10,000 deaths per year [6].
The most affected areas are America, South-East Asia
and regions of Western Pacific [2]. In Africa DENV is
known to circulate since the nineteenth century but
due to the lack of diagnostic tools and effective surveillance,
the real burden is likely to be underestimated [3,
7].
DENV infection can cause a variety of clinical manifestations
ranging from self-limited form referred as DF to
life threatening disease known as severe dengue [2].
The causative agent of dengue fever, is an enveloped,
positive, single stranded RNA virus belonging to the Flaviviridae
family, Flavivirus genus [8]. Its 11 kb genome
contains a single open reading frame encodes three structural
proteins [capsid (C), membrane (M) and envelope
(E)] and seven non-structural (NS) proteins (NS1, NS2A,
NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5) [8].
DENV is classified into four antigenically and genetically
distinct serotypes sharing around 65% of genome
similarity namely DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and
DENV-4 circulating worldwide [9]. DENV-1 presents five
genotypes (I, II, III, IV, and V); DENV-2 is divided in six
genotypes (Asian I, Asian II, Cosmopolitan, American,
American/Asian and Sylvatic); Four genotypes were identified
for DENV-3 (I, II, III, and V) and DENV-4 (I, II, III,
Sylvatic) [10]. Genotypes are defined as strains having up
to 6% divergence at a nucleotide level [10, 11].
For DENV serotyping and genotyping, several genomic
regions such as the Envelope (E), E-NS1 junction and
Capsid pre-membrane (C-prM) have been widely used
[12]. Genotyping using a single primer set, for both
amplification and sequencing, targeting the CprM gene is
preferred as it is faster and cost effective [12, 13].
However, due to the absence of effective antiviral therapy,
a safe vaccine that can induce efficient and balanced
immune response against all different DENV serotypes/
genotypes is urgently needed [14]. Genetic diversity
among serotypes and genotypes can hamper vaccine
development [11]. It is crucial to perform the surveillance
of circulating genotypes in a given area to guide the
choice of appropriate prophylactic measures before the
implementation of any vaccination trial. Also, it is well
known that different DENV serotypes or genotypes may
trigger various immune responses [15], with heterogeneous
ability to infect different target cells and cause the
severe form of dengue [16].
Despite the fact that DENV and its vector are known
to be present in Subsaharan Africa, only few studies
have described circulating serotypes and/or genotypes
[17–20]. Several studies focusing on the genetic diversity
of circulating DENV were undertaken in Colombia [21],
Nigeria [19] and India [22]. In Senegal, the first dengue
infection was reported in 1970 [23]. Since then, many
outbreaks and sporadic cases were reported [24–26].
Between 2017 and 2018, an unprecedented number of
cases associated to this viruses (DENV 1–3) occurred
in Senegal [27, 28]. Despite this growing incidence, the
circulating serotypes and genotypes, and their distribution
across the country are still unknown.
To address this gap on knowledge, we carried out a retrospective
study to identify circulating DENV serotypes
and genotypes among strains collected between 2017 and
2018 across the Senegal using qRT-PCR, sequencing and
phylogenetic analysis. We also determined the spatial and
temporal patterns of serotypes/genotypes around the
country.
Material and methods
Study design, settings: presentation of syndromic sentinel
surveillance network in Senegal (4S Network)
Senegal, a sub-Saharan Africa country, has long standing
febrile illnesses surveillance system. Through a partnership
between the Senegalese Ministry of health, the
WHO country office and the Institut Pasteur de Dakar
(IPD) which hosts the WHO Collaborating Center for
Arboviruses WHOCC for arboviruses and the National
Influenza Center [29, 30] a febrile illnesses surveillance
network was established. This system, initially limited to
virological surveillance of influenza like illnesses (ILI),
was reviewed through the establishment of a new surveillance
network, based on a syndromic approach based on
fever, called Senegalese Syndromic Sentinel Surveillance
Network or 4S network. The 4S network is responsible of
the surveillance of febrile illnesses with 20 sentinel sites
distributed in the 14 Senegal’s administrative regions
[30]. These sentinel sites conduct population-based surveillance
for Influenza-like illnesses and other public
health priority syndromes (malaria, dengue-like syndromes
and diarrheal syndromes). Outpatient visits are
distributed geographically in diverse areas across the
country (Fig. 1). DENV isolates were primarily derived
from human samples collected between 2017 and 2018
in community healthcare centers that are part of the 4S
network.
Sera samples and data collection
From January 2017 to December 2018, in collaboration
with the healthcare professionals at different sentinel
sites in Senegal, patients with history of fever lasting 2
to 7 days along with one or more of the following symptoms:
headache, myalgia, arthralgia, ocular pain, generalized
fatigue, cough, nausea, vomiting, sore throat,
rhinorrhea, difficulty breathing, diarrhea, or bleeding
were offered the opportunity to enrol in the study. After
informed consent was obtained, 5 ml of venous blood
was collected. For each patient, standardized interview
form was fulfilled containing both clinical and demographic
data. The collected samples were stored at 4 °C
before shipment to the WHOCC located at IPD. Samples
were shipped on a weekly basis. Of note, all patients
were retrospectively interviewed in the context of a sentinel
febrile illnesses surveillance. At the central laboratory,
collected sera were processed immediately for
several arboviruses and haemorrhagic fever viruses as
DENV, CHIKV, YFV, ZIKV, RVFV, CCHF by real time
RT-PCR using a protocol described by Dieng and colleagues
[25]. Aliquots of sera samples were also stored at
− 80 °C for additional analysis (isolation and/or molecular
characterization).
Nucleic acid extraction and arboviruses detection
Viral RNA was extracted from 140 μl of human sera
using a QIAamp viral RNA kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
extracted RNA was eluted in 60 μl of elution buffer and
stored at − 20 until use.
Arboviral detection was assessed by real-time qRTPCR
assays for DENV [31], CHIKV [32], RVFV [33], YFV
[34], ZIKV [35] using the Quantitect Probe RT-PCR Master
Mix (Qiagen). Briefly, the detection was performed
using ABI7500, using the following temperature profiles
for all RT-qPCR assays: RT at 50 °C for 10 min, activation
at 95 °C for 15 min and 45 cycles of 2-step PCR—at 95 °C
for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min.
Viral isolation
In December 2018, 65 DENV-positive sera collected
between January 2017 and December 2018 in the sentinel
febrile disease surveillance setting and previously evaluated
by real-time RT-PCR were available.
Viral isolation was attempted for the purpose of
biobanking and futures studies.
Briefly, 200 μl of each sample diluted 1:10 in Leibovitz
15 (L15) medium in a 25 cm2
flask of C6/36 cells at
80% confluence, followed by incubation at 28 °C for 1 h
to allow virus binding and entry. After incubation, L15
medium containing 5% FBS, 1% penicillin and streptomycin,
0.05% fungizone was added to the flask and incubated
for 8 days according to the protocol described by
Dieng and colleagues [36].
The culture supernatant was collected on day 8, to
assess viral infection, Immuno Fluorescence Assay (IFA)
was performed as previously described [37]. If DENV
isolation failed at passage 1, the supernatant from the
previous passage was used to infect a new batch of C6/36
cells as above. This was repeated up to three times until
viral isolation is achieved.
Isolation was successfully achieved on 39 of the 65 sera
samples used (Table 1).
Once isolation was confirmed, the contents of the vial
were transferred to a 15-ml tube and clarified by lowspeed
centrifugation (2500 rpm) at 4 °C for 5 min. The
supernatant was collected and stored at − 80 °C until further
use.
Serotyping of isolates
To assess the serotypes of the successfully isolated strains,
real-time molecular serotyping was performed on the
RNA extracts from viral isolates using the commercial
Tib-Molbiol Modular Dx Dengue Typing Kit (Cat-No.
40-0700-24) and the Lightcycler 480 (Roche, Penzberg,
Germany). This system allows simultaneous detection of
four dengue virus serotypes from 5 μl of input RNA [26].
Molecular characterization of CprM gene
For cDNA synthesis, 10 μl of viral RNA (from cell culture
supernatant) were mixed with 1 μl of the random
hexamer primers (2 pmol) and the mixture was heated
at 95 °C for 2 min. Reverse transcription was performed
in 20 μl mixture containing mixed of 2.5 U RNasin (Promega,
Madison, USA), 1 μl of deoxynucleotide triphosphate
(dNTP) (10 mM each DNTP), 5 U of AMV reverse
transcriptase (Promega, Madison, USA) and incubated
at 42 °C for 60 min. PCR products were generated using
set of primers DS1/DS2 described by Lanciotti and Colleagues
[19] at the concentration to amplify the CprM
gene. Five microliters of cDNA were mixed with 10×
buffer, 3 μl of each primer at 10 μM, 5 μl of dNTPs
10 mM, 3 μl of MgCl2,
and 0.5 μl of Taq polymerase (Promega,
Madison, USA).
The obtained amplicons were purified using a
QIAquick Spin PCR Purification kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany) normalized to 2 ng/μl then at least 10 μl of
each amplicon sent for bidirectional sequencing with an
ABI PRISM 377 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems)
using 5 μl of each of the same PCR primers at the
concentration of 5 μM.
The raw data was then sent to the laboratory for analysis.
Chromatograms were analyzed using CodonCode
Aligner 3.7.1 (Codon Code, Center Ville, MA, USA) with
a Phred quality score cut off of 20 as the cut-off for lowquality
sequence trimming.
Obtained cleaned sequences were then merged using
EMBOSS Merger software and final results were analyzed
using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
(BLAST, www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/) consulted on 18 July
2019. BLAST analysis was performed in order to define
proximity with globally sequenced dengue strains
deposed in Genbank.
The percentage of identities were obtained using
nBLAST [38]. The similarity of the sequences generated
during this study with those previously submitted
in GenBank was determined by percentage identity and
E-value, and only the best hits were used.
Cleaned CprM sequences were combined with 17 other
ones from Thiès 2018 in Senegal and already available on
Genbank. The obtained final dataset of 56 CprM genes
was combined with DENV sequences representing the
different serotypes/genotypes across the world manually
curated using geneious prime 2021.0.2 (Biomatters, New
Zealand), and alignment was made using Mafft [39].
Maximum likelihood (ML) trees were inferred for serotypes
and genotypes determination using IQtree software
[40]. All sequences were presented in the format: lab
number_location_year of isolation in the phylogenetic
trees.
Spatial mapping of defined DENV serotypes
According to the results obtained from the serotyping
(qRT-PCR, phylogenetic analysis), maps of Senegal
were drawn using Maptools package implemented in R.
For each isolate respective XY coordinates of sentinel
sites regions’ where corresponding sera samples were
collected were used for georeferencing.
Each described serotype at a given sentinel sites was
represented by a single-coloured dot respectively as follow:
yellow for DENV-1, blue for DENV-2 and green
for DENV-3. At each coordinate, there will be as many
points as circulating serotypes.
Samples used in this study are part of the Institut Pasteur
de Dakar collection (WHO Collaborating Centre
for Arboviruses and/or Haemorrhagic Fever Reference
and Research). Therefore, all the samples were anonymous
and only reference numbers were used during the
analysis. The Senegalese National Ethical Committee of
the Ministry of Health approved the surveillance protocol
which lead to the obtention of human sera as less
than minimal risk research, and written consent were not
required. Throughout the study, the database was shared
with the Epidemiology Department at the Senegalese
Ministry of Health and Prevention for appropriate public
health action.
Results
Characterization of identified dengue isolates
During this retrospective study, a total of 56 (39 newly
sequenced) dengue virus isolates were successfully serotyped
using both sequencing of CprM gene followed by
phylogenetic analysis and/or real time RT-qPCR. The
overall distribution of identified DENV serotypes during
this study across sampling locations in the 4S sentinel site
network (Fig. 1) are represented in Fig. 2.
Demographic (sampling locations, years of isolation,
age, gender) and Clinical data associated with newly
sequenced isolates during this study are summarized in
Additional file 1: Table S1.
Detected serotypes/genotypes and their spatio‑temporal
repartition
For a total of 56 serotyped isolates during this study the
number of detected DENV serotypes vary by years and
location (Additional file 1: Figure S1; Table S1). Overall,
three dengue virus serotypes were detected (Fig. 3). No
cases of DENV serotype 4 (DENV-4) were observed. At
a genotypic level, phylogenetic analysis based on CprM
gene reveal that dengue 1 sequences obtain during this
study (n = 14) grouped into genotype V (Additional file 1:
Figure S2), DENV-2 (n = 14) into genotype Cosmopolitan
(Additional file 1: Figure S3) and DENV-3 (n = 28) into
the genotype III (Additional file 1: Figure S4).
Based on the informations available in Additional file 1:
Table S2 and the defined serotypes (qRT-PCR and/or
CprM sequencing followed by Phylogenetic analysis), we
drawn maps of Senegal showing the spatio-temporal distribution
of defined serotypes covering the study period
(Fig. 4).
According to the obtained maps, in 2017 among 12
serotyped isolates DENV-1 was detected in Louga (11/12;
91.66%) and one DENV-2 strain in Bokidiawe area (1/12;
8,33%) located in Matam region (Fig. 4A). In contrast
Fig. 2 Barplot showing the distribution of used strains according to the year of detections. Used isolates were collected between 2017 and 2018,
collection sites are colored according to the sampling location (cf legend)
DENV1-3 were noticed in 9 localities belonging to 8 distinct
administrative regions (Fig. 4B).
Considering the overall study period, DENV-2 circulated
mainly in the North (Rosso, Matam, Richard Toll,
Bokidiawé), DENV-1 in Louga, Fatick and Thiès, and
DENV-3 was observed in seven distinct localities around
the country.
Using both methods, the predominant serotype was
DENV serotype 3 (DENV-3) accounting for 50% (28/56)
of serotyped strains, followed by DENV serotype 1
(DENV-1) with 25% (14/56) and then dengue virus serotype
2 (DENV-2) in 25% (14/56) of studied strains.
BLAST results
Genetic similarity of Senegalese DENV isolates compared
to other global types shows that DENV-1 is closely
related (99.18% nucleotides) to an isolate from Singapore
(KM403584.1) in 2012, DENV-2 shares closer identity
(100% nucleotides) with a strain isolated in the 2016 outbreak
in Burkina Faso (KY627763.1) and finally DENV-3
has 99.64% identity with a strain isolated in China
(JN662391.1) in 2009 and also in Ghana (LC379221.1) in
2014.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this work represents the first nationwide
study assessing the genetic diversity of DENV
strains circulating in Senegal at the genotype and serotype
level. The results of this study shows that between
2017 and 2018, three DENV serotypes (1, 2 and 3) were
co-circulating in 11 localities belonging to eight administrative
regions of Senegal. Co-circulation of multiple
serotypes has been commonly reported in Asian countries
such as Malaysia [41], India [22] and America [42].
The co-circulation of three different dengue virus serotypes
in Africa was first described during the 2007–2010
dengue epidemic reported in Gabon [43]. Recently,
DENV-2 and DENV-3 co-circulated during an epidemic
in Burkina Faso in 2016, with DENV-2 representing the
dominant serotype [44].
Co-circulation of multiple dengue virus serotypes in
the same area is known to be a risk factor for the emergence
of severe dengue [45]. Indeed, antibody-dependent
enhancement (ADE) can occur in areas where
different serotypes are circulating [22].
This highlights an urgent need for enhanced disease
surveillance and the application of a vector control
policy to reduce the vector density that determines the
intensity of transmission.
Compared to Asian and Caribbean regions, the epidemiology
of dengue in Africa is not well understood.
Indeed, the lack of surveillance and reliable diagnostic
tools result in underestimation of the real burden of the
disease in African countries [7].
As soon as data about dengue epidemiology is available,
there are sparse information regarding the circulating
serotypes and genotypes.
Yamashita and colleagues report the limited numbers
of studies describing the dengue virus serotypes/genotypes
occurrence in Sub-Saharan Africa where the virus
and the vector are widely distributed [18]. This lack of
informations about circulating serotypes/genotypes is
linked to the low amount of sequences from Africa in
public databases as Genbank.
Among the described serotypes during this study,
DENV-3 was the predominant and the most geographically
widely distributed serotype across Senegal during
our study period. This is particularly interesting since
the latest documented occurrence of DENV-3 in Senegal
was during an unprecedented urban epidemic in
2009 with 196 confirmed cases [24]. Nine years after,
this serotype re-emerged in 2018. Indeed, the Senegalese
ministry of health in collaboration with the Institut
Pasteur de Dakar reported an DENV-3 outbreak in
October 26, 2018 in Touba city [27]. Interestingly, the
outbreak occurred during the Grand Magal celebration,
a religious event considered to be one of the largest
Muslim pilgrimages/mass gatherings in West Africa,
which is an occasion for scattered families around
the country (and even around the world) to gather in
Touba.
Diagne and colleagues [28], Soxna and colleagues [27]
raised concern about a potential spread of dengue virus
to none affected areas around Senegal and Africa after
the Magal. Here, based on highest sequences similarity
among all sequenced DENV-3 a potential spread across
the country as the probable consequence of the religious
event is highly suspected. But more detailed study
including larger genomic effort (more isolates and full
genome sequencing) in combination with epidemiological
data are needed to get insight about the origin and the
dispersal pattern during this religious event. Otherwise
this serotype is known to be endemic in West Africa [19,
46].
In terms of occurrence, DENV-3 is followed by
DENV-1 detected in 14 out of 56 serotyped isolates and
found in the regions of Louga (11/14), Fatick (1/14) and
Thiès (2/14) where DENV outbreaks were reported in
2017 and 2018 respectively [47]. Phylogenetically, the
Louga, Fatick and Thiès strains are identical and closely
related (99.18% nucleotides) to a DENV strain from Singapore
(KM403584.1). Based on the complete E-gene
sequences, Dieng and colleagues reported that the
Louga 2017 and Fatick 2018 DENV-1 isolates fall into
a monophyletic cluster and were introduced into Senegal
(Medina Gounass) from Singapore in 2014 (95%
HPD = 2012.88–2014.84) [36].
Finally, DENV-2 isolates have been detected mainly
in the north of the country (Rosso, Matam, Richard
Toll and Bokidiawé) at the border with Mauritania. The
DENV-2 sequences in our study (14/56; 25% of isolates)
are closely related to those responsible of the 2016 epidemic
in Burkina Faso (KY627736.1) [46]. Numerous
imported cases of the epidemic strain from Burkina Faso
have been reported outside the continent in countries
such as France and Japan [46, 47], our study adds further
evidence of the spread of the strain in West Africa as previously
highlighted by Amoako and colleagues in their
study focusing on the etiology of acute febrile illness in
Ghana [48].
For genotype assignment, phylogenetic analysis of
sequenced CprM gene during this study revealed that all
DENV-1 belongs to the genotype V, DENV-2 to the Cosmopolitan
genotype, while all sequenced DENV-3 during
this study fall in the genotype III. Our results is concordant
with the overall genotypes distribution in Africa [19].
Indeed, DENV-1 genotype V, DENV-2 cosmopolitan
genotype and DENV-3 genotype III has over the years
been the predominant circulating DENV in Africa [19].
Previous studies in Cameroon [48] and Ghana [17]
revealed circulations of DENV-1 genotype V and
DENV-2 genotype Cosmopolitan in febrile patients in
Douala and Accra respectively.
Between 2016 and 2017 DENV-3/III re-emerged in
Gabon, where the detected strain is closely related to
those isolated in the same country in 2010. This highlight
a stable circulation of this serotype in Gabon [49].
Interestingly studies highlights that DENV-3/III has the
particularity to have a global distribution as consequence
of its high transmissibility potential [50].
In contrast a different genotypic composition is
observed by Ayolabi and colleagues during her study on
DENV among febrile illnesses in Nigeria where DENV-1
(genotype I) and DENV-3 (genotype I) were identified as
actively circulating in Lagos [19]. These results support a
possible cryptic circulation of genotypes other than those
predominantly detected in Africa.
Co-infection, with more than one serotype are likely
to be much higher when multiple dengue serotypes cocirculate
in a given population [51] and promoting the
risk of emergence of recombinant virus strains that could
have distinct properties [52].
Classically serotyping was performed in the lab by
using gel based semi-nested conventional RT-PCR
described by Lanciotti and colleagues [13]. The use of the
CprM gene for dengue serotyping is known to be fast,
economically cheaper [22] and sensitive [13], but these
approaches require multiple handling steps (semi-nested
PCR) which increase the risk of false-positive results due
to amplicons contamination [12]. For the reasons highlighted
below the Tib-Molbiol qRT-PCR system used
during our study allow the simultaneous dengue virus
serotyping in a single tube using 5 μl RNA input is a powerful
and reliable tool for rapid dengue serotyping with
lower risk of contamination.
Our study had several limitations. Firstly, we were limited
by the number of isolates identified. This is probably
due to the fact that the study is only focused on years
2017 and 2018. Secondly, collected sample were stored
at + 4 °C and shipped on a weekly basis. This has the
potential to impact considerably the viral isolation by
impairing virus integrity. Thirdly, DENV-3 appears to be
widespread but we must consider a potential sampling
bias in favor of this serotype. Finally, processed isolates
during this study were derived from sera samples collected
in a single site at a given area, our result may not
be representative of the real dengue burden and serotype
distribution profile within the region.
Early management of dengue positive cases is key to
reduce fatal outcomes, timely serotyping can provide
early warning of dengue epidemics to improve management
of patients and outbreaks [53]. Our aim is to adapt
and evaluate the Tib-Molbiol, into flexible and portable
qRT-PCR devices, as useful tool for DENV detection/
serotyping near to the points of needs.
Our study highlights the importance of continuous
molecular surveillance of arthropod-borne virus, particularly
DENV, since the spread of emerging pathogens
occurs rapidly between distant locations. This work will
constitute a reference for future studies on DENV disease,
dynamics of circulating strains and their impact on
the virus epidemiology in Senegal.
Conclusion
In summary, the present study describes the genetic
diversity of dengue virus in Senegal between 2017 and
2018 at the serotype and genotype level using isolates
available at the WHOCC and sequences from Senegal
covering the study period available on Genbank. Overall,
our results show a circulation of three dengue virus
serotypes belonging to three genotypes during the
study period and show a spatial distribution pattern of
different serotypes marked by localization of serotype 2
isolates mainly in the north of the country, DENV-1 in
Louga, Fatick and Thiès and a widespread of DENV-3
around the country.
However, the iceberg effect for DENV infection is
well-known; cases reported to the surveillance system
only represent a small proportion of total infections.
To assess the true incidence and evaluate the level of
herd immunity, a nationwide seroprevalence study is
urgently needed.