Background
In leprosy, diagnosing neural pain can be difficult, especially
for a non-specialist. The differential diagnosis
between neuritis and neuropathic pain is critical because
these involve distinct pathological processes requiring
different treatments [4]. Misdiagnosis tends to result
in prescription errors, as has been frequently identified
by specialists of reference centers receiving patients
forwarded from primary health care units. Inadequate
treatment then leads to unfavorable prognosis, particularly
with regards to the prescription of corticosteroids,
which may not be prescribed as necessary for neuritis
or may be inappropriately used for cases of neuropathic
pain [14, 21].
Neuritic pain starts with an inflammatory process
affecting nerves. Neuropathic pain, a nonexclusive condition
of leprosy, begins because of abnormal functioning
of the peripheral and central nervous systems. Neuritis
and neuropathic pain are commonly confused with each
other. Thus, it is difficult to reach a correct differential diagnosis and prescribe adequate treatment when both
conditions occur concomitantly [3, 8, 23].
In leprosy, the frequency of neuropathic pain ranges
from 11.3 to 70.3% [12, 17, 20, 27]. In our Leprosy Outpatient
Clinic based in Rio de Janeiro, the annual prevalence
is 15% [9]. Although sensitive questionnaires are
currently available to identify neuropathic pain, like the
Douleur Neuropathique en 4 Questions (DN4), due to a
low specificity rate (45–57.9%), it is not considered adequate
[12, 16].
The lack of diagnostic tests has hampered the diagnosis
of reactional episodes like reversal reaction or erythema
nodosum leprosum. Besides this, there are no laboratory
or neurophysiological tools able to identify neuritis [2].
Therefore, the purpose of this work was to define a simple
tool to diagnose neuritis in leprosy patients and identify
important clinical predictors to assist this.
The present study evaluated clinical predictors used
to differentiate neuritis from neuropathic pain in leprosy
neuropathy patients via a standardized form that
included subjective questions and physical examination
data. Few health units employ specialists in neurology or
have resources for electrophysiological evaluations that
could facilitate diagnosing patients with chronic neuropathic
pain. Therefore, defining clinical predictors to
diagnose neuritis could become a diagnostic tool to help
clarify uncertain cases.
Methods
Subjects
The present cross-sectional observational study was carried
out at the Souza Araújo Outpatient Clinic, a national
referral center for the diagnosis and treatment of leprosy
at the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), under the
Brazilian Ministry of Health, in Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil,
from September 2014 to May 2017. Eligibility criteria
included leprosy patients with neural pain in any
limb, except for cranial nerves, at least 18 years of age,
fluency in the Portuguese language, and ability to understand
questions during anamnesis. Exclusion criteria
were the presence of other neuropathic pain etiologies
such as human immunodeficiency virus infection and
chronic diseases; pain syndromes like complex regional
syndromes, fibromyalgia, painful ulcerations, radiculopathy,
joint pain, and tendonitis; and patients that had been
undergoing corticosteroid therapy (more than 10 mg of
prednisone or equivalence).
Clinical history and examination
After obtaining the written informed consent of the participants,
information regarding sex, age, educational
level, and the World Health Organization (WHO) leprosy
classification were recorded. Neurological evaluations
focusing on the peripheral nerves were performed and
patients with more than one affected limb were asked
to answer separately to each of them. The main leprosyaffected
peripheral nerves (superior auricular, ulnar,
radial cutaneous, lateral popliteal, and posterior tibial
nerves) were assessed for enlargement [6]; and palms
and soles were examined for the presence of cyanosis.
In brief, the tactile threshold was tested with Semmes–
Weinstein monofilaments [25]. The monofilaments vary
in thickness (1 = 300 g, 2 = 4 g, 3 = 2 g, 4 = 0.2 g, and
5 = 0.05 g); and the inability to perceive the touch of even
one of them represents an absence of tactile sensitivity to
that given pressure. Thermal sensation was determined
by the use of cold (15 °C) metal objects; and a safety pin
was utilized to ascertain pain perception in the trigeminal,
ulnar, median, radial, sural, superficial fibular, and
plantar bilateral nerves. Lastly, the Medical Research
Council (MRC) scale was adopted to determine individual
muscle strength in the upper and lower limbs; and
tendon reflexes were tested using Taylor’s hammer [13].
Standardized form
A standardized form was developed (Table 1) consisting
of the following items: date of onset of pain, sensory and
motor symptoms, worsening factors, irradiation signs,
and pain triggered by nerve palpation, whether declared
spontaneously or after questioning [6, 9, 27]. Items were
subsequently combined to create the following three subgroups:
(a) ‘sensory symptoms’ for positivity in questions
2 or 3; (b) ‘motor symptoms’ for positivity in questions
4 or 5; and (c) ‘neurological symptoms’ for those who
answered positively to any of the above questions, 2, 3, 4,
or 5 (Table 1). Finally, a pre-test was conducted with ten
patients to evaluate the comprehension of the standardized
form and their response time.
One neurologist, unaware of the previous neural
pain diagnoses, independently evaluated recruited participants
during a routine visit via the standardized
form. Patients with more than one affected limb were
instructed to complete a form for each limb separately.
Electrophysiological examination
Nerve conduction was verified in the painful limbs of
all participants. Parameters were measured by way of
the Neuropack μ MEB 9100 EP/EMG measuring system
(Nihon Kohden Corp., Tokyo, Japan). Skin temperatures
were taken at the wrists and ankles and maintained above
33 °C in room temperatures ranging from 29 to 32 °C.
Standard methods were performed according to Delisa,
1994 [5]. Sensory nerve conduction studies included
the radial, median, ulnar, sural, and superficial fibular
sensory nerves. Motor nerve conduction studies were
performed on the ulnar, median, tibial, and common peroneal
nerves [28].
Case definitions
Based on the patient history and examination results,
patients were classified into two diagnostic groups by a
neurologist specialized in leprosy: neuropathic pain and
neuritis (Table 2). The diagnostic criteria for neuropathic
pain was: pain distribution in a neuro-anatomically
plausible area with confirmed negative or positive sensory
signs (i.e., hypoesthesia, hyperesthesia, hypoalgesia,
hyperalgesia, or allodynia) [11]. The definition for neuritis
was: pain in the neuro-anatomical area but in conjunction
with motor impairment and/or sensory signs
in the correspondent nerve, in addition to confirmed
demyelinating signs demonstrated in the electrophysiological
examination results [15]. Demyelinating signs are
defined as such when there is a latency prolongation of
the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) and/or
sensory nerve action potential (SNAP); reduction of the
motor or muscular conduction velocity to below 85% of
the lower limit of normality circumventing the CMAP;
or a SNAP amplitude drop by up to 30% of the lower
limit [1, 7, 13]. If the patients with demyelinating signs
had been treated for neuritis in the previous year, they
were assigned to the neuropathic pain group. Despite
the paucity of data in the medical literature regarding a
gold standard to define neuritis, a satisfactory response
of up to one month of corticoid therapy was used for
diagnostic confirmation.
Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed via SPSS, version 16 [26]. The
sample demographic and clinical features were described
using median and interquartile interval for both nonparametric
quantitative variables and frequencies as well
as proportions of the categorical variables. Pearson Chi-
Square and Fisher’s exact test were adopted to assess the
association between demographic and clinical predictors.
The diagnosis of neuritis or neuropathic pain was determined
by the results of the neurological and electrophysiological
examinations at a significance level of p < 0.05.
The minimum estimated sample size was 57 neural
pain evaluations to obtain 80% of sensitivity and 34 for
90% of specificity, considering an acceptable difference of
10% and a 95% confidence level in an estimated population
of 750 patients with neural pain.
Clinical algorithms were built that could predict neuritis
using the clinical predictors statistically associated
with neuritis in analysis and the ones based on the
rationale of clinical practice. For each algorithm, indicators
of test accuracy were estimated with 95% confidence
intervals.
Results
Of the 161 eligible patients, 107 were excluded. Sixteen
were incompatible because of diabetic neuropathies and
5 due to other neuropathies. Fifty-one were in already
in treatment for neuropathic pain, 15 for neuritis, and
22 were in corticosteroid therapy. Sixteen had other
pain conditions and 3 were excluded for other causes.
The final sample included 54 patients with a total of 124
completed forms. Fourteen patients had neuritis, six of
which had neural pain in more than one limb and were
simultaneously diagnosed with neuritis and neuropathic
pain; five had neuritis in only one affected limb and three
in two affected limbs (Table 3); therefore, a total of 20
forms (16.1%) were described as neuritis. Demographic
characteristics of the diagnostic groups are presented
in Tables 4, 5. The median age of the study sample was
44. The majority had two or more painful neural sites,
roughly four years of formal education, and a WHO
multibacillary leprosy classification.
Significant differences were found between the diagnostic
groups (“neuropathic pain” and “neuritis”) with
regards to when the pain began; if the pain had lasted
up to 90 days (p = 0.031); if movement was a worsening
pain factor (p = 0.042); and if the pain was triggered by
nerve palpation (p = 0.039). The set of analyzed questions
and answers is presented in Table 6.
The presence of any sensory or motor symptoms for
at least 30 days was not found to be statistically different
between the two groups (p = 0.103). However, this is
a common clinical finding during routine evaluations of
neuritis, and it had been chosen to discriminate between
neuritis and neuropathic pain.
Algorithms based on the clinical predictors identified
on the forms were used to diagnose the subtype of neural
pain (Table 7). All algorithms tested are presented in
Table 7. Pain onset in the last 90 days or pain with any
of the typical symptoms for at least 30 days, in association
with movement and spontaneously-declared triggering
of pain by palpation as factors in the worsening of
pain, were analyzed as diagnostic algorithms for neuritis,
showing a negative predictive value of 86.3%, a specificity
of 97.12%, and a positive likelihood ratio of 6.93. When
considering pain triggered by palpation in any condition
(spontaneously referred or not), sensitivity increased
from 20.0 to 35.0%, so that, as described in Fig. 1, a diagnosis
of “confirmed neuritis” could be reached.
Most of the patients assessed considered the form easy
to answer (68.5%), while one (1.9%) found it difficult,
22.2% were indifferent, and 3.7% had no opinion.
Discussion
Neural pain is a common complaint during medical
appointments with leprosy patients. Neuropathy in leprosy
starts with the entry of Mycobacterium leprae in the
Schwann cells of the small nerve fibers [18, 19]. However,
acute and subacute neural damage may also occur due to neuritis and reactional episodes, characterized
by the mixture of neurological symptoms with neural
pain. In the acute phases, the diagnosis of neuritis is relatively
clear. In the later stage, characterized by late nerve
impairments due to intra-neural fibrosis, reactional episodes
may reoccur, further complicating an accurate
diagnosis of neuritis, especially in patients with neuropathic
pain or chronic neuropathy [7, 22, 23].
Anamnesis is essential in the differential diagnosis of
neural pain. Locating the onset of pain and neurological
symptoms might be one of the most effective diagnostic
indicators at our disposal. As expected, the persistence
of pain beyond 90 days was more frequent in cases of
neuropathic pain, with a statistically significant difference
when comparing these cases to those with neuritis.
In contrast, identifying movement as a factor in worsening
pain might not seem specific enough, yet, there is a
statistically significant difference between the diagnostic
groups regarding this factor. Moreover, in the absence of
this information, positive likelihood ratios decreased in
the neuritic diagnostic algorithm.
Neurological evaluations focusing on the peripheral
nerves and their enlargement plus trigger pain by nerve
palpation were the clinical signs that best predicted
neuritis. However, isolated thickening of the peripheral
nerves should not be the only support for its diagnosis.
Knowledge of overall anatomy and the use of peripheral
nerve palpation in leprosy are crucial in researching
identifying potential trigger points for pain and should
be encouraged in clinical practice [7].
Pain triggered by nerve palpation raises the possibility
of an inflammatory component in the pathophysiological
process of pain, which, due to local inflammation,
would naturally be present in neuritis [9]. This finding
was common in these cases. This isolated sign did not
reach an acceptable level of accuracy, primarily because
it is present in almost half of all patients with neuropathic
pain and because dysesthesia upon nerve palpation
can occur in many reactional states [9, 15].
There were limitations to calculate sample size considering
divergence register about acute neuritis incidence.
Datas were based on cohorts that estimate the
incidence of neuritis in leprosy reactions, without differentiating
neuritis with or without pain [10, 24]. The
term “neuritis” in the medical literature has been used
for different contexts, both in the pathophysiological
process of nerve involvement in leprosy and in the
clinical diagnosis of the leprosy reaction. There is not a
clear and reliable gold standard for neuritis diagnosis.
During case definition, defining the diagnostic criteria
for neuritis was more difficult than for neuropathic
pain [11]. It is well known that leprosy is first a demyelinating
neuropathy, which, as it progresses, leads
to axonal loss [7]. The present study incorporated the
neurophysiological criteria for demyelination that have
been used in clinical practice by highly reliable reference
centers to reach a definitive diagnosis of neuritis,
despite the absence of these data in the medical literature.
Therefore, pain relief following corticoid therapy
was included as a confirmatory diagnostic. We believe
that the criteria to define neuritis, as presented here,
could be a method used by other researchers to diagnose
this condition.
Date of pain onset at any time during the 90-day
period prior to examination or the simultaneous occurrence
of pain and neurological symptoms within the
last 30 days, in association with the spontaneouslydeclared
triggering of pain by nerve palpation and
movement as factors of pain worsening showed higher
positive likelihood ratios, resulting in an increased
specificity in the diagnosis of neuritis. However, when
nerve palpation alone triggered pain, whether spontaneously
declared or after questioning the patient, both
the specificity and positive likelihood ratios decreased,
albeit only slightly for the latter.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the present study determined that the sum
of the following data satisfactorily confirmed a diagnosis
of neuritis: the occurrence of the onset of pain at any
time within the previous 90 days or in association with
the initiation of neurological symptoms sometime during
the prior 30-day period, plus the worsening of pain
as a result of movement and nerve palpation. When a
negative result is obtained, individuals without neuritis
are correctly identified, enabling the appropriate medications
to be prescribed. This avoids the indiscriminate use
of corticosteroids, a common problem seen by reference
centers, especially in patients with neuropathic pain or
chronic neuropathy.
Perhaps even more importantly, the results of the present
study unequivocally show that a correct diagnosis
could be reached by (1) a non-specialist and (2) without
any neurophysiological testing whatsoever.
There is hope that these findings assure more frequent
and reliable diagnoses of this particularly neglected disease
and greatly facilitate its case management in primary
health care units with limited resources.

