Burn infections are a noticeable health problem, especially
in developing countries [1]. It has been documented
that about 75% of death in patients with burn
injuries are due to infections [2] Acinetobacter baumannii
is one of the most common causes of nosocomial infections
with high mortality and morbidity among hospitalized
patients, especially in burn and intensive care units
[3, 4]. Nowadays, the emergence and spread of antibiotic
resistance in A. baumannii is a major global challenge
[4]. Carbapenems are considered drugs of choice
for the treatment of severe infections caused by MDR-A.
baumannii [5]. Unfortunately, carbapenem resistance is
increasing among A. baumannii isolates, which is alarming
[5].
Various mechanisms are involved in the development
of carbapenem resistance in A. baumannii including
β-lactamases acquisition, outer membrane proteins and
PBPs alteration, overexpression of efflux pumps and gene
mutation of CarO [6].
One of the most important mechanisms of antibiotic
resistance in A. baumannii is the production of
β-lactamase enzymes, the genes of which are usually
carried on mobile genetic elements, including integrons
[7]. Beta-lactamases are grouped into four classes based
on the amino acid sequence, including: A, B, C, and D
[8]. Resistance to carbapenems is usually dependent on
β-lactamases of class B (MBLs) and D (OXA-type carbapenemases)
[9]. OXA β-lactamases or OXA-type carbapenemases,
include distinct subgroups from which
OXA-23-like, OXA-24-like, OXA-40-like, OXA-51-like,
OXA-58-like and OXA-143-like have been found in
A. baumannii strains [9, 10]. MBLs families are more
important than other β-lactamases, due to their ability
to hydrolyze a wide range of β-lactam antibiotics, especially
carbapenems [11, 12]. Several MBLs including
VIM and IMP have been identified among A. baumannii
strains [13, 14]. Different IMP–type enzymes have
been described in the globe among Gram-negative bacilli
especially Enterobacterales and non-fermenter organisms
including Acinetobacter spp. [15]. Previous studies
have shown that the prevalence of MBL-producing
strains of A. baumannii in the world is increasing,
although there are different reports in various geographical
areas [13].
Acinetobacter has a high potential for the acquisition
of resistance genes through mobile genetic elements,
including integrons [15]. MBLs are generally encoded on
the gene cassettes of class 1 integrons and spread readily
among A. baumannii strains [16]. The presence of integrons
and association with genes encoding MBLs are frequently
reported in A. baumannii isolates [17].
The current study was performed to detect the genes
encoding MBLs and class 1 integron structures in A. baumannii
isolates from burn patients.
Methods
Ethical consideration
Informed consent was obtained from all subjects, and all
methods were carried out in accordance with the relevant
guidelines and regulations of Ethics Clearance Committee
of the Alborz University of Medical Sciences.
Bacterial isolates and identification
The current study was conducted between December
2019 and November 2020. A total of 106 non-duplicate
A. baumannii isolates were collected from hospitalized
burn patients at Shahid Motahari Hospital in Tehran,
Iran. The collected clinical isolates were transferred
to the laboratory of the Department of Microbiology,
School of Medicine, Alborz University of Medical Sciences.
Standard biochemical tests were used to identify
the Gram-negative bacilli isolates as A. baumannii strains
These tests included catalase, oxidase, O/F test, motility,
citrate utilization test and growth on TSI agar (Merck,
Germany) [18]. The diagnosed A. baumannii strains were
cultured in TSB (Merck, Germany) supplemented with
20% glycerol and stored at − 20 °C for further studies.
The phenotypically isolated A. baumannii strains were
confirmed by PCR and sequencing of the rpoB gene [19].
The A. baumannii ATCC 19606 was used as a control
strain.
Antibiotic susceptibility testing
Susceptibility of A. baumannii to imipenem (10 μg),
gentamicin (10 μg), ciprofloxacin (5 μg), ampicillinsulbactam
(20 μg), trimethoprim/sulfamethaxazole
(1.25/23.75 μg), ceftazidime (30 μg), doxycycline (30 μg),
and minocycline (30 μg) was performed by disk diffusion
method accordant with CLSI standard guidelines
[20]. The studied antibiotics were purchased from
MAST Company (Mast, UK). The MICs of imipenem
[breakpoints (μg/ml): susceptible: ≤ 2; intermediate: 4;
resistant: ≥ 8], and colistin [breakpoints (μg/ml): susceptible:
≤ 2; intermediate: -; resistant: ≥ 4] were determined
by the broth microdilution method according to the
guidelines of the CLSI [20]. The quality control strain was
Escherichia coli ATCC 25922. The bacteria were categorized
to MDR, XDR or PDR based on Magiorakos et al.,
[21] criteria.
Determination of integrons and associated gene cassettes
Extraction of genomic DNA of A. baumannii strains was
performed using boiling method [22]. The presence of
integrons class 1 and related gene cassettes were determined
by PCR using related primers [23]. The gene cassettes
of integrons were amplified using primers and
PCR conditions as described previously [23, 24]. Amplified
gene cassettes were sent for sequencing (Macrogen
Research, Seoul, Korea). The sequences obtained
were compared with those deposited in the NCBI database
with using BLAST program (http:// blast. ncbi. nlm.
nih. gov/ Blast. cgi) to determine the cassettes arrays of
integrons.
Molecular detection of metallo‑β‑lactamases‑encoding
genes
The amplification of the metallo-β-lactamases-encoding
genes including blaVIM, and blaIMP which is associated
with carbapenem resistance was performed by PCR
assays in all isolates. The relevant primers used for PCR
testing are listed in Table 1. The PCR conditions were
performed according to the protocol provided [22].
Statistical analysis
All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software
version 21 (SPSS, Inc.). The differences between variables
were evaluated by the chi-square (χ2) test and P-values
(P < 0.05) were interpreted statistically significant.
Results
In this cross-sectional study, a total of 106 non-duplicate
A. baumannii isolates were collected from burn wounds
of hospitalized patients. Seventy-six of the A. baumannii
strains were isolated from male (71.7%) and 30 females
(28.3%) patients. According to the results of antimicrobial
susceptibility testing, all (100%) of our A. baumannii
isolates were identified as MDR and 101 (95.3%) were
XDR, however, PDR phenotype were not detected in any
of the isolates. The antibiotic susceptibility profiles of
the A. baumannii isolates by disk diffusion method are
shown in Table 2. Determination of MICs of imipenem
and colistin showed that all isolates were sensitive to
colistin (MIC of ≤ 2 μg/ml) and at the same time all were
resistant to imipenem (MIC of ≥ 8 μg/ml).
The presence of integrons class 1 was detected by
amplification of integrase (intI1) in 62 (58.5%) of the
A. baumannii isolates (Table 3). Of 62 integron class 1
-positive A. baumannii strains, 49 (79.0%) were identified
with at least one gene cassette and 13 (21.0%) of
these were identified as empty integrons without gene
cassettes. Mapping of integrons revealed three different
gene cassettes including: arr2, cmlA5, qacE1 (2300 bp);
arr-2, ereC, aadA1, cmlA7, qacE1 (4800 bp); and aac(3)-
Ic, cmlA5 (2250 bp) (Fig. 1) which were identified in 44
(70.9%), 2 (3.2%) and 3 (4.8%) integron class 1 positive
A. baumannii isolates respectively. Also the frequency
rates of blaVIM, and blaIMP among 106 A. baumannii isolates
were 102 (96.2%) and 62 (58.5%) respectively and
60 (56.6%) carried both blaVIM, and blaIMP genes. The
association between intI1 + blaVIM, and intI1 + blaIMP
genes was identified among 58 (54.7%), and 42 (39.6%)
respectively. Forty (37.7%) of 106 A. baumannii isolates,
carried all three intI1 + blaVIM + blaIMP genes. It was also
shown that 44 (41.5%), isolates were intI1 (−); blaVIM (+)
and 4 (3.8%) of which identified as intI1 (+); blaVIM (−)
whereas 20 (18.9%) and 20 (18.9%) out of 106 A. baumannii
isolates were intI1 (−); blaIMP (+) and intI1 (+);
blaIMP (−) respectively (Table 3).
Interpretation of the results of statistical analysis
showed there was no significant association between the
presence of class 1 integrons and age groups (P = 0.55),
and burn size (P = 0.52). However the presence of class
1 integrons were significantly higher in female than male
patients (P = 0.017).
Discussion
Acinetobacter baumannii is one of the most important
pathogens leading to infections in burn patients. Control
of A. baumannii infections in these patients is a
major challenge due to the proliferation of MDR strains
[25]. In the current study, all isolates were identified as
MDR strains. Also in accordance with other studies, we
found that all our A. baumannii strains were carbapenem
resistant [26]. Similarly to our study, 94.5% of A.
baumannii isolated from burn patients were resistant to
carbapenems in the study by Pournajaf et al., [5], suggesting
that the mentioned group of antibiotics is no longer
suitable for the treatment of infections caused by this
bacterium. Determination of resistance by MIC showed
that all strains were sensitive to colistin. These data are
in agreement with those of Tarashi et al., [27] and previous
studies [17], and show that colistin is still an effective
antibiotic against MDR A. baumannii. In our study,
blaVIM was identified as the most common gene encoding
MBLs in the vast majority of isolates, followed by blaIMP.
According to the literature, a wide distribution of VIM
type metallo-β-lactamase has been reported at Middle
East CRAB [22]. An association between class 1 integrons
and MBLs genes, particularly blaIMP and blaVIM,
has been reported in other studies [17]. However, our
findings showed that the blaIMP and blaVIM genes were
not located on the class 1 integrons and no association
was found between MBL genes and the presence of class
1 integrons among studied isolates. The reason could
be that these genes may have been located on the other
region of bacterial DNA.
The analysis of integrons content revealed that 79.0%
of studied integron class 1 positive A. baumannii strains
carried at least one gene cassette, while 21.0% had no
cassettes and carried empty integrons. Considering
that strains with empty integrons have the potential to
capture cassettes carrying resistance genes, this result
could be remarkable. The most common integron cassettes
identified among integron-positive A. baumannii
strains were arr2, cmlA5, qacE1, which encode rifampin
ADP -ribosyltransferase, chloramphenicol transporter
and quaternary ammonium resistance protein leading to
resistance to rifampicin, chloramphenicol and quaternary
ammonium compounds, respectively. Rifampin resistance
due to the arr-2 gene carried by class 1 integrons
has been documented in A. baumannii strains [28]. Also
other variants of cmlA gene have been reported in other
studies and it seems that this is the first report of detecting
cmlA5 and cmlA7 variants in A. baumannii strains in
Iran [24]. Other cassettes, including aadA1 and aac(3)-
Ic encoding aminoglycoside adenylase and aminoglycoside
acetyltransferase respectively were found to be less
common in the present study. In researches conducted
in other parts of the world, including Taiwan, mainland
China, and France, different variants of the aadA gene
such as aadA1, aadA2 and aadA6 have been identified
in multidrug-resistant A. baumannii strains [23, 24, 29].
The identification of aadA1 and aac(3)-Ic genes in cassettes
of class 1 integrons could explain the high resistance
to aminoglycosides in the present study. Despite
the high resistance to antibiotics such as ceftazidime,
ciprofloxacin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethaxazole, no
gene cassette encoding resistance to these antibiotics was
found in the present study. Therefore, the development of
resistance to mentioned antibiotics may depend on the
presence of genetic elements other than integrons.
Limitations
This project is a cross-sectional study. However, to demonstrate
the clinical relevance and dynamic community
structure of clinical isolates, we need to continuously
monitor the outbreaks using PFGE, MLST, or WGS tools.
More information about resistant bacteria helps us to
respond to how bacteria spread throughout clinical settings.
Part of the limitations of the current study is also
due to limited resources. However, other genes responsible
for carbapenem resistance and MBL formation
could be identified by WGS. In addition to class 1, detection
of gene cassette arrays associated with other integron
classes could level up the study. Seemingly, the data
obtained in the present study may provide a basis for
future studies and assess the trend of infection generated
by A. baumannii in burn patients in our region.
Conclusion
A high prevalence of MBLs genes especially blaVIM was
identified in studied MDR A. baumannii isolates. In addition,
most of the VIM type MBL-positive strains carried
class 1 integrons. Furthermore, the gene cassettes arrays
of integrons including cmlA5 and cmlA7 were detected,
for the first time, in A. baumannii strains in Iran.