Background
Bartonella henselae is a bacterium responsible for cat
scratch disease (CSD), a zoonotic infectious disease usually
transmitted to human by bites or scratches of domestic
cat, its natural reservoir. Atypical clinical course in
CSD occurs in a minority of cases (5–14% of CSD) [1].
Among these atypical CSD, neurological manifestations
associated with B. henselae are scarce, consisting mostly
in neuroretinitis, meningoencephalitis and myelitis [2].
To our knowledge, cerebral epidural empyema has never
been described in the literature. We report here the
case of a cerebral epidural empyema due to B. henselae
diagnosed incidentally by 16S rDNA gene sequencing on
the abscess fluid.
Case presentation
An adult patient visited his general practitioner for a
five-day history of high fever, diffuse abdominal pain
and myalgia. Symptoms first disappeared and relapsed a
few days later with the onset of gradual worsening headaches.
A corticosteroid therapy was initiated considering
sinusitis as a possible cause of the headaches, resulting in
a complete resolution of all symptoms. After one week
of treatment interruption, the headaches resumed and
prompted the patient’s admission to the hospital. He had
no past medical history except for severe acne, tonsillectomy
and surgery for a sinus polyp. No medication was
reported at the time of admission. The patient worked as
a welder and had a 5-year-old son. No exposure to animals
was reported except for his cat.
On hospital admission, clinical examination revealed
a body temperature of 36.4 °C. The patient reported
isolated headaches. A cerebral computed tomography
scan (CT) identified an epidural collection with contrast
enhancement in the right frontoparietal area. The cerebral
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed findings
typical of a cerebral epidural empyema with FLAIR
hyperintensities with gadolinium enhancing lesions
(Fig. 1A, B). The thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT was normal.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis detected 30
WBCs/mm3 including 85% of lymphocytes, with normal
protein and glucose levels. The bacteriological cultures
of the CSF were sterile after a 48-h incubation on sheep
blood and chocolate agar plates in air atmosphere with
5% CO2
as well as on Brain–Heart enrichment broth.
A surgical drainage of the epidural collection was performed,
with bacteriological and pathological analyses.
The direct examination with Gram staining was negative.
The bacteriological cultures remained sterile after 7 days
of incubation on sheep blood agar in aerobic and anaerobic
conditions, on chocolate agar in air with 5% CO2
and
in Schaedler and Brain–Heart enrichment broths.
Post-operative examination was normal with complete
resolution of the headaches. The serum biochemical
parameters were within reference range, the serum protein
electrophoresis showed a restricted heterogeneity of
gamma globulins, corresponding to a slightly irregular
distribution of gamma globulins. No coagulation disorder
was recorded and a normal level of thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH) was observed. The C-reactive protein
level was normal (4 mg/L, reference value ≤ 6 mg/L). The
serologies for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis
B virus, hepatitis C virus, toxocariasis and hydatidosis
were negative. Microscopic examination of the epidural
collection by the pathologist (AR) showed a granulomatous
inflammation associated with necrosis and granular
On hospital admission, clinical examination revealed
a body temperature of 36.4 °C. The patient reported
isolated headaches. A cerebral computed tomography
scan (CT) identified an epidural collection with contrast
enhancement in the right frontoparietal area. The cerebral
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed findings
typical of a cerebral epidural empyema with FLAIR
hyperintensities with gadolinium enhancing lesions
(Fig. 1A, B). The thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT was normal.
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis detected 30
WBCs/mm3 including 85% of lymphocytes, with normal
protein and glucose levels. The bacteriological cultures
of the CSF were sterile after a 48-h incubation on sheep
blood and chocolate agar plates in air atmosphere with
5% CO2
as well as on Brain–Heart enrichment broth.
A surgical drainage of the epidural collection was performed,
with bacteriological and pathological analyses.
The direct examination with Gram staining was negative.
The bacteriological cultures remained sterile after 7 days
of incubation on sheep blood agar in aerobic and anaerobic
conditions, on chocolate agar in air with 5% CO2
and
in Schaedler and Brain–Heart enrichment broths.
Post-operative examination was normal with complete
resolution of the headaches. The serum biochemical
parameters were within reference range, the serum protein
electrophoresis showed a restricted heterogeneity of
gamma globulins, corresponding to a slightly irregular
distribution of gamma globulins. No coagulation disorder
was recorded and a normal level of thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH) was observed. The C-reactive protein
level was normal (4 mg/L, reference value ≤ 6 mg/L). The
serologies for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis
B virus, hepatitis C virus, toxocariasis and hydatidosis
were negative. Microscopic examination of the epidural
collection by the pathologist (AR) showed a granulomatous
inflammation associated with necrosis and granular
debris; neutrophils were recognizable. Grocott and
Ziehl–Neelsen stainings were negative. There were no
signs of malignancy (Fig. 1C, D). Meanwhile, 16S rDNA
gene sequencing was performed on the abscess fluid
with Sanger sequencing protocol, using the universal
primer pair fD1 (5’-AGA GTT TGA TCC TGG CTC AG-3’)
and rP2 (5’-ACG GCT ACC TTG TTA CGA CTT-3’) [3].
The result was analyzed using Basic Local Alignment
Tool (BLAST) program through the National Center
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) server (https://
blast. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ Blast. cgi). An identification of B.
henselae was obtained. This result was confirmed by an
in-house PCR targeting the rRNA 23S B. henselae gene
(BH5 5’-GAG GCC CCT ACC TCT GAA AGA-3’ and BH6
5’-TCA AAG CCC ACG GTGGA-3’). During the follow-up
of the patient, it turned out that his cat made frequent
scratches on his scalp.
A 1 month course of doxycycline (100 mg bid) was prescribed
with no relapse during a two-year follow-up.
Discussion and conclusions
To the best of our knowledge, we report herein the first
case of cerebral epidural empyema due to B. henselae
described in the literature. This clinical description
raises the question about the pathophysiology of Cat
Scratch Disease (CSD) in this patient. Following inoculation
of B. henselae, most patients with CSD present a
benign self-limited infection. CSD is one of the leading
causes of lymphadenopathy in children and adolescents
but the exact interaction between the host immune system
and the bacterium remains unknown. By invading
endothelial cells with an increased production of vascular
endothelial growth factor, B. henselae has also been associated
with systemic diseases like endocarditis, hepatosplenic
abscesses, retinopathy, uveitis, peliosis hepatitis,
osteomyelitis, splenomegaly, pneumonia and glomerulonephritis
[2]. Some of these manifestations have been
mostly described in patients presenting an immunocompromised
status like bacillary angiomatosis (BA) but
the pathogenesis of each form of CSD remains poorly
understood while documented BA in immunocompetent
adults has also been reported [4, 5]. Most neurological
manifestations consist of neuroretinitis, encephalitis and
meningitis. Peripheral neuropathy and acute hemiplegia
have also been described during CSD. Diagnosis of CSDassociated
encephalopathy may be challenging as normal
MRI have been described despite the existence of neurological
deficits [6]. Other manifestations include status
epilepticus [7], cerebral vasculitis, with secondary cerebral
infarction and necrosis [8], or brainstem encephalopathy
with basal ganglia impairment [9]. Spinal epidural
abscesses due to B. henselae have also been detailed in
the literature [10–12]. In these cases, the spinal abscesses
were all described in pediatric context (children from 5
to 10 years old) and associated with vertebral osteomyelitis.
However, cerebral epidural empyema associated
with B. henselae has never been reported in the literature.
We suggest that this uncommon manifestation may
reflect the atypical portal of entry of B. henselae in this
patient with the cerebral epidural empyema corresponding
to a localized manifestation of CSD. During a followup
interview, the patient acknowledged that his cat had
scratched his head on several occasions. Moreover, cerebral
abscesses or empyema may be associated with local
infection (sinusitis, acute medium otitis) or may appear
in the post-operative setting. Haematogenous spread
can be associated with brain abscesses and may complicate
the clinical course of CSD endocarditis [13]. However,
this source of contamination is unlikely in this case,
the most likely transmission route being the scratches
on the scalp. The emissary veins of the scalp could thus
have played a role in the dissemination of the pathogen,
providing a connection between the extracranial tissues
and the intracranial transverse sinus, and possibly the
epidural space. The initial prescription of corticosteroids
without antibiotics could also contribute to the intracranial
extension of the infection. The development of
the granulomatous lesion in the epidural space was thus
associated with the multiplication of B. henselae.
Because B. henselae is a fastidious bacterium that
requires specific laboratory conditions, conventional
growth techniques performed on cerebral samples may
lack sensitivity for this pathogen. Overall, 7 to 53% of
cultures of cerebral suppuration remain negative with
conventional techniques. Because streptococci and
anaerobes are the most commonly isolated microorganisms
from empyema material and because most negative
cultures are related to previous antibiotic treatment
[14], the use of complex additional techniques may have
been considered as futile. Recently, the causative bacteria
involved in central nervous system (CNS) infections
have been studied through a systematic comparison
between 16S-rDNA-based next-generation sequencing
and conventional techniques [15]. Molecular assays were
able to identify a larger number of bacterial taxa compared
to culture with the identification of several species
infrequently recorded in these infections. Therefore, the
absence of identification of infective microorganisms in a
CNS infection requires an extensive investigation and the
use of additional molecular-based techniques.
Most patients with CSD lymphadenitis experience
a spontaneous resolution of their symptoms without
specific antibiotic therapy. The fact that the antibiotic
treatment may shorten the duration of symptoms or
decrease the risk of systemic disease is debated in the
literature [16, 17]. However, in a large cohort of 268
patients with CSD lymphadenitis, antibiotic treatment was associated
with a median duration of symptoms of 2.8 weeks compared with
14.5 weeks in patients without antibiotherapy [17]. Limited data are
available for more severe forms of the disease but a combination of
active agents against B. henselae is commonly used with a favorable
outcome after a 4-week regimen [18]. A combination of doxycycline
and rifampicin [2, 7, 9, 19] or azithromycin and rifampicin has been
proposed for the management of CNS infections associated with B.
henselae, in particular for encephalitis [7]. Because of their specific
pathophysiology, intracranial epidural abscesses may be easier to treat
than cerebral abscesses or encephalitis with the specific impact of surgical
drainage. In our case, the evolution was favorable with surgical
drainage and a one-month course of doxycycline.
This case report describes a first case of B. henselae cerebral epidural
empyema. This emphasizes the potential unusual clinical
presentation of B. henselae infection, which has been treated here by
surgical drainage and appropriate antibiotic treatment. Furthermore,
in CNS infections with negative microbiological culture results, the
use of additional molecular techniques seems essential to the microbiological
diagnosis.