Introduction
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) is the most frequent
causative organism of genital herpes (GH) in the
United States, while HSV type 1 is felt responsible for this
recurrent infection in only 20 to 30 percent of cases [1].
GH is contagious both in the symptomatic and in the
asymptomatic phase of the disease and causes painful
genital ulcers. The management of the patient involves
consultations, laboratory exams and drug treatment for
the disease and its complications.
GH is one of the three most widespread sexually transmitted
diseases in the USA [2]. Published data show that
45 million persons aged 12 years or older have HSV-2 an-
tibodies [3], that up to 70% of patients attending sexual
transmitted disease clinics have HSV-2 infection [4] and
that the majority of patients with initially symptomatic
GH will develop recurrent disease [5].
Cost of illness studies represent one of the applications of
economic science to medicine. The aim of these studies is
to assess the economic burden of a disease and to help
decision-makers in targeting preventive efforts and allocating
resources [6,7]. Despite its widespread and increasing
transmission, there is still poor understanding
of the economic impact of GH in the USA, which makes
it difficult to evaluate societal costs and the cost-effectiveness
of preventive efforts [8]. Therefore, the objective
of the present study was to estimate the economic
burden of GH in the USA, using two different costing approaches.
Methods
We conducted a population-based study on the costs of
GH. In order to give a better estimate of the disease burden,
we retrieved economic information using two different
approaches: In the first instance, direct interviews
were conducted with a random sample of office-based
physicians using a structured, comprehensive questionnaire.
Secondly, information was retrieved from a large,
longitudinal administrative database. For this purpose,
data from Diversified Pharmaceutical Services (DPS),
which is a pharmaceutical benefit management firm,
were used. For both approaches, the time span was one
year (1996). Costs were referred to on a yearly basis and
computed in 1996 US dollars. Data were collected and
analyzed separately.
Approach using expert interviews
A questionnaire was administered to 30 randomly selected
primary and secondary care physicians practicing
in the North-East of the USA. Physicians were asked
about the annual number of patients with GH and the total
number of episodes of symptomatic GH, seeking
medical care and treatment. Data collection included the
following variables: (1) demographic characteristics of
the physicians' practices; (2) epidemiological figures:
number of patients with GH per year; stratification of patients
according to age, gender, severity of disease recurrence
rates; duration of episodes; and (3) resource
utilization: frequency of consultations and laboratory
tests for GH patients; prescription of drugs in first/recurrent
episodes and duration of treatment; frequency of
hospitalizations due to GH complications; employment
of patients; proportion of patients unable to work.
The perspective of this analysis was societal; thus, both
direct and indirect medical costs were based on the costs
born by society. The US population in 1996 (279 million)
served as a reference. Regarding medical costs, the categories
considered were the consultations and medical
procedures performed, laboratory tests, pharmacological
treatment and hospitalizations. Unit costs are illustrated
in Table 1. For the purpose of this analysis,
average monetary values from all respondents were considered
[9]. Values used came directly from interviews
with physicians involved in the study.
Indirect costs were calculated using the human capital
approach [7, 10, 11]. These costs were based on an average
U.S. hourly wage of $14 [12], and were valued according
to estimates of time consumed by
hospitalization, time lost from work due to illness, and
travel and waiting-room time resulting from physician
visits. We estimated that individuals with a primary GH
syndrome would miss two days of work if symptoms
were not severe enough to require hospitalization, and
one week of work if hospitalization was required. Patient
travel and waiting room time was estimated to be two
hours per physician visit. We did not use gender-specific
wage rates, as females are underpaid relative to men
[12], so that gender specific wage-rates would implicitly
undervalue the costs of GH in females.
Approach using claims database
DPS is a pharmaceutical benefit service collecting and
processing claims on consultations, laboratory tests,
drug utilization and hospital treatment from Health
Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and Independent
Practice Associations from different areas in the USA.
For the present study, all patients diagnosed with GH
who have been enrolled in the plans of four HMOs at any
time during 1996 were included. The four health plans
included in the analysis were located in the Southwest,
East, Mid-West, and West of the USA. The approximately
0.5 million members enrolled in the health plans were
generally employed or dependents of employed members.
The majority of members reside in an urban rather
than rural environment, representing an urban, working-
class population. Less well represented in this population
were the elderly (age over 65), the unemployed
and those entitled to state medical assistance (6% of the
plan members had Medicaid as their principal insurance).
Members were included if they had at least one claim for
GH during the study period. We used the following International
Classification of Disease-9 codes for data collection:
054.1 (GH); 054.10 (GH, unspecified); 054.11
(herpetic vulvovaginitis); 054.12 (herpetic ulceration of
vulva); 054.13 (herpetic infection of penis) and 054.19
(other GH). For this analysis, the following definitions
were used: "prevalent case" = members who had a GH
diagnosis claim between the dates of 1/1/96 and 12/31/
96; "active case" = members who had a GH diagnosis
claim between the dates of 1/1/96 and 12/31/96, and had
a drug claim for treating GH or were treated in the hospital
for GH; "incident case" = members who had a GH
diagnosis or drug claim in 1996 and no GH claim prior to
1996; "recurrent case" = members who were continuously
enrolled in 1996, had a GH diagnosis or drug claim
in 1996 and a recurrent claim 15 days or more after the
first claim (incident cases excluded).
Direct medical costs were based on actual pharmacy,
outpatient and hospital claims processed by DPS. Component
costs were based on drug costs, outpatient costs,
emergency room costs, inpatient costs, laboratory costs
and home visit costs. Drugs used for treatment of GH
were identified in members who also had a diagnosis
claim for GH at some time during the study period. This
allows for some reliance that the drug was used to treat
GH and not some other form of herpetic infection. Mean,
median, and standard deviation were calculated to describe
the population statistics for costs. The perspective
of this analysis was third party payer.
The annual costs attributable to GH-infection in the
United States were estimated as the product of the
number of incident and prevalent infections and the average
present value of the costs attributable to a single
GH-infection. We also evaluated the impact of other GHassociated
complications such as neonatal herpes and
excess cesarean sections. A crude estimate of the burden
of these complications was calculated, based on data extracted
from the DPS database and published data [1,
13,14,15,16].
Results
Approach using expert opinion
In the sample of 30 interviewed physicians, 15 were general
practitioners (GPs), while 15 were specialists (6 dermatologists,
4 gynecologists, 3 infectious disease
specialists and 2 urologists). Based on our data, GPs see
on average 34 GH patients a year; among these patients
13 (38%) were reported to be primary cases. Specialists
see 56 GH patients per year, including 12 (21%) incident
cases. Sixty-five percent of patients were in the 18-30 age
group; 52% of patients were female. Almost half of the
patients (49%) suffered from mild GH, whereas moderate
and severe cases represented 37% and 14% of patients,
respectively. Forty-eight percent of patients
experienced less than 2 relapses a year, 36% 2 to 5 relapses
and 16% more than 5 per year. A typical first GH
episode was reported to last on average 10.8 days, slightly
more than a typical recurrence (8.4 d). From the data
available, the incidence of clinically manifest GH can be
estimated to be 423,000 cases and the number of recurrent
cases at about 698,000 patients in 1996. These estimates
correspond to an occurrence rate of 3,139,000
symptomatic episodes.
Table 2 illustrates the total cost of illness obtained translating
epidemiological figures and utilization rates in
monetary terms using the unit cost values previously described.
The estimated total burden of medical care for
GH in the US in 1996 represents $984 million, based on
an estimated occurrence rate of 3.1 Mio symptomatic episodes.
Of these costs, 49.7% were caused by drug expenditures,
47.7% by medical care and 2.6% by hospital
costs. Further $214 million represent the indirect costs
to society. Thus, up to $1.2 billion can be considered as
being the total burden of GH to the US as computed with
this methodology. Table 3 gives a breakdown of the costs
at the single patient level.
Approach using claims database
Among 1,565 patients with GH, 65% of patients were in
the 21-40 age group; 74% were female. Table 4 summarizes
the main epidemiologic findings from this analysis.
We extrapolated the collected data to the US population
in 1996 (279 million) and calculated an annual incidence
of 131,130 symptomatic GH cases in 1996, corresponding
to a crude incidence of 0.47 per 1,000. The total number
of persons with prevalent, active or recurrent symptomatic
GH was estimated to be 806,310. This produces a
crude prevalence of 2.89 cases per 1,000 in 1996.
Table 5 shows the costs of GH among DPS database enrollees.
Costs were highest among recurrent cases and
lowest among prevalent, symptomatic cases not requiring
treatment. Using this approach, the amount of medical
resources absorbed by the care of GH patients in the
US can thus be estimated at $244 million for 1996.
Based on previously published data [1, 13,14,15,16], we
also estimated the direct costs of GH-associated complications.
Neonatal herpes accounted for 400 annual cases
with mean medical costs of $60,000, whereas 6,000 excess
cesarean sections contributed, on average, $2,500
per case. Thus, the average cost of these GH-associated
complications can be estimated at $39 million for 1996,
bringing the total of the direct medical cost estimates to
a sum of $283 million.
Discussion
This report presents crude estimates rather than precise
measures of the economic costs of GH in the USA. Using
two different approaches, we estimated the total direct
medical costs of GH to range from a minimum of $283
million to a maximum of $984 million in 1996. Indirect
costs to society amounted to $214 million due to production
losses. Office-based medical care and drug treatment
were the major sources of direct costs. Moreover,
this study showed that the average GH patient seeking
treatment is likely to be younger than 40, to develop
about 2 recurrent episodes, to undergo several laboratory
exams, and to be treated with antiviral drugs. Relapses
tended to be shorter than first episodes though having a
higher cost per episode.
Our results are likely to be conservative estimates due to
the great number of asymptomatic and shedding patients
not seeking medical care and transmitting the disease
to other individuals. As recently shown, the great
majority of people with serologic evidence of HSV-2 infection
have no history of recognized GH [3]. However,
many seropositive persons shed HSV-2 that is detectable
by culture from the genital tract, and many have symptoms
that are directly referable to HSV-2 detectable by
culture [17].
From an economic point of view, it must be borne in
mind that GH and other sexually transmitted infectious
diseases have negative externalities in the sense that
consequences of the disease are not only limited to people
who have the disease but also to other people that can
be potentially infected. This stems from the fact that consequences
of risky sexual behavior are borne by the subject
itself and by others via the transmission of the
disease. In addition, it must be underlined that GH constitutes
a risk factor for the spread of other sexually
transmitted diseases (e.g. human immunodeficency virus),
which can be interpreted as a negative consequence
of GH.
The estimates of the total direct medical costs obtained
with the two different approaches are discrepant and can
be explained, at least in part, with the influence of compliance
to treatment. It must be noted that the higher figure
is obtained with data collected via questionnaire and
is likely to represent the monetary value of the amount of
treatment prescribed by physicians. Moreover, the reported
duration of primary and recurrent GH episodes in
this analysis was longer than that commonly cited in the
literature [5, 8, 17], which may have artificially increased
the cost estimates. The lower figure, on the other hand, is
an estimate based on claims and represents the minimum
amount of medical care and treatment actually
consumed by patients. This difference can be expressed
as the difference from what is prescribed and what is actually
consumed, i.e. compliance. Thus, the difference
between the two global figures may be attributable to different
utilization rates or different levels of compliance.
A lower level of compliance means probably lower shortterm
direct costs, but probably higher indirect and longterm
medical costs. The hypothesis of different utilization
rates is also consistent with the psychological aspects
of GH, which is perceived as a potential source of
shame on patients [18] and is a plausible reason for lower
levels of compliance to treatment.
In a recently published article by Tao et al [16], the national
direct medical costs of GH were estimated at $166
million annually for 1992-1994 ($207 million in 1999
dollars), based on claims data from several sources.
These numbers may be underestimates. Tao and colleagues
[16] estimated that less than 30% of acyclovir
claims not associated with a specific diagnostic code
were provided for the treatment of GH. As drugs account
for over half of the costs attributed to GH, underestimation
of drug costs substantially decreases the estimated
annual costs of GH.
Based on our estimates using the DPS claims database,
GH seems to be a public health problem of important
economic relevance. At least $283 million can be estimated
the direct health care costs attributable to GH,
corresponding to 0.1% of the US health care expenditure
($1,007,300 million). However, when computing for indirect
costs and long-term complications (e.g. neonatal
herpes, enhanced HIV transmission), the true costs may
be greater than $1.0 billion. In addition, this study has
not been designed to give a monetary estimate of intangible
costs of the disease. Psychological stress related to
GH is well documented in the literature [18,19,20], and
should be considered as a relevant factor of the total burden
of illness, though not easily quantifiable.
As with any research study, limitations must he placed
on the ability to generalize the results beyond the sample
and setting employed. First, treatment for GH in the USA
can be met at neighborhood health clinics, which offer
confidential, low-cost treatment. Since a stigma is attached
to the diagnosis of GH, patients may choose treatment
at these clinics. The database had no information
on these visits, since no claims were generated. Second,
claims databases are collected for the purpose of payment
to providers for the medical services rendered on
behalf of enrolled members and rely on the coding of numerous
medical events. Because of variations and incompleteness
of coding, errors in identification and
classification may occur. Coding is dependent on the diagnostic
process, which is related to a clinician's training.
Thus, the decision to diagnose GH by individual
clinicians with different levels of expertise cannot be
controlled within the boundaries of claims data. Third,
the health plans included in this study allowed for geographical
representation on a large regional basis. However,
undetected patient, provider and practice
differences may still exist. Caution should therefore be
exercised in generalizing to other regions. Finally, cases
selected may not necessarily be indicative of minority,
low socioeconomic status, or indigent populations, since
claims data can only provide data on those individuals
who access the system. Therefore, the demographics of
the database, in combination with the use of neighborhood
clinics for GH treatment, make our calculated GH
rates and costs lower bound estimates of the true GH
prevalence and associated costs in the USA.
In conclusion, GH appears to be an important public
health problem in the USA from the health economic
point of view. The present study demonstrates the validity
of using different approaches in analyzing the economic
burden of a specific disease to the health care
system.