Background
Non-typhoidal Salmonella spp. is a substantive cause of
human gastroenteritis in many parts of the world [1]. In
Germany, non-typhoidal salmonellosis remains the most
frequently reported infectious disease. For example, in
2001, the 77,185 Salmonella reports (incidence:94/
100,000) received at the federal level by the Robert Koch-
Institut (RKI) accounted for 31% of all notifications for
the 54 notifiable conditions [2]. Salmonella enterica subspecies
enterica serotype Enteritidis (S. Enteritidis) is the
predominating serotype followed by S. Typhimurium.
They represented 65% and 23% of the reported cases of
non-typhoidal salmonelloses with known serotype in
2001. Thus, the remaining ~250 serotypes reported to the
RKI in that year, including S. Oranienburg, accounted for
only 12%.
In mid-October 2001, the National Reference Center for
Salmonella and Other Enteric Pathogens (NRC) in Hamburg
noted an unusual increase in the number of S.
Oranienburg isolates received in October. At that time, no
increase was noticeable in the national database for statutorily
reportable infectious diseases; 50 S. Oranienburg
notifications (median: 1 per week) had been registered for
2001. On November 19, the NRC in Wernigerode
informed the RKI that it had received a S. Oranienburg
isolate in September. The isolate was submitted by a private
laboratory for serotyping and had come with the
additional source information "confectionery sample".
Upon inquiry, a large German chocolate manufacturer
(company A), which produced a broad variety of chocolates
and products made thereof, called the RKI on
November 27, and confirmed that it had sent in the confectionery
sample. According to company A, the positive
sample originated from an in-house control of a chocolate
product and the pertaining batch, due to be exported to
the United States, was completely destroyed and not distributed.
Notwithstanding, the number of statutory S.
Oranienburg notifications had sharply increased and continued
to rise. This report describes the epidemiologic,
food safety, and microbiological investigations of this
outbreak.
Methods
Epidemiologic investigation
Descriptive epidemiology
A standard exploratory questionnaire was distributed on
20 November 2001 via state health departments to all
local health departments to aid the collection of data on
food and environmental exposure from cases. In addition,
local health departments were asked to immediately interview
patients with newly reported S. Oranienburg infections
about chocolate consumption in the seven days
before disease onset, and also to send any remaining
chocolate to a food safety laboratory.
International case-finding
A request was distributed to participants of the Enter-net
surveillance network [6] on December 10, to see if other
countries were affected or had relevant information.
Case-control study
On December 3, while exploration of patients were ongoing
and results inconclusive, S. Oranienburg isolates from
patients and from the in-house chocolate control were
found to be indistinguishable by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
(PFGE). On the same day, a multistate case-control
study was initiated and coordinated by RKI to test the
hypothesis that at least one product from company A was
associated with S. Oranienburg-infections. As we were
denied a product list from company A, we resorted to the
company's web-site and included in our food history evaluation
all the products listed there. Some products from
company A, e.g., bars of chocolate (brand A), were exclusively
sold at a large chain of discount grocery stores
(chain X). We found that the majority of chocolates sold
at chain X were produced by company A. Therefore, for
the analysis we constructed a variable for chocolate(s)
purchased at chain X ("chain-X-chocolate") as a proxy for
chocolate-products from company A because most
patients could remember the flavor of the purchased
chocolate, but seldom the brand name.
The hypothesis-testing questionnaire collected data on
the consumption of chocolates, and some other foods,
particularly those previously associated with outbreaks of
S. Oranienburg in other countries [3-5]. Food-consumption
history was evaluated for two different time periods,
i.e., for the seven days prior to onset of symptoms in the
case-patients and for the seven days before the interview.
In addition, case-patients were asked about clinical symptoms,
duration of illness and hospitalization. We defined
a case-patient as a person with gastroenteritis starting after
1 October 2001 who had been reported with a S. Oranienburg
infection to a public health department before
December 6. Case-patients were excluded from the analysis,
if they could have been secondary, i.e., if they reported
to having had contact with a person with diarrhea in the
seven days prior to symptom onset. Cases were selected
from the national reportable database by simple random
sampling; in Lower Saxony an attempt to interview all
case-patients was launched. Case selection was done irrespective
of whether patients also had been interviewed
with an exploratory questionnaire. At least one age and
telephone exchange-matched control subject was selected
for each case-patient by sequentially adding 2 to each
case-patients' telephone number. Control subjects were
eligible if they were in the same age-group as their
matched case-patient (0–5 years, 6–17 years, 18–59 years,
60 years or older), had no gastrointestinal symptoms after
1 October 2001, and had not traveled abroad in the seven
days prior to the onset of symptoms of the matched case.
Telephone interviews were conducted by state health
departments, local health departments, and the RKI. Data
were analyzed with Epi Info V6.04c (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA).
Investigation by the food safety authorities
The local food safety authority inspected company A's
production facility and took samples from already packaged
("in-house") chocolates, and from ingredients from
its suppliers. Beginning December 11, a nationwide chocolate
sampling of German chocolates in grocery stores was
initiated by the Federal Ministry of Consumer Protection,
Food and Agriculture, and was assisted by the Federal
Institute for Risk Assessment (Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung,
"BfR"). On December 18, when a chocolate leftover
from brand A tested positive, the investigations were
tailored to German chocolates from company A. The BfR
examined quantitatively four Salmonella positive chocolate
leftovers and five chocolates from grocery stores using
the most probable number technique [7].
Molecular subtyping
For comparison by the use of PFGE, S. Oranienburg isolated
from stool specimens were sent to the NRC from laboratories
in Germany and, on Enter-net request, from
other countries. Furthermore, isolates from chocolates
were submitted from state or private food laboratories in
Germany as well as from Canada and the Czech Republic.
PFGE-analysis was carried out according to Prager et al [8].
Results
Epidemiologic investigation
Descriptive epidemiology
In 2001, the RKI received 50 reports of S. Oranienburg up
to reporting week 42, but 462 reports in the following 23
weeks (15 October 2001–24 March 2002, "outbreak
period", figure 1). Thus, an excess of 439 S. Oranienburg
reports were registered assuming a background rate of one
report per week. The median age was 15 years (range: 0–
92 yrs), 240 (52%) patients were female. There was no difference
in the gender distribution within the single 10-
year age-bands (P = .51). All 16 states of Germany
reported S. Oranienburg cases during the outbreak period,
with the highest incidence in the state of Schleswig-Holstein
(1.78/100,000) bordering on Denmark. In total, 206
of the 440 German counties were affected with a median
of one report and a maximum of 16 from the city of Hamburg
during the outbreak period.
Sixty exploratory questionnaires were received from eight
states by the end of 2001. Forty-three (88%) of 49 patients
with information on chocolate consumption had a symptom
onset after 1 October 2001. Of the 34 who gave information
as to where they bought the chocolate, 21 (62%)
explicitly reported chain X. Some reported exclusively
having eaten chocolate bars from brand A, among them a
two-year-old child. On 18 December 2001, two months
after the initial outbreak alert, a leftover consumed reportedly
by this child in the seven days before symptom onset
tested positive for S. Oranienburg.
International case-finding
On December 11, one day after the Enter-net request was
distributed, Denmark was the first country to respond.
Twelve cases of S. Oranienburg had been reported in Denmark
from October 18 through December 10, compared
with only two cases in 2001 before October 18. None of
the clustered cases were travel-related [9]. Exploratory
patient interviews had already been conducted at the time
of the Enter-net request. At this point in time the investigators
in Denmark, without knowledge of the German S.
Oranienburg problem, independently suspected German
chocolate bought in chain X as the source of the Danish
outbreak. Chocolate was the only food item that all
patients reported eating. The majority stated purchasing
chocolate in chain X, which, although German, operates
internationally [9]. In the next few days, an increase in the
number of S. Oranienburg infections was reported from
other countries such as Austria, Belgium, Finland, Sweden,
The Netherlands (figure 2), and Canada [10]. As it
became apparent that German chocolate was contaminated
with S. Oranienburg, patient interviews were conducted
that showed that several patients remembered
having consumed German chocolate [10], except in Canada
where all of the patients denied this consumption.
Case-control study
Sixty cases and 62 controls from five states were enrolled
in the matched case-control study. Interviews were conducted
with a median delay of 37 days (range: 12–64
days) after disease onset in case-patients. Twelve case-control
pairs were excluded from chocolate-specific analysis,
nine because the case-patients could have been secondary,
one due to illness in September, and two where the control
subjects could not remember whether they had eaten
chocolate. Of the 48 cases and 50 controls that were analyzed,
24 (50%) case-patients and 32 (67%) control subjects
were female, 22 (46%) case-patients were younger
than 10 years. Ten (21%) of the case-patients reported to
have suffered from bloody diarrhea and 14 (29%) were
hospitalized (table 1). Results of the preliminary analysis
were available on December 14. All 48 case-patients ate
chocolate in the seven days before symptom onset, but
this also applied to 43 (86%) of the control subjects.
Three variables relating to the seven-day period prior to
symptom onset of the case-patient were significantly associated
with disease (table 2). The first variable was having
shopped at chain X (matched odds ratio [MOR]: 4.2; 95%
confidence interval [CI]: 1.2–23.0). The second variable
was having consumed chain-X-chocolate (MOR: 5.0; 95%
CI: 1.1–47.0). Eleven (25%) of 44 case-patients gave such
an exposure history, six of whom reported having consumed
either brand A chocolate exclusively (which could
be inferred from the flavor of chocolate eaten), or were
uncertain whether they had also eaten another kind of
chocolate (n = 3). The third variable was having eaten
(any kind of) chocolate on a daily basis (MOR: 4.8; 95%
CI: 1.3–26.5). None of the other variables including all
those relating to the seven days before the interview were
significantly associated with illness.
Public health action
On December 18, the finding of S. Oranienburg in a chocolate
leftover of a patient led to an immediate public
warning and recall of all chocolates of this brand with specific
production numbers by company A. The recall was
extended to other products from company A a few days
later. Chocolates included in the German recall were
promptly withdrawn from the market in other European
countries as well as in Canada. In Canada, Finland, and
Sweden, samples from withdrawn chocolates tested positive
for S. Oranienburg [10].
Investigation by the food safety authorities
The local food safety authority in Germany did not identify
hygienic deficiencies at the production facility. Samples
obtained in the beginning of December 2001 from
in-house chocolates (n = 12), as well as from cocoa (n =
3) and cocoa powder (n = 7) from a supplier of company
A tested negative. This applied also to German chocolates
sampled in grocery stores until 18 December (on that day
a leftover tested positive). Overall, S. Oranienburg was
found in 18 (5%) of 381 chocolates that were tested and
reported to BfR during the outbreak period. S. Oranienburg
was isolated from two different brands of company
A; all positive chocolates were produced during the same
week in August 2001. Estimates of the number of Salmonella
in the tested chocolates ranged between 1.1 and 2.8
per gram.
Molecular subtyping
From October 2001 through January 2002, the NRC
received 98 S. Oranienburg isolates from human cases of
gastroenteritis originating in Germany (n = 52), Austria (n= 19), Belgium (n = 8), Canada (n = 6), Denmark (n = 4),
The Netherlands (n = 4), Sweden (n = 4), and the Czech
Republic (n = 1). Furthermore, 15 chocolate isolates were
sent to the NRC for PFGE-analysis from Germany (n =
12), Canada (n = 2), and the Czech Republic (n = 1). They
came from an in-house sample, from leftovers of chocolates
consumed by patients in their incubation period,
and from chocolates sampled in grocery stores in Germany.
The PFGE profiles of S. Oranienburg isolates from
patients with symptom onset after 1 October 2001 (outbreak
period) in Germany and in the other countries mentioned
above, except Canada, were indistinguishable
(figure 3), but differed from S. Oranienburg isolates from
German patients with symptom onset before October. All
15 chocolate isolates showed PFGE profiles indistinguishable
from human isolates of the outbreak period.
Discussion
We describe an international outbreak of S. Oranienburg
and present several lines of evidence that German chocolate
from company A was the vehicle of infections. S.
Oranienburg, a rare serotype in food as well as in humans
in Germany, was isolated from retail-sampled chocolates
of two brands produced by company A, from chocolate
leftovers that had been consumed by patients before
symptom onset, and from an in-house sample of company A obtained prior to the outbreak. In a case-control
study, S. Oranienburg infection was significantly
associated with the consumption of chain-X-chocolate
(proxy for chocolate from company A) in the week prior
to symptom onset, but not in the seven days before the
interview. Case-patients were more likely than control
subjects to report eating chocolate daily, likely indicating
an increased probability of having been exposed to contaminated
chocolate. Furthermore, patient isolates from
the outbreak period shared a PFGE profile with isolates
from chocolates but differed from isolates of patients who
became sporadically diseased with S. Oranienburg before
the outbreak. In addition, the food histories and microbiological
results from S. Oranienburg patients in several
other countries pointed to the same source [9,10].
Salmonella infections after consumption of contaminated
chocolate, although rare, have been known since the
1960's [11]. Common to all reported chocolate-outbreaks,
including ours, was that the epidemics were propagated
in time, widely disseminated geographically, and
affected large number of persons, predominantly children
[12-17] (table 3). In addition, only very small numbers of
Salmonella have been recovered from chocolates in these
outbreaks, suggesting a very low infectious dose. Estimates
of the number of S. Oranienburg cells per gram in
this outbreak ranged from 1.1–2.8. However, we cannot
exclude that the bacteria were unevenly distributed in the
chocolate(products) and that those parts carrying many
viable cells were not tested quantitatively. In chocolate,
the low moisture (water activity aw: 0.4–0.5) and high
sugar content does not favor bacterial growth, but significantly
increases thermal resistance [11,18,19]. In addition,
it has been speculated that the food matrix protects
Salmonella against the acidic conditions of the stomach
[11], which could imply that only few salmonellae are
necessary to cause illness.
Company A produced several dozen tons of chocolate per
day. All positive samples were produced in the same week.
However, S. Oranienburg reports above an expected baseline
of 1–2 reports per week in Germany were received for
five months. The protracted nature of chocolate-associated
outbreaks probably reflects both the long shelf-life of
chocolate [20] and the long survival of Salmonella in these
products [15,21]. S. Oranienburg was isolated from
chocolates five months after manufacture. In an S. Napoli
outbreak in England and Wales, this interval was 12
months. The number of affected persons reported in chocolate-
associated Salmonella outbreaks has grown steadily
over the years (table 3). Among other factors, this may
parallel advances in food-processing technologies and
improvements of national surveillance systems. Taken
together, the chocolate industry faces a difficult situation
because:
raw ingredients (e.g., cacao beans, milk powder) can
carry Salmonella spp.,the low water activity and high fat content in chocolate
increases thermal resistance so that temperatures reached
during chocolate production (even after considerable
overheating [19]) do not necessarily destroy Salmonella,
a small number of Salmonella may be sufficient to cause
disease,
even with low-level contamination, chocolate can affect
large number of persons (often children) scattered over a
wide area, and thus, has the potential to cause serious
public health consequences.
It is noteworthy that the case-control study did not identify
further products as risk factors. This applied also to the
second contaminated brand of company A, which was
included in the recall. The small proportion of study cases
(25%) mentioning having eaten chain-X-chocolate lends
support to the hypothesis of more contaminated brands
(even from other manufacturers), which could be one
explanation for the continuing case-occurrence. However,
inaccuracies due to lack of brand awareness may have
played a particular role in this outbreak, and the timedelay
between disease onset and interview (median: 37
days) may have contributed to an inaccurate recall of cases
and their guardians. Furthermore, cases with a disease
onset in 2002 may have occurred as a result of a diminished
impact of the public warning due to the Christmas
season. For example, chocolate gifts received or given for
Christmas may not have been thoroughly enough
checked for best-before dates stated in the public warning.
Identification of vehicles in foodborne outbreaks can
become difficult if the exposure is common. Consumption
of a wide variety of German chocolates was reported
by all case-patients (and 88% of explored patients), but
also from 86% of the control subjects in the week prior to
onset of illness. When groups are (nearly) universally
exposed or a more specific hypothesis cannot be tested,
often the best one can do is to establish a "dose-responserelationship"
[22], i.e., unravel differences in the frequency
of consumption of the incriminated food between
cases and controls. Consequently, the observation that a
higher proportion of cases reported eating chocolate on a
daily basis added to the evidence that chocolate was the
vehicle in this outbreak. Furthermore, the Danish data
provided powerful supplementary evidence because consumption
of German chocolate was particularly common
in Germany but unusual in Denmark. Therefore, in multinational
outbreaks, international collaboration provides
an important means for disclosing the common source of
infections, particularly when the contaminated food is
very popular in one (likely the source) country (e.g.,
[23,24]). Multinational collaboration facilitated by Enternet
helped in preventing contaminated chocolate from
entering the market in Canada, Finland and Sweden,
thereby averting human illness. Furthermore, by rapid
electronic exchange and comparison of PFGE profiles, the
Canadian cluster of human cases could be classified as
unrelated to this outbreak.
No source or point of contamination was identified. Hygienic
deficiencies had not been observed at the production
facility of company A, which used a modern production
method. This included an extra heating of the milled
cocoa beans by a special heat-steam treatment with 125–
130°C as an additional safeguard. Samples from in-house
chocolates and from ingredients tested negative. However,
no environmental samples and very few samples of
raw ingredients (n = 10) were obtained. In a S. Eastbourne
outbreak in Canada/USA in 1973/74, 286 environmental
samples and 98 chocolate samples from the productionline
were examined. No in-line chocolate sample tested
positive and overall only 6 (1.6%) samples were positive
(bean processing rooms [n = 4], and samples from a
molding plant [n = 2]] [12]. Therefore, source investigations
in chocolate-outbreaks should include extensive
sampling in the production environment to increase the
likelihood of determining possible points of contamination.
In this outbreak, it remains unclear whether the salmonellae
survived the heating or (re)contaminated the
chocolate afterwards. Consequently, long-term preventive
measures to render chocolate-production safer could not
be implemented.
An Enter-net urgent inquiry was sent after the first results
of molecular subtyping suggested a link between human
cases and chocolate from company A. Until then, investigators
in Germany and Denmark had worked independently
unaware that the outbreak extended outside of their
respective countries. An earlier inquiry, ideally as early as
an outbreak was suspected by the investigating countries
(or as an increase was noted in the Enter-net database),
may have speeded up hypothesis generating, and thus,
may have helped in earlier identification of the vehicle,
thereby preventing illnesses.
Finally, a public warning or recall of company A products
did not occur before a brand A leftover tested positive
although the confluence of information – the results of
the case-control study, the Danish investigations, and the
subtyping comparison between human isolates and the
in-house sample – had already pointed to company A
products as the source of the outbreak. Yet, no specific
product or lot had been identified at the time. For this
reason, a recall or a public warning were considered excessive
responses by the German food safety authority. However,
relying on microbiological confirmation in leftovers,
if available for testing, is disputable (directionality of
contamination unclear) and is dangerous in unopened
food packages because critical time can elapse before a
positive culture in food is obtained [25]. Therefore, it has
been argued that public health action should be based on
well-performed epidemiological investigations encompassing
clear statistical associations with a specific exposure
[25-27]. Such data are easiest to obtain when only
one (ideally distinct) vehicle is involved that is infrequently
consumed. Nonetheless, when food-production
leads to more than one contaminated foodstuff, or when
popular foods are vehicles of infection, hypothesis generating
or testing can become intricate. Unfortunately, these
instances appear conducive to affect large areas/populations.
Therefore, we believe that clear associations even
with surrogates of exposure suffice to justify public health
actions (e.g., extensive source investigations) provided
they plausibly fit other lines of evidence.
Conclusions
To our knowledge, this is the largest reported chocolateassociated
outbreak, the seriousness being emphasized by
the hospitalizations (29%) and self-reported bloody
diarrhea (21%) of the study cases. Despite the use of
improved production technologies, the chocolate industry
continues to carry a small risk of manufacturing Salmonella-
containing products. For the future, awareness
among German food safety authorities must be heightened
for the need to base public health action not exclusively
on laboratory confirmation in food, and to conduct
timely and comprehensive source investigations to
enhance food safety in the long-run. The international
scale of this outbreak shows how easy it is to distribute a
contaminated product across many countries. This underlines
the necessity of mechanisms for international surveillance
and information dissemination such as Enternet
to ensure that international outbreaks can be dealt
with rapidly and in an appropriate manner. Similar
networks should be set up or, if existing, should be connected
(possibly overseen by WHO), to allow rapid communications
to other parts of the world when it is clear
that a contaminated product is distributed
internationally.
Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests.
Authors' contributions
DW was the principal investigator of the German part of
this outbreak; he carried out the statistical analysis of the
case-control study, and drafted the manuscript. JD and FF
were responsible for the outbreak investigation including
the case-control study for the state ("Bundesland") of
Lower Saxony. UvT was responsible for the outbreak
investigation including the case-control study for the state
("Bundesland") of Northrhine-Westfalia. GF was responsible
for the outbreak investigation including the casecontrol
study for the state ("Bundesland") of Hamburg.
SE conducted the Danish part of this outbreak investigation.
AMH was responsible for the outbreak investigation
including the case-control study for the state ("Bundesland")
of Hesse. PR detected the outbreak and conducted
microbiological investigations. RP and HT conducted the
PFGE-analysis. ISTF coordinated the Enter-net inquiries
and investigations. SB conducted interviews in the casecontrol
study, designed the database and helped in the
analysis. EB conducted quantitative analysis of Salmonella
in chocolate. EW coordinated food safety investigations in
this outbreak. AE conducted the Canadian part of this outbreak
investigation. AS conducted the Finnish part of this
outbreak investigation. YA conducted the Swedish part of
this outbreak investigation. MHK was instrumental in the
design of the case-control study. AA coordinated the German
part of this outbreak investigation, broadened the
scope of this outbreak by prompting an urgent Enter-net
inquiry, and helped in designing the case-control study
and drafting the manuscript.