Introduction
In 2017, the number of international migrants was reported
as many as 258 million people. Migration to developed
countries has been common among health
professionals, and growing rapidly over the past decades
[1, 2]. Discussions about the advantages and drawbacks
of migration of health workers have been taking place in
both origin and destination countries [3–5]. The reasons
for migration have been termed as push and pull factors
- and include social, financial, political, academic, cultural,
personal or religious reasons - which can trigger
health professionals to leave their homelands [6–8]. To
address this, in 2010, the World Health Organization
Global Code of Practice for the International Recruitment
of Health Personnel was published by the World
Health Assembly [9].
Patterns of medical staff migration, especially to developed
nations, results in imbalanced human resources in
both source and destination countries. These migration
flows may weaken the donor health system; however, we
should equally respect the human rights of health professionals
for migration as in their homelands they lack
resources and education opportunities [9]. Whilst migration
is of interest to economists, labor markets, sociologists,
and demographers, detailed information of health
labor markets, salaries and unemployment rates should
be public knowledge [10].
In upper income countries, as reported in 2014, there
were 6.6 psychiatrists per 100,000 population and this number
increased in 2017 to 11.9 psychiatrists per 100,000
population. In fact, around 70 % of the mental health professionals
worldwide are working in high-income countries
and about half of them working in Europe [11, 12]. Reports
suggest that doctors from Asia commonly migrate to other
continents. For example, India has a vast number of highly
skilled health workers who have left the country [13]; in
Pakistan, 20.3 % of the graduated physicians migrate from
the country every year [14]; and China also reported increased
rate of migration to America over the past 10 years
among medical graduates [15].
Iran is the second largest country in the Middle East and
one of the world’s oldest civilizations founded. According
to the latest United Nations’ data, the current population of
Iran is estimated 84,808,441 with the median age of 32.0
years old [16]. After the Islamic revolution in 1979, Iran
went through major social, cultural, and religious changes,
and based on the 2011 Iranian census, 99.98 % of Iranians
believe in Islam, while only few of the population believe in
Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism [17–19]. Mental
health is strongly connected with each society’s culture and
religious beliefs, which might impact both source and destination
countries. In Iran, psychiatry training courses are
available in more than 20 medical universities across the
country [20]. Once medical students qualify as doctors, they
can take the medical residency entrance examination and
enter the 4-year training psychiatry field, if selected.
This article aimed to explore the attitudes towards migration
among psychiatric trainees and early career psychiatrists
in Iran and to identify the reasons behind migration.
Methods
Study design
This is a cross-sectional survey to explore migration
trends in junior doctors in Psychiatry in Iran. This builds
on the international study conducted in Europe by the
European Federation of Psychiatric Trainees (EFPT) –
the Brain Drain study [21] – using the same study instrument
to assess this migration trends in Iran. This
was a self-report, anonymous 61-item questionnaire inquiring
about participants’ demographics, experiences of
short-term (from 3 months to 1 year) mobility, longterm
(more than 1 year) migration and trainees’ attitudes
towards migration (current and future plans).
Data collection
The questionnaire was sent by e-mail to approximately
700 psychiatric trainees studying in all the nationally
recognized institutions in Iran, and to early career psychiatrists
who are members of the Young Psychiatrists
Section of Iranian Psychiatric Association, between
March 2020 to March 2021. The inclusion criteria were
to be a psychiatric trainee (i.e., a qualified physician who
is undertaking psychiatric training in an institution in
Iran) or an early career psychiatrist (i.e., a physician who
has completed their psychiatric training not more than 5
years before). When in this manuscript the term ‘participants’
is used, this is in reference to both psychiatric
trainees and early career psychiatrists.
Data analysis
Data were analyzed by IBM SPSS Statistics (v. 25.0). To
report the frequencies and percentages of categorical
variables, descriptive statistics were used, and only valid
percentages are reported. The demographic data and the
variables of short-term mobility and long-term migration
were compared using chi-square statistic tests.
Results
One hundred eighty-four responses were received (response
rate: 26.2 %). The majority of the participants
were female (73.4 %) with an age range of 25–65 (Mean:
34.9). The majority were married (65.2 %) and lived with
their family (81.2 %). Most (64.7 %) were paid less than
250 €, and the wide majority (82.1 %) reported no additional
income, with most (82.1 %) either ‘dissatisfied’ or
‘very dissatisfied’ with their income. Participants’ detailed
socio-demographic data is presented in Table 1.
Only 25 (13.5 %) had had previous short-term mobility
experiences, which were mainly for education (48 %),
and volunteer work (16 %). More than three-fourths
(76 %) stated that this short-mobility had influenced
them in favor of migration, with preferred destination
countries: the UK, Germany, France, America, Italy,
Syria, and Kuwait. Only a few (N = 13,7 %) had a migratory
experience of more than a year. They had migrated
to America, Canada, Britain, Syria, Georgia, and United
Arab Emirates. They had either migrated with their families
(N = 7, 53.8 %), partners (N = 5, 38.4 %) or with a
friend (N = 1, 7.6 %). Among them, they were either ‘very
satisfied’ (N = 5, 38.4 %), or ‘satisfied’ (N = 3, 23 %) with
their experiences and the rest were ‘neither satisfied nor
dissatisfied’ (N = 5, 38.4 %).
In relation to their 5 year-plan, most (N = 124, 67.3 %)
answered they saw themselves in the country they
already live in (Iran), 15.8 % (N = 29) stated ‘I have not
made up my mind yet’, 9.8 % (N = 18) ‘Anywhere in the
world’, 4.4 % (N = 9) ‘in Europe’, 1.1 % (N = 2) in America,
and 1.1 % (N = 2) in Australia.
In relation to their migratory tendencies, the majority
had ‘ever’ considered leaving Iran (N = 153, 83.7 %), but
fewer had taken practical steps towards it (N = 51,
27.7 %) or had planned working in a different country
(N = 66, 35.9 %).
In the Chi-square test, no significant correlations were
found among the participant’s variables.
The main reason to ‘leave’ the country was political
(32.1 %), followed by work (28.8 %) (Fig. 1). The main
reason to ‘stay’ in the country was mainly due to
personal reasons (54.9 %), followed by political reasons
(19.6 %). The main conditions that participants required
improvements in were financial (85.3 %), academic (64.1 %),
and in their professional networks (63.5 %) (Fig. 2).
The main features reported for an attractive job were
‘good welfare and social security’ (87.5 %), ‘pleasant work
environment’ (82.6 %), and ‘good work life balance
‘(77.7 %) (Fig. 3).
Discussion
Key findings
All study participants were native Iranians and most of
them were females (73.4 %). This is in line with the
population of psychiatric trainees in Iran, of which
73.2 % are female doctors [20]. Participants mostly lived
with their families, owned a house, were paid less than
250 €, and had no additional income. Not many of them
had experienced mobility or migration. The majority
(83.7 %) had ‘ever’ considered leaving Iran but only
27.7 % had taken practical steps towards migration.
The main conditions recommended to be improved
in Iran, were financial (85.3 %), academic conditions
(64.1 %), and in their professional network (63.5 %).
The main reasons to ‘stay’ in Iran were mainly personal
(54.9 %), followed by political (19.6 %), and academic
(19 %), whereas the top reasons to ‘leave’ Iran
were political (32.1 %), work (28.8 %), and financial
(27.2 %). In a 5-year perspective, 66.5 % planned on
staying in Iran, 15.8 % had not decided yet, and
16.7 % planned on leaving the country. The main
feature for an attractive job was reported ‘good welfare
and social security’.
Comparison with the literature
A study conducted in 2016, searching for ‘factors affecting
the intention of migration among Iranian health
workers, described that people who were most likely
open to migration were under 35, had less than 5 years’
experience of work, had informal employment status,
spoke more than one foreign language, had relatives living
abroad and previous experience of mobility. The
main reasons to migrate, among health workers, were
seeking a better life, interdisciplinary discrimination, and
wanting to have the experience of migration [22].
Comparing our findings in Iran, with the results from
this study from 2013 to 2014 in 33 European countries, it
was then reported that 13.3 % of the psychiatric trainees
working in Europe were already immigrants (Switzerland,
Sweden and UK being the top host countries). Two-thirds
had ‘ever’ considered migration, and half were considering
it at the time of the study. North and West countries were
reported as the host countries and South and East as
the donors. Academic, financial, and personal reasons
triggered migration among psychiatric trainees
in Europe [21].
Data from this study in Turkey [23], and the Baltics
[24] showed that females demonstrated less tendency towards
migration, whereas in Portugal it was reported to
be slightly more [25]. In another study conducted in
Germany, females who were in a relationship or had
children were less likely to consider migration [26].
The main reasons to leave the country in Turkey were
academic, work and financial [23], whereas in Portugal
and in the Baltics were personal and financial, and in
Spain were financial, work, and cultural [24, 25, 27]. In
another study in Ireland, work and financial reasons
were reported to be leading medical students to leave
the country [28]. Similar to Iran, political, work, financial,
and social conditions were reported as the main
push factors.
In Romania, personal reasons, in Spain personal, cultural,
and social reasons, and in Portugal, personal, academic,
and work were the main reasons to stay in the
country [25, 27, 29]. The main pull factors in Iran were
reported personal, political, academic, and religious
factors.
In a 5-year perspective, 57.6 % of the Estonian,
Lithuanian and Turkish trainees [23, 24], 50.0 % Portuguese
and Romanian trainees were considering
working in another European country [25, 29]. In
Iran, most of the participants in this study (66.8 %)
saw their future-selves in the country they lived in,
and the rest had not made up their minds yet
(15.8 %), or saw themselves ‘anywhere in the world’
(9.8 %) or particularly ‘in Europe’ (4.4 %), America
(1.1 %) or Australia (1.1 %).
Strengths and limitations
This is the first study to investigate the attitudes of psychiatric
trainees and early career psychiatrists in Iran towards
migration. However, this study has some
limitations. First, a low response rate (26.3 %) and a
small sample size. Second, there are differences in the
response rate among different provinces in Iran. Other
limitations include the nature of the self-report data collection,
the reporting bias and social-desirability bias
(i.e., participants may answer questions in a manner that
may be viewed favorably by others).
Implications for practice, research, and policies
The findings of this study call for improvements in political,
academic, work and financial conditions in Iran.
Lack of time and expertise in other fields, due to heavy
healthcare work, leaves psychiatric trainees and early
career psychiatrists with no time to look for an additional
income, and dissatisfaction with their salary is
considered a ‘push factor’. In addition, recent political
variations and sanctions against Iran have led to imbalance
in economy, bad welfare and social insecurity, lack
of goods and medications, lack of academic facilities and
have made transportation between countries harder.
Rejecting to live under these influences and the desire to
seek better opportunities and quality of life, the three
‘political, work, and financial’ reasons are on top of the
list of push factors. In relation to work conditions,
strong status, environment, better management, facilities,
promotion and security are important factors.
This study recommends that psychiatric trainees and
early career psychiatrists need to be supported and provided
with efficient academic opportunities and facilities,
higher salary and pleasant work place, which may decrease
their willingness to migrate. Further investigation
is needed to develop and implement a functional management
plan.
Conclusions
There is a significant willingness to migrate in psychiatric
trainees and early career psychiatrists in Iran. Addressing
their professional needs, and improve the
political context, the work conditions, and their finances
might lower the rate of migratory intention and brain
drain. This study calls for more care and support for
psychiatric trainees and early career psychiatrists in the
healthcare system in Iran.