Attitude which has three components including cognitive
(what we think and believe), affective (what we feel
and experience) and behavioral (what we do), has been a
good predictor of professional behavior and clinical
competence [1].
Empathy is one of the component of attitude that enables
health professionals to understand the experience of patient,
concerns and perspectives [2]. It includes the ability
and capacity of the doctor to see the world from the perspective
of the patient and to walk himself in the patient’s
shoes, without interfering with the professional responsibilities
and obligations [3]. Health professionals should have
certain degree of empathy and should put their knowledge,
skills and attitude in their clinical practice to eliminate the
pain and suffering of their patients [4].
Previous studies have found that empathy towards patients
can positively affect patient satisfaction, compliance
and clinical outcome [5] and that patients of health
professionals who achieved well in empathy measurement
had better control of their disease and better prognosis
when compared to patients of physicians with
lower empathy scores [6]. Researchers have addressed
the need to investigate empathy in terms of direction
(favorable/ unfavorable), intensity (positive, negative),
and range of feeling (pervasiveness), consistency, and salience.
They have also addressed the need to measure
empathy either at admission to medical school or during
clinical training [7–10]. However, research and measurement
of empathy remained limited due to the lack of
clarity in its conceptualization and lack of standardized
tool that can measure it [11].
To measure empathy, it is important to have a consensus
definition of it as a multidimensional construct and to
understand its cognitive and emotional components [12].
Emotional empathy with its three subdivisions “emotion
contagion, proximal and peripheral responsivity” [13], is
the reaction to the response of others [14], experience
their feelings, emotions, and sharing their emotional experiences
[12]. Cognitive empathy with its subdivisions “perspective
taking, and online simulation” is the process of
understanding the perspective of another person, the capacity
to judge, understand the intentions of others and
consequently help them [12, 15]. Researchers have addressed
the importance of both components of empathy
in clinical outcome [16]. Some researchers have indicated
that cognitive empathy is more prominent in medical setting
than emotional empathy [16]. Others indicated that
emotional empathy could be useful to a limited extent but
could also affect the clinical decision if it is in excess as it
can create fatigue and exhaustion [16]. In this regard, it is
important to design a scale that is relevant to community
and culture, which can measure cognitive and emotional
empathy among health professionals and students.
During Syrian crisis, the role of Syrian health professional
as a “human rather than a machine” should be
emphasized in order to respond to health, psychological
and social needs of patients who suffer from different
economic, social, psychological, and health problems
during crisis [17–20]. The development of a valid precise
tool that enables the measurement of empathy and comparison
with other societies can be of particular importance.
The measurement should be carried out using a
reliable, valid, effective, simple, and understandable scale
[21].
Previous work has emphasized the need to use variant
methods for measurement such as direct self-report
questionnaires, paper cases and observation of behavior
[17]. The present study aimed at measuring cognitive
and emotional empathy among Syrian health professionals
and students of health professions using the Syrian
Empathy Scale SES.
Methods
Participants
This is a cross-sectional, observational study conducted
among Syrian health professionals in August 2020. It
was performed in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki and was approved by the ethical committee of
the Faculty of Dentistry, in Damascus University(
No.561/s). The data collection was performed through
uploading an on-line survey and distributing the SES on
all Syrian health webs and social media. A total of 214
participants (118 males and 96 females) enrolled in this
study from Medical (62), and Dental faculties (152).
They were 116 undergraduates, 59 postgraduates and 39
general practitioners. Informed consent was taken assuring
the anonymity and confidentiality of the answers.
Instrument of measurement
The Syrian Empathy Scale was developed by MD in the
Faculty of Dentistry, Damascus University to assess the
empathy among health professionals during Syrian crisis.
All attitude statements were designed to be simple, clear
and belonged to the same attitude variable in order to
decrease the wrong interpretation of the results. To increase
the validity and reliability of statements, three of
academic members were asked to test the clarity and the
relevance of statements in the light of the aim of the
study and to define whether the statement is reflecting
the cognitive or emotional state [22]. Modifications and
suggestions were considered with no deletion of any of
the items. For internal consistency, Pearson correlation
coefficient was calculated for all items and all values of
correlations were significant at values (P = 0.05). In
addition, about half of the items [20] were negatively
written [23] in which scores would range between 20
and 140, and higher values would indicate a higher
degree of empathy [24]. Scoring was reversed for negative
items in order to obtain the same direction of positive
items [1]. A Likert-scale, which is one-dimensional
and non-comparative scaling technique [25], has been
used to determine the extent, to which the health professionals
and students would agree or disagree with the
statement in which quantitve data can be obtained [26].
To add additional granularity [25], a 7-point rather than
5-point scale ranged from 1 = Strongly Disagree, 2: Disagree,
3: Slightly disagree, 4: Undecided, 5: Slightly agree,
6: Agree, 7: Strongly agree has been implemented [27].
Table 1 shows the designed scale together with the nine
cognitive and 11 emotional empathy statements.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed in SPSS Version 25
(SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The descriptive statistics
was applied. Mean and standard deviation (SD) together
with frequencies and percentages of students in the light
of their specialization and gender were calculated [9].
The SES mean score was categorized according to gender,
specialization, level of practice. The mean score for
all participants and the sum of cognitive and affective
empathy scores [22] were also measured. Number and
percentages of responses for each level of agreement in
each item were also determined. Group comparisons of
the empathy scores were conducted using t-test to determine
the significance difference between males and females
in the empathy mean scores. Analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was carried out to determine the significance
differences between the level of practices and
specialization [25]. P < 0.05 was considered as the significant
level. The internal consistency of SES was 0.85. Second,
a factor analysis was performed following the next
steps: (a) Bartlett’s test of the sphericity and the KMO
(Kaiser Meyer Olkin) measure of sampling adequacy
were determined to measure the goodness of factor analysis.
(b) The principal component analysis was performed
to extract the number of components. (c) The
retained components were submitted to a varimax rotation
and the criteria of eigenvalue > 1 six main factors
were retained. In addition, factor coefficients greater
than 0.4 were used to make the interpretation of suggested
components. To analyze the internal consistency
of these factors the test of alpha Cronbach was used.
Results
The final sample was composed of 214 participants.
There were 96 females (45%) and 118 males (55%), from
medical (62) and dental specializations (152) and they
distributed as follows: 116(54%) undergraduates, 59(28%)
postgraduates, and 39 (18%) general practitioners. The
Descriptive analysis indicated that the mean value of the
SES was 98.12 ± 18.076, the minimum score was 32, and
the maximum value was 137. The skewness and kurtosis
of the SES was −.587 ± .166 and 1.010 ± .331
respectively.
Regarding item statistics, participants used the full
range of responses for all items. Table 1 presents the
number and frequencies of all items together with the
item mean scores which ranged from 3.83 for item 17
“Response to patient needs might affect clinical decision”
to 5.90 for item 4 “I consider that understanding the
background and culture of my patient is very important
to make treatment successful”.
The summary results of factor analysis for the 20 items
of SES are reported in Table 2. It presents the retained
extracted five components, initial Eigenvalues, percentages
of variance, and cumulative percentages. Figure 1
presents the eigenvalues scree plot.
Each factor had eigenvalue greater than one, accounting
for 55.92% of a total variation before rotation.
Findings of KMO indicated sampling adequacy
(KMO = 0.824 > 0.7) and the value of Bartlett’s test of
the sphericity (1255.65, df = 190, P-value< 0.001) proved
that the factor analysis is meaningful and acceptable
[28]. In addition, the reliability analysis of internal factors
calculated showed a high internal consistency since
the Cronbach’s alpha value (0.85) was greater than 0.5
for all factors except factor 5, which was composed by
two items. The composition of different factors is analyzed
considering the items associated, with a value
greater than 0.4. The results of varimax rotation are presented
in Table 3. Five main factors were retained
(eigenvalue > 1). Factor 1, which accounted for 14.715 of
the variance, was labeled as “Care and Understanding”
based on the contents of (items 7, 8, 6, 10, 5, 4, 9). Factor
2, which accounted for 12.286 of the variance, was
labeled as “Feeling” based on the contents of [1–3]. Factor
3, which accounted for 11.686 of the variance, was
labeled as “Health Care” based on the contents [11, 14,
16, 19, 20]. Factor 4, which accounted for 9.368 of the
variance, “Negative Empathy Impact”, based on the contents
of [12, 13, 18].Factor 5, which accounted for 7.862
of the variance was labeled as “Clinical Decision Making”,
based on the contents of [15, 17].
In addition, the Pearson correlation coefficients demonstrated
positive and statistically significant correlations
between each item score and the total score of the
SES. The item total score correlations ranged from 0.489
to a high of 0.864.
In addition, the item-total correlations for each factor
are presented in Table 4.
A significant difference was found between males and
females in the SES mean score. The empathy score of female
students (mean = 102.36; SD = 15.28) was significantly
higher than the scores of the male students
(Mean = 94.67, SD = 19.68; t = 3.14, P = 0.002). Moreover,
no significant difference was found between medical
doctors and dentists in the SES mean score. The SES
empathy scores of medical students (mean = 95.55; SD =
22.99) were lower than the scores of the dental students
with no significant difference (Mean = 99.17, SD = 15.83;
t = 1.36, P = 0.259).
In addition, the ANOVA analysis showed that the SES
empathy score of practitioners (mean ± SD 101.00 ±
17.31) was significantly (F = 3.74, P = 0.025) higher than
undergraduates and postgraduates (mean ± SD 99.91 ±
17.51, 92.71 ± 19.29 respectively).
To discriminate between professionals and students in
each specialization, the ANOVA analysis was also performed.
Findings showed significant difference between
dental undergraduate students, postgraduate dental students
and general dental practitioners in the SES mean
score (F = 4.2, P = 0.017). The SES empathy scores of
postgraduates (mean = 92.57; SD = 15.89) were significantly
lower than the scores of dental undergraduates
(mean = 100.79; SD = 15.08) and general dental practitioners
(mean = 102.13, SD = 16.21). However, no significant
difference between medical undergraduate students
(mean = 97.36; SD = 23.24), postgraduate medical students
(mean = 92.91; SD = 23.75) and general medical
practitioners (mean = 96.62; SD = 21.77) was found in
the SES mean score (F = 0.253, P = 0.777).
Table 5 represents the result of Least Significant Difference
LSD test and a significant difference between
undergraduates and postgraduates (P = 0.013) in the SES
mean score as well as the difference between undergraduates
and practitioners (P = 0.027).
Moreover, testing the SES mean score of participants
according to their gender and specialization using multivariate
analysis has indicated that there is no effect (F =
0.04, P = 0.842). In addition, testing the SES mean score
of participants according to their gender and level of
practice using multivariate analysis has indicated that
there is no effect (F = 0.31, P = 0.735).
Discussion
Given the importance of teaching attitude to medical
students, questions have been raised regarding the possibilities
of finding a standardized, valid reliable and feasible
instrument that can measure it [17]. Attitude is a
complex construct. The decision should be made
whether the instrument would test cognitive, psychomotor
or affective aspects [26].
Empathy is one of the component of attitude that enables
health professionals to understand the experience
of patient, concerns and perspectives [2].
Previous studies have indicated that empathy is not
well covered in medical curricula [17–20]. Researchers
have addressed the need to measure empathy either at
admission to medical school or during clinical training
[7, 8, 10]. Health professionals should have certain degree
of empathy and should put their knowledge, skills
and attitude in their clinical practice to eliminate the
pain and suffering of their patients [4].The Jefferson Scale of Empathy (JSE) has been used to
evaluate empathy among health professionals and students
of health professions in several countries such as
the USA, Poland, Korea, Italy, Japan. It has been standardized
for its validity and reliability [3]. However, no
empathy scales have been designed to measure the empathy
of health professionals who are located in an area
exposed to war and are practicing medicine in regions
with conflicts. Only one recent study has investigated
the attitude of host countries’ citizens toward refugee
children [29]. This study has addressed the importance
of designing, developing and validating scales that measure
attitudes in fragile areas in which people may suffer
from violence, internal displacement and adverse psychological
environment.
In Syria, people after ten years of war are suffering
from gross human rights violations, international
sanction, shortage of medicine and medical equipments,
chronic hunger, and the COVID-19 pandemic.
In these situations, health professionals should provide
the life-saving assistance to community; respond
to health, psychological and social needs of patients
who suffer from different economic, social, psychological,
and health problems regardless of their own
daily suffering and daily miserable conditions. Therefore,
the Syrian Empathy Scale SES was developed to
measure the empathy in the context of Syrian health
professionals during the crisis, support decisionmaking
processes, and help identifying areas that require
further attention and training.
The designed scale includes 20 questions and the overall
score ranges from twenty to one hundred and forty
in which higher scores indicate a better empathic relationship
in the medical and therapeutic care.
The SES was designed to be simple, cheap, readable
and practical useful tool that can be used in practice settings
as an attempt to shed some light on the role of
Syrian health professionals during conflict, with respect
to health care, understanding, feeling and clinical
decision-making.
Writing statement, which is a crucial part in designing
the empathy scale to anonymous group [17, 24], has not
been an easy task as it has to be simple, short, direct debatable,
clear-cut, meaningful and interesting. Attempt
was made to make statements understandable and
belonged to the same attitude variable as well as to make
them relevant to the community during Syrian crisis
[24]. For instance, issues such as feeling the pain of poor
patients regardless of their social, health, and religious
background (item 2) as well as recognizing the feeling of
heart broken patients, (items 3) have enabled us to assess
the cognitive and emotional attitude of health professionals
in conflicts. However, the comparison between
the SES and other designed scales has been inappropriate
and testing the convergent validity would be not
suitable due to differences existed in the constructs.
After the factorial analysis, it was possible to identify
five different components of empathy (Care and Understanding,
Feeling, Health Care, Negative Empathy Impact
and Clinical Decision Making). The findings support the
goodness of the factorial analysis. Duarte et al. identified
6 components of empathy through the factorial analysis
(compassionate care, perspective taking, cognitive dimension,
standing in patient shoes clinical outcomes, no influence
by others) and could also supported the goodness
of the analysis [3].
To increase the reliability of measurement, decrease
error and save time, attempts was made to make each
statement has one interpretation, contains one complete
thought and one specific attitude related to one issue
[24]. Likert scales was also adopted in order to identify
the extent to which the respondent would agree or disagree
with the object [26]. Negatively wording of half of
the attitude statements was applied to provide a true
measurement of an attitude, avoid the acquiescence bias
and minimize extreme response that might be caused
because of some respondents who might tend to agree
with most statements [23]. Moreover, careful statistical
methods and analysis such as Cronbach’s alpha reliability
coefficient were applied in order to verify the internal
consistency of the applied scales [23]. The value of
Cronbach’s alpha which were considered as good (0.85)
provided evidence about the reliability of the applied
scale [30]. The alpha coefficient obtained was similar to
other values obtained in some studies [31, 32] and was
higher than the values obtained in other studies [2, 33,
34]. The values of item-total correlations obtained for
each item was higher than 0.48 indicating that an item
was related to the overall scale. Anonymous questionnaires
to a sufficient sample size was considered in order
to further validate and improve the designed scale [13].
Accordingly, this questionnaire can be considered as reliable
for measuring empathy among Syrian health
professionals.
The findings of the present study showed that the SES
empathy score of undergraduates was significantly
higher than postgraduates and it was higher in dental
specialization (100.79) when compared to medicine(
97.36). Similar findings were reported about the decline
in empathy with increasing age or year of
education [35–37]. Studies have attributed many factors
to this consistent finding. The stress of academic performance,
long work hours [38], lack of quality sleep,
and increased responsibilities with age [39] are some factors
that contribute to declining empathy among older
individuals [40]. Further studies, using the SES scale,
with a larger samples size are still needed to ascertain
our findings.
The present study reported a significant difference between
males and females in the SES mean score and
higher empathy scores among females. The findings were
consistent with previous findings reported [41, 42] who attributed
this to qualitative variance in integrating emotional
information between males and females genders
that can affect the decision-making process [40]. Similarly,
Hojat et al. attributed this to social learning, genetic predisposition,
and evolutionary underpinnings [43].
The SES has been a great tool for assessing Empathy
of Syrian health professionals However, several procedures
are still essential to increase its validity and reliability
before applying it in linguistically and culturally
diverse settings. For instance, multiple tests and items
such as questionnaires, papers cases and observation of
behavior could be developed [17]. In addition, observation
of medical students, during management of patients,
can also be used together with empathy scale in
order to improve the validity and reliability of the scale.
An objective approach in which students are required to
take OSCEs by standardized patients could also be suggested
to explore the association between empathy
scores and ratings of clinical competence in OSCE stations
[7, 44–46].
Conclusions
This study is the first of its kind in Syria that addressed
the importance of empathy in the field of health care
and the need of measuring it among health professionals
and students of health professions. Findings of this study
support the reliability of the newly designed Syrian Empathy
Scale for measuring empathy in the field of health
care. Our work is still in progress in order to combine
our designed tool with qualitative investigation in order
to explore the lived experience of Syrian health professionals
and investigate areas that require further attention.
This would further improve understanding about
the role of empathy in improving health care and would
support decision-making processes in identifying areas
that require further attention and training.