Professionalism is a fundamental component of medical
profession which shapes the quality of medical care provided
by the health care workers. The American Board
of Internal Medicine (ABIM), identified the core components
of medical professionalism in its ‘Project Professionalism’,
one of whose key elements is altruism
described as ‘the best interest of patients, not selfinterest’
[1]. The Merriam-Webster dictionary defined
altruism as an “unselfish regard for or devotion to the
welfare of others” [2]. Although, both of these mentioned
sources do not necessarily imply its meaning as
‘self-sacrifice’, much of the literature [3–5] alluded to
this meaning as a prevalent concept, which brought to it
a misguided impression of moral superiority [3] beyond
professional obligation [6].
Thus, a dispute emerged, questioning even the retention
of altruism as an element of medical professionalism
due to reservations about it being too
unrealistic and idealistic for practice [4]. At the least,
there were suggestions of replacing the term with
others like ‘pro-sociality’ or ‘beneficence’, to capture
the obligatory nature of a doctor’s relation with the
patients in a better manner [4, 7]. Furthermore, the
concept of ‘pathological altruism’ emerged in recent
literature as altruistic behaviours taken to an extreme,
causing adverse rather than beneficial patient outcome
and/or work–life imbalance of doctors [6]. More recent
studies advocate aligning self-interest with the
interest of others termed as ‘enlightened self-interest’,
which is of benefit to both the patients as well as the
doctors [8]. They contend that it would result in
small consistent practices of altruism which are more
achievable and sustainable.
Altruistic behaviour may be understood as a complex
process accounted for and shaped by multiple
factors [4, 9]. These include sociocultural, religious,
gender and economic factors, to name a few. According
to literature, culture influences altruistic behaviours
beyond one’s own community and group level.
Religion also effects altruism by influencing the moral
values and behaviours [9]. Altruistic tendencies are
also affected by economic factors in health care systems.
Economically driven health care systems negatively
affect altruism [4].
There is still an alleged ambiguity in the understanding
of altruism, and an observed discordance
between the perceived concept and its clinical practice.
Also, there is a lack of agreement on what to
consider as the essential components of altruism
which need to be taught to our medical students as
a must feature of professionalism [8]. This subject is
directly linked to everyday clinical practice and may
be best gauged by the practicing clinicians. However,
there is a lack of clinician perspectives about altruism
[7] and the required balance of altruistic attitude
which needs to be fostered in medical students, requires
clinicians’ input. To bridge this gap in literature,
we sought to identify clinicians’ understanding
of altruism and their recommendations regarding the
essential altruistic behaviors required for medical
practice. For this, we devised the following two research
questions:
1. What is the understanding of clinicians regarding
altruism, based on their experiences?
2. What are the essential altruistic behaviors required
to be practiced in the medical field?
Methodology
It was an exploratory qualitative study conducted at
Riphah International University between October and
December 2020.
Research philosophy
Epistemological position
The Epistemological stance used in our study was constructivism,
in which knowledge is constructed depending
on interactions between individuals and their world
and develops within a social context [10]. The reasons
for this epistemological assumption were the nature of
research questions of the study, and the social context of
the study. The theoretical perspective, methodology, data
collection and analysis were all based on this
assumption.
Theoretical perspective
As the epistemological position of our study was constructivism,
the theoretical perspective informing the
methodology was interpretivism [10].
The theoretical/conceptual framework was based
on the ‘Enlightened Self-Interest in Altruism (ESIA)’
[8]. This framework attempts to synergize interest of
both the doctors and the patients, with the goal of
promoting altruistic behaviors in physician and medical
students that benefit everyone. Elements contributing
to ESIA are: balanced self-sacrifice, personal
ambition, altruism, professionalism and desire to
help others.
The context of the study was clinicians doing hospitalbased
practices at various clinical departments in different
institutions and involved in teaching undergraduate
or postgraduate medical students. This was done to
probe their comprehension with regards to teaching requirement
of students.
Purposive maximum variation sampling technique
was used to select clinicians, with variable ages and
work experiences, working in various clinical
specialties and institutions. The prospective participants
were sent an email invitation to participate
along with relevant information to familiarize them
with the term ‘altruism’.
There were 18 participants, including 10 females
and 8 males from 6 different institutions. The range
of clinical specialties included surgery (5), internal
medicine (3), pediatrics (3), obstetrics and gynecology
(2), and 1 each from nephrology, neurosurgery, radiology,
dermatology and ENT. Their clinical experience
ranged from 8 to 32 years. Mean experience was 17
years. There were 5 Professors, 5 Associate professors,
7 Assistant professors and one clinical specialist without
an academic title.
Semi-structured interview technique was chosen to
gain a comprehensive understanding of participants’
views and to allow for exploration of vague answers.
The interview questions aimed to find the clinicians
understanding about altruism based on their clinical
experiences, and the altruistic practices they considered
as essential and others which they considered
as optional. Interview questions were refined after
conducting a pilot interview.
Interviews were conducted by MS, SI and SQ, all of
whom are involved in planning and development of professionalism
content in undergraduate medical curriculum,
are experienced in teaching undergraduate medical
students and involved in conducting communication
skill sessions. This gave them a background understanding
of altruism and helped in obtaining information
from interviewees.
Each interview lasted between twenty to thirty minutes.
Interviews were held through Zoom [11] with participants’
permission, audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim
using Otter [12], to provide interactive transcripts in real
time. Participant confidentiality was ensured.
Data saturation was assessed as no new information being
generated from the last interviews. Transcribed data
was checked for errors and participants were sent copies
of their individual interview transcripts for review.
Data analysis
Exploratory analysis of the data collected through clinicians’
responses was done. Two authors (MS and SQ)
independently coded the transcripts using a qualitative
data analysis and research software ‘Atlas ti- 8’. Open
coding was done initially. Selective coding was then
done by finding commonalities between codes to generate
sub-themes and themes.
Results
Regarding the interviewee characteristics, the ages of the
participants ranged from 35 to 64 years. Mean age was
47 years. All participants were Muslim by religion. All
were married, having children and some were living in
joint family systems.
The main themes under which the research questions
were explored were: ‘Clinicians’ understanding of altruism’,
and ‘Practice points for altruism’, each having further
subthemes identified from interview transcripts.
A. Clinicians’ understanding of altruism
Almost all the participants recognized altruism as an important
component of professionalism. Although the
participants’ understanding of altruism was sought in
the clinical context, we discovered a strong religious influence
as well as a sociocultural impact. This is exemplified
by the following quotes.
“I think altruism is something inculcated in us not
just professionally, but also culturally and especially
religiously.” (interviewee 11, Female).
“We should provide financial help to the poor patients
because we are Muslims and we don’t consider
it a burden or stress”. (interviewee 14, Male)
‘It is difficult to decide limits but being doctors and
Muslims, we should always be ready for altruism.’
(interviewee 17, Male).
Role models were also reckoned as a powerful inspiration
for few participants in our study, one of whom
stated their impact as:
“I’ve worked with amazing people that have shown
altruism day in and out”. (interviewee11, female)
The various concepts emerging from the interview
transcripts regarding the clinicians’ understanding of altruism
are listed below as subthemes, in descending
order of frequency. The patient quotes relevant to the
context are given in italics.
1. Prioritizing patient interest
Prioritizing patients above family commitments and own
interests, emerged as the most repeated concept.
“I think, to be a true professional. We should be
keeping the patient’s interests at the priority, rather
than our own interests.” (Interviewee 3, male).
“There was a time my daughter was on a wheelchair
with suspected cerebral malaria and I was doing
rounds in the hospital” (Interviewee 11, female).
2. Making arrangements according to context/ situation
During the interviews, the participants were presented a
hypothetical scenario where they faced a family emergency
whilst having a patient/work related commitment and
asked what they would do if such a situation occurred.
This question was aimed to probe clinicians’ individual
perceptions and understanding of altruism. Most of the
participants said that given a situation where there was a
clash between work and family commitment, they would
request a colleague to manage the work commitment and
most emphasized that they would weigh the context and
nature of the issue and act accordingly.
“I will analyze the situation and communicate with
my family if my presence is beneficial for my mother,
I will ask for another Doctor to replace me, …”
(Interviewee 6, female).
A few also stated that good patient communication and
counselling in this regard helped in decision making.
‘My approach is to counsel my patient and attendants.
I have to set priority…… Patients really understand if
properly communicated.’ (Interviewee 2, female).
3. Sacrificing extra time for patients
Many of the participants considered sacrificing their personal
time beyond their duty hours, as altruism.
“A patient I operated on was shifted to the ward for
post op care, even though not necessary I came to see
him multiple times during my free time and off days,
even in the evenings….” (Interviewee 8, female).
4. Physical exertion beyond obligation
This ranged from sacrificing rest or sleep to donating
blood for the patient.
“Altruism is when doctor gets up in the middle of
night in the winter and attend the patient and especially
in covid 19 scenario using full PPE in humid
weather and knowing the risk.” (Interviewee 5, male).
“I donated blood twice for a young boy who was in
shock after a roadside accident and matching blood
group was not available.” (Interviewee 18, female).
5. Providing financial help to patient
Participants also considered helping poor patients
through provision of money, food or medicine.
“I and many of my colleagues have arranged medicines
…….we used to arrange for some zakat funds.
And then we used to arrange their medicines.”
(Interviewee 9, female).
6. Selflessness and empathy
Selflessness was talked about, in association with empathy
for the patients by some participants and they explained
it as:
“Altruism is selfless empathy for patient betterment.”(
Interviewee 4, female).
“Empathy is a feeling, altruism is when you actually
act.” (Interviewee 11, female).
7. Favouring patients
Few participants communicated their understanding of
altruism as ‘favoring’ or guiding the patients beyond
their usual duty.
“It means if I can favour a patient beyond my routine
work this is my understanding that this is altruism.”
(Interviewee 1, male).
8. Importance of teamwork in establishing altruism
The primary concept that emerged especially in a hospital
based or team setting was the importance of teamwork
in establishing altruism for patient benefit rather
than an individual effort.
“Medical profession is a teamwork and when you
work in an institution there are always competent
people around you----” (Interviewee 4,
female).
“….and we must learn how to delegate work to other
team members.” (Interviewee 17, male).
9. Tailoring treatment according to patient needs and
constraints rather than denying it altogether
An interesting concept suggested by one participant as a
part of altruism was doing everything possible for the
non-affording patients so that they are benefitted in the
best possible way.
“….we will offer them an alternative instead of denying
them the procedure altogether. So basically,
catering the patients according to their social structure
and financial status.” (Interviewee 8, female).
10. Positive psychological benefits
Some of the participants in our study reported a sense of
satisfaction and divine connection with such altruistic acts:
“Sometimes we become exhausted both mentally and
physically when we work beyond our capacity but at
the end we feel inner satisfaction.”(Interviewee 17,
male).
“… when we sacrifice our needs for others especially
for the sick human beings then it is always rewarded
by the Divine power’. (Interviewee 18, female)
11. Compromise in work-life balance
While providing their understanding of altruism few of
the participants recognized the work-life imbalance issues
associated with being altruistic.
“Sometimes you become exhausted and it becomes
difficult for you to keep a balance between professional
and family life.” (Interviewee 14, male).
“Neurosurgery is a subspecialty which requires a lot
of sacrifice not only from doctor, but also from family
as well….” (Interviewee 16, female).
12. Relation with physical, mental or financial stress
Some participants recognized altruism having strong relation
with stress.
“In my opinion it is not possible to practice altruism
without mental or physical stress.” (Interviewee 18,
female).
13. Difficult to practice altruism in essence
Few participants were of the understanding that altruism
was difficult to practice if taken in its true meaning especially
in an individual capacity.
“So, in my personal opinion, it will be very difficult
to incorporate altruism for practice. …. and there is
a certain extent to which we can incorporate altruism
into our practice.” (Interviewee 3, male).
“Since the system does not provide any resources for
instance, transport or finance, it is not feasible for a
single doctor to go out of their way to accommodate
their patients.” (Interviewee 8, female).
B. Essential practice points for altruism
When posed a question, “To what extent altruism should
be an essential part of a doctor’s role as a professional
and what practices do you consider as essential?”, multiple
concepts emerged from the answers. The
participant comments related to essential practice requirements
of altruism in workplace settings, were classified
as subthemes and are presented in Table 1.
Few participants commented on components of altruism
which they deemed as optional or desirable rather
than essential. The optional components with the salient
relevant quotes were:
 Giving financial help to patients.
“Giving financial help to patients is beyond the scope
of professional altruism.” (Interviewee 4, female).
 Working beyond duty hours.
“If doctor A has finished his work timings and doctor
B is available to take care of a patient, then doctor
A may excuse to provide care to the patient so as
not to violate the timing and responsibility of another
doctor.” (Interviewee 11, female).
 Doing non-designated work.
“Similarly, a doctor can excuse from doing something
for a patient if it is not his designated job….” (Interviewee
7, female).
 Excusing from patient treatment when there was
availability of a more competent doctor was also
considered altruistic as it was in a patient’s best
interest.
“A doctor can excuse from doing something for a patient….
other professionals can do it better or more
befitting to the job. Under these circumstances the
moral consciousness of a doctor dictates him to the
right decision for a patient….” (Interviewee 12,
male).
Discussion
Our study re-evaluates the practical understanding of altruism.
It also suggests a realistic approach for students
and physicians to deliver a more achievable and effective
altruistic care which is sustainable. We used an exploratory,
qualitative, interview-based approach to identify clinicians’
understanding of altruism based on their clinical experience and altruistic approaches they considered essential
in various clinical contexts.
For this purpose, our participants were from various
specialties and age groups from both genders, having a
background of institutional clinical practice and experience
of teaching medical students. We found an influence
of sociocultural and religious values on their
perception regarding altruism and in their placement of
altruism as an essential component of professionalism.
The sociocultural norms and religious values of our region
give high regard to helping others in need. According
to Szuster, altruistic inspirations have an association
with moral values [13]. As religious teachings stress
upon moral values [9], altruism has a strong link to religion
[14]. Research on regional differences in altruistic
tendencies have also identified religion as one of the
most important influencing factor [15, 16] as has culture
[9]. Role modelling has been suggested significant in
transmitting such sociocultural values [17]. This was an
influencing factor for few participants in our study as
well. There were no definite gender differences in participant
opinions about altruism, although few studies
have described females as being more altruistic [14].
We discovered that the understanding of clinicians regarding
altruism was distinctly diverse. Opinions about
it ranged from recognizing its positive psychological impact
at one extreme, to it being considered as stressful
and difficult to comply with on the other. Most of the
participants considered altruism as prioritizing the patient’s
interest above their own. However, when compelled
to tackle the dual goals of practicing altruism and
maintaining their work-life balance, they emphasized
upon making decisions according to the context. Most
recognized the sacrifice of time, money and effort for a
patient, as important components of altruism, but some
admitted to these components as stressful, rendering
practice of altruism in its true essence impossible. This
was also emphasized in other studies [6] with suggestions to change this practice for the well-being of
both the physicians and the patients. More significantly,
they agreed that empathizing with the patients and guiding
them beyond the requirements of duty were more
important and achievable aspects of altruism. An interesting
finding was recognition of positive psychological
benefits of such acts by some of the participants in our
study. This appreciation of positive psychological benefits
for altruism, was formerly taken as an ‘egoist’ or selfish
motive [3, 4, 7]. There was an identified need for a
balanced approach to altruism in some other studies
[18] culminating in the more recent concept of ‘enlightened
self-interest’ in altruism [8] which has a more balanced
approach recognizing physician’s well-being as an
advantage rather than a drawback. It promotes wellbeing
of both the physicians and the patients as desirable
[6].
Few new and interesting concepts emerged from the
interviews. One of them was employing teamwork as an
important means to establish altruism. Only a few studies
have been identified linking effective altruism to
team-work in an organizational setting [19] and none in
the medical context. The importance of team work is
doing the best for the patient in a situation where the
onus of responsibility is on the team and not an individual.
Therefore, even if one of the team members is not
available or is committed elsewhere, the patient's interest
is not compromised. However, this idea requires team
organization and commitment [19]. The other concept
was tailoring treatment according to patients’ needs and
constraints and guiding them to alternate treatment options
if they could not afford the primary treatment option,
rather than denying treatment altogether. The
essence of this idea was to do everything in one’s power
to serve patients’ needs.
Moving on to the second theme, regarding the essential
practice suggestions given by the clinicians, despite
the variability in their concept of altruism they seemed
to agree in most of their practical tips. The participants
suggested a more realistic approach to practice altruism
in the present-day clinical context. ‘Maintaining a balance’
between one’s altruistic tendencies, family life and
mental health was considered as a top of the list essential
for practice. This was followed by a related opinion
of ‘identifying one’s own individual capacity’ to practice
altruism as it varied according to the clinicians. Consistent
with our findings, many studies also favoured the
importance of a balanced approach between family life
and professional commitments [20] encouraging development
of ‘ethical literacy’ in students in order to respond
appropriately in different contexts [4].
Another interesting suggestion was that of establishing
‘teamwork’ for an organized altruistic approach for improved
patient care as well as doctors’ well-being.
Although generating funds for needy patients was considered
an essential practice component in our study,
but by most as an organized team contribution in the
form of ‘ward funds’, rather than an individual effort, for
a long-term benefit. In a study by Babiker et al. [21]
team based altruism was considered instrumental for
feasible, consistent and sustainable patient care. The net
effect of such an approach would not only benefit the
patients but also promote the satisfaction and professionalism
of doctors. Team leader was perceived as having
a pivotal role in such organized efforts. Jahan et al.
regarded organizational contribution as an important
factor [22]. Health care institutes can provide better patient
care by implementing a team-based philosophy
[21].
The clinicians in our study also placed more emphasis
on small day to day, achievable altruistic activities in the
spirit of empathizing with patients and guiding them,
with their interest in mind. In a study by Sanjai & Gopichandran
[17], these acts were defined as acts of ‘Simple
altruism’ where there wasn’t a high level of physical,
mental, social or emotional risk to oneself. Whereas acts
like blood donation or working in risky environments
were taken as ‘risk-taking altruism’. There has been considerable
evidence supporting the empathy-altruism hypothesis
suggesting empathy as a motivator for altruism
[3, 23]. Jeffrey has also suggested a practical model of
empathy focusing on developing skills, attitudes and
moral concern [23]. It was asserted by the participants
that formal training of doctors in this context was essential
mainly through an experiential model. It has been
traditionally considered that the ‘altruistic approach’ implied
giving financial help to patients, working beyond
duty hours and doing non-designated work [24], as can
also be deciphered from the examples narrated by the
participants. However, our results suggest that clinicians
considered these components as ‘optional’ for practice
based on an individual’s moral consciousness rather than
an obligation. This has also been suggested in other
studies [3, 17].
Implications
The results from this study have important implications,
at the conceptual and practical level for both medical
education and medical practice.
For the medical educationists and curriculum developers,
the findings of this study may help to reduce the
ambiguity in developing professionalism component of
medical curricula, for medical students of both preclinical
and clinical years. At the conceptual level, altruism
may be re-defined to fit the intricacies of modern-day
society. Revisions in curricula, with more emphasis on
empathy towards patients, better communication skills,
better team-work and practices which are feasible for
the doctors and are in patients’ interest should be the
focus. At the practical level, the study results provide a
framework for the essential expected behaviours especially
regarding student teaching. Students may be
taught the essential altruistic behaviours in a more practical
and meaningful manner, by developing case-based
scenarios in pre-clinical years and workplace-based techniques
in the clinical years.
The results also have vital importance for medical
practice especially in Medical institutions and hospitals.
They can guide the clinicians to develop altruistic attitudes
and behaviours which benefit their patients and
are feasible as well as sustainable. They can also guide
the administration to promote a supportive institutional
culture enabling and encouraging clinicians towards altruistic
practices and teamwork.
Limitations and future recommendations
Our study was done on purposely selected sample of 18
clinicians, thus it may not be possible to generalize the
findings widely. The participants were from teaching institutions
with hospital-based practices and their perspectives
may pertain to team situations rather than
individual practice. The context was kept limited, as the
focus of the research was identifying essential altruistic
behaviours to teach medical students, as part of professionalism.
Further studies are suggested to identify essential
altruistic practices and behaviors in other
contexts such as individual-based and private practices
where lack of teamwork and economic pressures are
some of the constraints.
Conclusions
Altruism is an important professionalism attribute for
doctors but is a complex concept subject to variations in
medical practice and physician backgrounds. In this
study, we identified a wide variation in clinicians understanding
of altruism and shared suggestions for establishing
effective and realistic altruism in medical
practice. These include a balanced altruistic approach
and promotion of workplace altruistic cultures through
organized team-based approach rather than individual
efforts.