Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is the most common
form of diabetes among adults. Approximately 463
million people globally had diabetes in 2019, and this
number is projected to rise to 700 million by 2045 [1].
At the same time, over 10.8% of the world’s population
is affected by severe periodontitis [2], which is the sixth
complication of T2DM [3]. Periodontitis occurs in the
tooth-supporting structures known as periodontium due
to untreated gingivitis, i.e., inflammation that begins in
the gums due to irritation caused by toxins produced by
dental plaque [4–6]. In Malaysia, 18.3% of adults have
diabetes and 23.6% pre-diabetes [7]. Meanwhile, periodontitis
affects nearly half of Malaysians aged 16 years
and older, with 30.3% having moderate and 18.2% severe periodontitis [8]. Periodontitis management imposes a
significant economic burden on the country [9].
For a long time, healthcare professionals have emphasised
managing the cause of T2DM through improvements
of unhealthy lifestyles and management of obesity
[10–12]. More recently, there is increasing highlight on
the impact of T2DM and periodontitis bilateral relationship
on disease progression and treatment outcomes
[13–16]. Since then, management of both diseases has
focused on integrating diabetic care in health clinics
alongside periodontitis therapy in dental clinics.
The key to ensuring the success of this integrated
management of diabetes in patients with and at risk of
periodontitis depends highly on the awareness of patients
and the healthcare professionals and treatment
planning. However, the awareness of the diseases’ relationship
among the population and non-dental healthcare
professionals is still low [17–20]. Patients with
diabetes and non-dental healthcare professionals perceived
dental care as less critical [21]. The current team
approach of diabetes wellness modules does not emphasise
oral health care [22]. This paper reports the collaborative
effort in developing and evaluating a new
nutrition and health education module designed for
healthcare professionals use during consultation sessions
with diabetes and periodontitis patients.
Methods
Study design
This study consisted of three phases: 1) needs assessment
on module contents and characteristics, 2) development
of nutrition and health education module and 3)
evaluation of the module. Ethics approval was obtained
from the University’s Research Ethics Committee (reference:
UKM PPI/111/8/JEP-2020-106), and all participants
gave written informed consent before the start of
the study.
Phase 1: needs assessment on module contents and
characteristics
An extensive literature review was initially conducted to
determine the potential contents of interest for module
development purposes. A literature search via electronic
databases including EBSCOhost and Google was carried
out to find relevant T2DM and/or periodontitis guidelines,
articles and educational materials between August
2019 to January 2020. Information was extracted and
summarised in a table. Subsequently, semi-structured indepth
interviews were conducted among healthcare professionals
from a public university hospital in Kuala
Lumpur to seek opinions on the module’s contents and
design. The interviews were carried out in English and
Malay languages by a trained interviewer (C.S.H.) either
in private office rooms, diet counselling room or dental
clinics. A digital voice recorder (Sony ICD-PX470, Sony
Corporation, Japan) and an Android Huawei mobile
phone (Huawei Y9, Huawei Device Co., Ltd., China)
were used to record all interviews, in addition to written
field notes during the interview sessions, which were
later summarised.
Phase 2: module development
The module development involved an iterative design
and review process by five experts comprising of two
dietitians (N.A.J and C.S.H), a nutritionist (M.J.S), a periodontist
(S.M-S), and a dental public health specialist
(H.R). The module was written in the Malay language
and consisted of 17 units under four topics: (i) Introduction
to Diabetes and Periodontitis, (ii) Diabetes and
Periodontitis Care, (iii) Lifestyle Modifications and (iv)
Myths and Facts. Based on the phase 1 recommendations,
two modes of delivery were chosen: (i) printed
material via flip chart for healthcare professionals’ use
during consultation sessions with patients with diabetes
and periodontitis disease, and (ii) audio-visual aids via
short videos as educational materials for patients’ references.
All flip charts were developed using Canva
graphic design platform (Canva Pty. Ltd), whereas videos
were made by Powtoon, The Visual Communication
Platform (Powtoon Ltd.). The module used simple terms
and language, attractive and colourful illustrations, pictures
with captions, and culturally suitable examples. The
illustrations and pictures used in the module were obtained
from the Freepik graphic design website (Freepik
Company S.L.).
Phase 3: module evaluation
A panel of interdisciplinary healthcare experts consisting
of citizens with a minimum of 3 years of experience in
diabetes care and/or periodontitis from medical universities
and hospitals in Kuala Lumpur was invited to
evaluate the module. All participants involved in the previous
phase 1 were contacted through emails to participate
in this study. An additional six new healthcare
professionals (2 dietitians and 4 dental specialists) were
contacted to participate in the evaluation phase. The
number of experts evaluating the module in this study is
more than the recommended numbers suggested by previous
studies of at least five expert panels [23, 24].
The evaluation process was performed during the
Coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) and Restriction
Movement Order in Malaysia (February 2020 until
April 2020), where all communications were done online
via emails, phone and video calls. Participants were provided
with a link to access a Google Drive folder that
contained: (i) an Introduction File that briefly introduced
the module and provided instructions on how to conduct
the evaluation process, and (ii) two other folders containing flip charts in pdf form and videos labelled according
to module units.
For each material, an evaluation form was provided for
an independent review process. The Malay version of
the Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool for
printable materials (PEMAT-P), which comprises 17
statements for understandability and 7 for actionability,
was used to evaluate each flip chart [25]. ‘Understandability’
is defined as the ability of people from diverse
backgrounds with varying health literacy abilities to
comprehend educational materials and extract key messages,
while ‘actionability’ is the respondents’ ability to
identify what can take actions based on educational material
information [26]. Subsequently, a questionnaire for
audio-visual materials (PEMAT-A/V) consisted of 13
statements for understandability and 4 for actionability
was used to evaluate each video. Each item on PEMAT
scored as either 1 (agree), 0 (disagree), or N/A (not applicable
to the material). The total understandability and
actionability scores were calculated and presented in
percentage (%). A higher score of the material’s understandability
and actionability indicates that the educational
material is easy to understand and action.
Results
Phase 1: needs assessment on module contents and
characteristics
From the literature search, fifteen topics were proposed
for the integrated module for healthcare professionals’
use during consultation sessions with patients with diabetes
and periodontitis disease (Table 1). Then, the table
was presented during interview sessions with fifteen
healthcare professionals (mean age 41.9 years, SD 8.0)
consisted of dietitians, diabetes educators, dental professionals
(dental specialist and dental officer), an endocrinologist,
a health psychologist, and a pharmacist
(Table 2). Majority of them were female (87%), with an
average service duration of 15 years (SD 6.6) in the
current institution.
Through the interview, most healthcare professionals
agreed that an emphasis must be placed on the importance
of optimal blood glucose maintenance through lifestyle
modifications. This could be ensured via weight
management, dietary intake, physical activity, hygiene
care, smoking cessation, stress management, and compliance
on medications and treatment plans. Particularly
regarding dietary management, most of the participants
highlighted the need for meal portion control to be included,
especially carbohydrate intake. Sugar intake was
constantly mentioned by dental and non-dental health
professionals alike due to its substantial contribution to
glycaemic control and oral health problems, such as
dental caries and periodontitis. Common misconceptions
about sugar, alcohol intake, and medication
compliance were proposed to be included in the new
module.
From the dental perspective, suggestions were made to
emphasise dental plaque in the new module to create
further awareness of the relationship between T2DMperiodontitis.
Known as the primary etiology of bacterial
infection-related oral diseases including periodontitis,
both diseases involve inflammation and infection and
may be caused by dental plaque. Oral hygiene care and
self-examination upon noting the signs and symptoms of
periodontitis among patients with diabetes were proposed
for inclusion in the module.
Most participants suggested the new module be developed
by incorporating fewer texts, the appropriate font
sizes, and simpler layman terms to cater to readers’ literacy
level within a diverse educational background. The
use of pictures with captions and colourful illustrations
would be preferable to ensure a clearer understanding of
the new module and consider the different literacy levels
among patients. Printed materials and appropriate as
well as attractive audio-visual materials, preferably short
videos, were proposed. Culturally relevant information
was also suggested by participants as lifestyle advice is
largely related to culture. Some participants recommended
that common practice and local food should be
included as part of the cultural component.
Phase 2: module development
The developed module has 17 units consisting of 17
double-sided flip charts and 13 short videos (Table 3).
Each unit of the flip chart has (i) a healthcare professional’s
view, which consists of detailed explanations of
the topic, and (ii) a patient’s view, which is more
straightforward and mainly composed of pictures (infographics).
The total number of pages in each flip chart
unit is between 4 to 32 pages, including a front cover
and an introduction section that describes the unit’s objective.
Meanwhile, the average length of the video is
2.35 min and ended with a take-home message.
Phase 3: module evaluation
The expert panels comprised 12 healthcare professionals
with a mean age of 39.2 (SD 6.9) years, ranging between
30 and 53 (Table 2). Most of the experts were female
(83.3%) and of Malay ethnicity (91.7%).
Evaluation of the flip chart (PEMAT-P)
The overall median scores for understandability and
actionability were 100%, ranging from 76.5 to 100% for
understandability and 80 to 100% for actionability, respectively
(Table 4). All experts scored 100% for Unit 9
and 16 for both understandability and actionability domain.
Some feedbacks included straightforward and easy
to understand and used attractive and appropriate visual
aids. The expert panels also suggested reorganising a few
medical and specific terms used in the flip charts and
adding more detailed descriptions and explicit pictures.
Evaluation of the short video (PEMAT-A/V)
The overall median scores for understandability and
actionability were 100%, ranging from 90 to 100% for
understandability (Table 5). All experts scored 100% for
the actionability domain in all units. The videos were
noted to be attractive, straightforward, and easy to
understand. Further, the contents of the videos were
consistent with the flip charts and compact with information.
Adding voice-over to the videos and adding a
demonstration video for oral hygiene topics were suggested
to enhance the module’s understandability and
actionability.
Discussion
Our present study successfully developed an integrated
module for diabetes and periodontitis management that
combined nutrition and health aspects. More importantly,
the module was developed based on specific needs
and interests expressed by the healthcare providers
themselves. The module would serve as a structured diabetes
education programme for healthcare professionals
in Malaysia in providing care for diabetes and periodontitis.
Besides, short educational videos can educate and
empower patients with diabetes and oral health care
needs and further improve their overall quality of life.
Studies have well established a bi-directional relationship
between periodontitis-diabetes; diabetes is one of
the risk factors for periodontitis and can exacerbate the
severity of periodontitis, whereas periodontal inflammation
will also have adverse effects on glycaemic control
[27, 28]. Oral health education is important as it leads to
improving oral health practices [29]. This module contains
flip charts that healthcare professionals can use as
an educational tool during counselling sessions with patients.
Our previous needs assessment highlighted the
lack of such educational materials or modules in the
clinics (unpublished data). Besides, most non-dental
healthcare professionals mentioned they missed the importance
of oral health care and did not recognise periodontitis
as a complication of diabetes. Hence, it is
hoped that the developed flip charts can fill in the knowledge
and practice gaps in this area amongst healthcare
professionals.
It was found that most (95%) of patients with diabetes
and periodontitis in Malaysia showed more interest in
multimedia educational materials such as videos rather
than printed materials [30]. In their study, the patients
agreed that videos with a duration below 5 min are easier
to comprehend and could spark their interest and retain
focus and attention. Our study fulfilled this gap and
produced videos with a limit of 3 min at most. Online video is easy to access and can convey the intended message
to a broader audience range rather than a face-toface
method [31]. For health-related short video advertisements,
informativeness, intrusiveness, relevance, and
social interactions are the key factors for user acceptance
[32]. High-quality online audio-visual educational material
that is accurate, understandable, and actionable is
warranted [33].
The current study used PEMAT to evaluate the educational
module of both flip charts and videos. The PEMA
T questionnaire is a systematic method that assesses two
essential domains: understandability and actionability,
with lower scores (70% and below) considered poorly
understandable or poorly actionable [26]. Overall, the
module’s median score for understandability and actionability
was 100%, showing that most of the module’s unit
is highly acceptable among healthcare professionals in
the current study. The understandability scores demonstrated
that the module was easy to understand and
comprised clear and comprehensible contents. Layman
terms were incorporated in the module instead of medical
terms. If medical terms were used, subtitles and
meaning were provided to avoid confusion. The module
also included the use of appropriate visual aids. Meanwhile,
the module’s actionability scores concluded that
the module could clearly explain actions to be acted
upon and directly referred to users.
Overall, our educational materials’ scores were higher
than previously published health educational materials
for diabetes (49.5% understandability and 31.4% actionability)
[34] and oral health (71.5% understandability and
70% actionability) [35]. The higher scores of understandability
and actionability reported in our study might be
due to the participating healthcare professionals who are
more familiar and expert in the areas. A slightly higher
score for understandability (79.2%) and actionability
(78.1%) was reported in a study among university
students in evaluating printed material for smoking
cessation [36].
The present study was the first study in Malaysia to
integrate nutrition and oral health aspects in developing
a diabetes-periodontitis module. This module was designed
based on local and international established
guidelines and considered healthcare professionals’ perspectives
in managing T2DM and periodontitis. Our
short videos, however, have yet to be evaluated by the
patients. Of note, this study was conducted during the
COVID-19 outbreak and Restriction Movement Order
in the country. Therefore, the evaluation process was
completed online with healthcare professionals, and the
patients’ recruitment and access were limited.
Conclusions
Our newly developed integrated nutrition and health
education module for diabetes and periodontitis consisting
of flip charts and short videos was highly wellreceived
by expert panels. Future studies should evaluate
this module’s use by healthcare professionals as one of
the educational materials and its acceptance among diabetes
and periodontitis patients.