Background
Since early 2020, the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has
challenged all the fields of knowledge, increasing the need
for their interconnection. Medicine, science, politics, and
more specialized sectors such as biomedical engineering
(BME), faced crucial ethical issues, which can no longer
be underestimated.
Biomedical engineers design medical devices, raising
many ethical dilemmas in ordinary times, which become
compelling during such a crisis. The authors of this
manuscript had the privilege of different points of view
thanks to the President of the European Society of BME
(i.e., EAMBES) and Secretary General of the global society
of BME and medical physics (IUPESM).
Three pivotal themes emerged in the global BME
community:
1. The dilemma of identifying criteria for the allocation
of medical devices
2. Responsibilities of science and technology
3. Inadequacy of regulations and norms, which lack
universality
This manuscript does not follow the traditional structure
of scientific papers (e.g., methods, results etc.),
rather it is a critical analysis, revolving around the 3
above-mentioned pillars. The first pillar focuses on
the surfacing of ethical dilemmas in times of pandemic
(e.g., scarce resource allocation), delving into examples
from Italy, where the new decision-making criteria often
clashed against the existing constitutional and moral
principles during the first wave.
The second pillar retrospectively reports how the medical
device sector was affected by the current pandemic,
touching on hazardous amatorial attempts of the general
public to face the scarcity of resources and the urgent
needs, and on the crisis-related challenges that surfaced
for manufacturers, exacerbated by the lack of dialogue
with decision-makers. In the same pillar, the theoretical
debate among science and politics is addressed, referring
the case of the “intended use” of a medical device,
from two different philosophical perspectives, i.e., substantialism
and utilitarianism. The former underlines
the fundamentality of substances as ontological categories
[1], suggesting that the intended use of a medical
device should always be respected. The latter stresses the
importance of maximizing the overall good, authorizing
different uses, depending on the relativistic utility or, in
exceptional times of crisis, on the emergency.
This invites the reader to a subsequent reflection on
the inadequacy of the existing regulations on medical
devices, in the third pillar. In respect to this, the manuscript
proposes to offer a hermeneutic perspective close
to the situational ethics that authorizes negotiations
and mediations between the generality of principles and
norms, and the specificity of the context.
Overall, the ethical considerations made in this manuscript,
should be considered a valuable lesson for the
future of crisis management. If and only if ethics and
bioethics will be considered as effective support for science
and scientists (doctors, biomedical engineers, etc.),
the Cartesian separation of knowledge [2] could be overcome,
establishing an interdisciplinary dialogue that
involves peoples and emphasizes the public relevance of
such issues.
In this way, such dilemmas could be anticipated by
establishing a framework that could provide guidance
and appropriate methodology to address arising urgent
issues, without having to resort to specialists for questions
that concern everyone and need a multidisciplinary
approach.
Allocation of medical devices: clinical and ethical
principles
Due to limited resources, decision-makers have had to
compromise among all the potential useful interventions.
Also in the past 10 years, the most public National health
systems were massively privatized, resulting in a significant
reduction of prevention services and a great reduction
of Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds. The rapid spread
of the SARS-CoV-2 resulted in an unprecedented need of
sub-intensive and ICU beds, which overcame the capacity
of the most advanced national healthcare services.
Within a few weeks, the available resources (i.e., medical
devices, doctors, nurses) proved to be insufficient
to cover the care needs of the multitude of COVID-19
patients, beyond the ordinary needs of other patients.
Consequently, doctors and healthcare structures ended
up pondering and making difficult ethical choices in a
short time and identifying priority principles that could
guide them.
National [3–6] and international [7–9] ethics committees,
scientific societies [10, 11], and experts [12–15]
soon expressed their opinion on the matter [16], identifying
requirements that respect human dignity and fundamental
ethical principles, enshrined in the Charters of
both National and International Rights [17].
The case of Italy, the first country significantly affected
outside China, is emblematic. According to the Italian
Constitution, health is a "fundamental right of the individual"
and a "collective interest" (article 32). In addition,
article 2 recognizes the personalist principle and
the duty of solidarity, and article 3 establishes the principle
of equality. Accordingly, the law founding the Italian
National Health Services (NHS) (n. 883/1978) prescribes
that care must be ensured according to the principles of
universality, equality and fairness.
Leveraging on these fundamental principles, the Italian
National Bioethics Committee [18] remarked the need to
allocate medical devices and other resources based only
on a clinical criterion, and without considering criteria
such as age, gender, social attributes, ethnicity, disability
and costs, in compliance with the principles of "justice,
equity, solidarity". The envisaged method was that of "triage
in a pandemic emergency", based on what the World
Health Organization defines as "preparedness" (WHO) as
a premise, and on two key concepts, i.e., "clinical appropriateness"
and "actuality", identified by the healthcare
professional on the basis of clinical criteria [19].
This point of view, which values the person and
opposes attempts of objectification in a series of “preestablished
criteria” (except for the point of view of the
clinician), is well expressed by J. Habermas. In an interview
with the newspaper Le Monde, Habermas underlined
the inadequacy, in moral terms, of an “objective
quantification” of patients and insisted on the essential
issue of the “recognition” of the individual: “when
addressing a second person (you, you), the other person’s
self-determination must either be respected or denied,
that is, either accepted or ignored” [20].
On the other hand, the Italian society of anesthesiology
(SIAARTI) introduced the identification of an age
limit for accessing intensive care in case of necessity [21].
SIAARTI’s document explained that COVID-19 created
a scenario, in which criteria for accessing ICU may be
needed beyond the clinical appropriateness and proportionality
of care, but also in distributive justice and the
appropriate allocation of limited healthcare resources,
which means privileging those with the "greatest life
expectancy" [22]. Even if the choice of whom to admit
to treatment is a terrible reality, it must be discussed by
ethicists and bioethicists to further identify solutions that
support medical doctors in taking these decisions. “This
is not to deny their clinical authority and responsibility,
but rather to urge a commitment to give such question
public relevance" so that in the future the "public health
perspective" [23] to follow is clear from the beginning.
Responsible thinking, responsible actions,
responsible silence
COVID-19 created a global lack of essential medical
devices (e.g., pulmonary ventilators) and personal protective
equipment (PPE, such as masks, respirators) [24].
This led to an unprecedented amount of do-it-yourself
(DIY) solutions, which were fomented on media worldwide.
Consequently, ordinary individuals started producing
PPE at home with 3D printers and everyday materials,
and manufacturers converted their production facilities
to develop medical devices and PPE.
Unfortunately, although very admirable, this approach
is not feasible in critical sectors such as medical devices
or PPE, which require postgraduate education, years of
experience and deep knowledge of relevant international
standards and norms, in order to ensure appropriate levels
of safety, efficacy and resilience. Thus, only 7 manufacturers
in the world are producing pulmonary ventilators.
In fact, during a pandemic, we do not only need to ensure
the usual standard of quality, but we should also consider
making those devices more resilient, because, if hospitals
fail, we will need to safely operationalize these devices
in field hospitals, tent-like structures, and any other
relevant setting. Therefore, experience, safe-by-design
approaches, and the knowledge of additional standards
(e.g., military standards) become relevant too.
Minimal scientific evidence exists on how harmful this
DIY wave has been, but few facts can be clearly reported
referencing major newspapers. In mid-March 2020,
manufacturers were called upon to help to tackle medical
devices and PPE crisis.12 Many responded, certainly
moved by the noblest principle and willingness to help.
Unfortunately, learning to manufacture complicated and
highly regulated pulmonary ventilators cannot be done
in a few weeks. By mid-April 2020, new productions of
ventilators were stopped in Spain,3 UK suspended orders
of BlueSky ventilators4and France followed.5 Once again,
a virtuous example came from Italy, where the only Italian
manufacturer of ventilators (i.e., Siare Engineering
International Group l.t.d.) was supported by the Italian
Government, which offered 25 highly specialized
army engineers, by the former FIAT (now FCA), who
supported producing electro-mechanic components,
in addition to Ferrari providing electronic components.
With this collaborative effort, Siare increased the production
of top-of-the-range ventilators from 160 to 500 units
per month, respecting the highest quality standards. In
conclusion, the rise of useless and potentially harmful
DIY approaches to PPE and medical devices could have
been easily avoided at the start of the pandemic by decision-
makers initially consulting with domain experts,
such as biomedical and clinical engineers.
In this regard, the belief that disciplinary competence
is to be sectorized and not interconnected, very often,
leads to a further separation of knowledge that is detrimental
to people. In fact, it could be good practice that
politicians had a solid scientific background in order to
legislate about scientific matters, above all if they involve
public health. On the other hand, scientists should
"grovel in the dirt of the city of Romulus" [25] keeping
their related studies as tangible and accessible as possible,
and acquire a more solid political culture and a growing
awareness of their social role. After all, the relationship
between science, policy-making and politics has been
controversial since the dawns of civilization: people like
Aristarchus of Samos (i.e., one of the fathers of an early
Heliocentrism), censored by sectaries such as Cleanthes
(i.e., the prince of stoics at that age), or like Socrates,
accused, “censored”, and sentenced to death for being
“unorthodox” by one of the most open and democratic
societies of the times, the Polis of Athens [26], or like
Galileus, who was condemned for radically opposing to
the Sacred Scriptures- and Church-approved Geocentric
model, are just a few stark examples. Although much progress
has been made since then, there is still an ongoing
debate among a Weberian distinction between science
and politics and a Habermasian and Marcusean dichotomy
between the technocratic and decisionist models of
scientific advice to politics. Nonetheless, it is evident that
we are transitioning towards ever more present democratization
of science, and not without associated risks. In
fact, how can this be achieved without compromising the
epistemic quality of knowledge [27]?
politicians, scientists (especially biomedical engineers)
and ethics experts, is based on two distinct currents of
thought, referring to two different philosophical matrices,
i.e., utilitarianism and substantialism. In fact, some people
believe that any kind of emergency-ready response
that can make up for the shortage of PPE and medical
devices is “better than nothing”, even at the expense
of the safety and efficiency normally guaranteed by the
standards. This way of thinking is in line with Utilitarianism’s
conception of maximizing happiness and overall
gains for all the affected individuals. However, the “better
than nothing approach” is dubious and is a well-known
logical fallacy, that of the relative privation [28]. This kind
of fallacious way of reasoning also justifies the misuse of
something that does meet the standards but was intended
for completely different purposes. In fact, the intended
purpose is key, at least in the world of medical devices,
and it is what safeguards the manufacturers in case their
products fail if they are used “off label”. In this case, the
liability falls with the individual who misused the product
in the first place [29]. This concept is well portrayed
by what happened in Harrow,6,7 where some nurses, after
denouncing their precarious working conditions and the
lack of PPE in the fight against COVID-19, had started
using bin bags as a replacement of the unavailable PPE.
In this case, the beneficial objective was given priority
and the collective benefit was maximised. However, also
the risk to the wearer had rapidly increased to the extent
that it was not possible to predict its consequences (even
negative).
Conversely, other people believe that the intended purpose
of an object should be respected, in line with Substantialism’s
theories, which attribute absolute value to
an idea. According to this perspective, for example, a bin
bag would be designed, tested and marketed to contain
rubbish, not to protect healthcare workers from diseases
(in this case the design principles and the tests will be different
and stricter). Thus, these people tend towards a
minimisation of the risk, but, at the same time, their precautional
approach hinders the possible benefit underlying
the other “less safe” alternatives. In this regard, it is
necessary to recall the philosophy of Hans Jonas who,
faced with an indeterminate and potential risk, the consequences
of which cannot be estimated, introduced the
imperative of responsibility in defence of future generations
and based on the precautionary principle. His "heuristics
of fear" implies foresight and ability to predict and
adequately assess the consequences of collective activities
in contemporary societies. Such principle implies
to “act so that the effects of your action are compatible
with the permanence of genuine life” and, in our present
choices, to “include the future wholeness of Man among
the objects of your (our) will” [30].
Consequently, this responsibility goes beyond the personal
one of engineers, as it also includes the responsibility
they partially assume if and when they do not limit
reckless or inadequately considered actions, guided by
the above-mentioned utilitarian approach. In fact, the
compliance with international standards and the consequent
CE marking does not only guarantee the quality,
safety, efficiency, and efficacy of a product, but also the
protection of manufacturers and users. In fact, as aforementioned
from a general point of view, those to be
blamed for the possible failure of bin bags used as PPE
for the prevention of COVID-19 and the consequent
infection and potential death of the healthcare workers
using them are not the manufacturers of such items,
but whomever decided to use this amateur substitution
to other certified means of protection, and, to a certain
extent, the biomedical engineers who did not respect
their duty to identify the limits regarding the unintended
uses.
Overall, two theoretical orientations are at the basis of
these dichotomous approaches. However, in order to better
frame them, it is necessary to analyse them in view of
the extraordinary condition of necessity begotten by the
pandemic. The dilemma revolves around the "intended
use", or rather the purpose for which something (e.g.,
PPE or medical devices) was originally designed for: on
the one hand there are those who assert that, in conditions
of necessity, the contingent purpose, i.e., the social
functionality that overcomes the intended use, ought to
be preferred despite being “off label”. In fact, they firmly
believe that it is preferable to maximize the current benefit
while assuming an undefined risk. Although it is not
easy to relate this trend to a specific current of thought, it
certainly shares some points in common with utilitarianism,
starting from the Benthamian one [31], if not with
pragmatism (e.g., Dewey [32]).
On the other hand, the position of those who consider
the “intended use” or rather the intrinsic purpose
for which the product was manufactured tested and
marketed, a priority, would seem evocative of Aristotelian
substantialism or eschatology. In this case, the risks
are limited by compliance with the law and the relevant
standards, which also guarantee the achievement of the
benefits. The refusal of this immediately relieves the
manufacturer and the regulator from any responsibility
related to the misuse of the object, leaving every possible
and unforeseeable risk to the individual.
In particular, the COVID-19-related debate, involving
politicians, scientists (especially biomedical engineers)
and ethics experts, is based on two distinct currents of
thought, referring to two different philosophical matrices,
i.e., utilitarianism and substantialism. In fact, some people
believe that any kind of emergency-ready response
that can make up for the shortage of PPE and medical
devices is “better than nothing”, even at the expense
of the safety and efficiency normally guaranteed by the
standards. This way of thinking is in line with Utilitarianism’s
conception of maximizing happiness and overall
gains for all the affected individuals. However, the “better
than nothing approach” is dubious and is a well-known
logical fallacy, that of the relative privation [28]. This kind
of fallacious way of reasoning also justifies the misuse of
something that does meet the standards but was intended
for completely different purposes. In fact, the intended
purpose is key, at least in the world of medical devices,
and it is what safeguards the manufacturers in case their
products fail if they are used “off label”. In this case, the
liability falls with the individual who misused the product
in the first place [29]. This concept is well portrayed
by what happened in Harrow,6,7 where some nurses, after
denouncing their precarious working conditions and the
lack of PPE in the fight against COVID-19, had started
using bin bags as a replacement of the unavailable PPE.
In this case, the beneficial objective was given priority
and the collective benefit was maximised. However, also
the risk to the wearer had rapidly increased to the extent
that it was not possible to predict its consequences (even
negative).
Conversely, other people believe that the intended purpose
of an object should be respected, in line with Substantialism’s
theories, which attribute absolute value to
an idea. According to this perspective, for example, a bin
bag would be designed, tested and marketed to contain
rubbish, not to protect healthcare workers from diseases
(in this case the design principles and the tests will be different
and stricter). Thus, these people tend towards a
minimisation of the risk, but, at the same time, their precautional
approach hinders the possible benefit underlying
the other “less safe” alternatives. In this regard, it is
necessary to recall the philosophy of Hans Jonas who,
faced with an indeterminate and potential risk, the consequences
of which cannot be estimated, introduced the
imperative of responsibility in defence of future generations
and based on the precautionary principle. His "heuristics
of fear" implies foresight and ability to predict and
adequately assess the consequences of collective activities
in contemporary societies. Such principle implies
to “act so that the effects of your action are compatible
with the permanence of genuine life” and, in our present
choices, to “include the future wholeness of Man among
the objects of your (our) will” [30].
Consequently, this responsibility goes beyond the personal
one of engineers, as it also includes the responsibility
they partially assume if and when they do not limit
reckless or inadequately considered actions, guided by
the above-mentioned utilitarian approach. In fact, the
compliance with international standards and the consequent
CE marking does not only guarantee the quality,
safety, efficiency, and efficacy of a product, but also the
protection of manufacturers and users. In fact, as aforementioned
from a general point of view, those to be
blamed for the possible failure of bin bags used as PPE
for the prevention of COVID-19 and the consequent
infection and potential death of the healthcare workers
using them are not the manufacturers of such items,
but whomever decided to use this amateur substitution
to other certified means of protection, and, to a certain
extent, the biomedical engineers who did not respect
their duty to identify the limits regarding the unintended
uses.
Overall, two theoretical orientations are at the basis of
these dichotomous approaches. However, in order to better
frame them, it is necessary to analyse them in view of
the extraordinary condition of necessity begotten by the
pandemic. The dilemma revolves around the "intended
use", or rather the purpose for which something (e.g.,
PPE or medical devices) was originally designed for: on
the one hand there are those who assert that, in conditions
of necessity, the contingent purpose, i.e., the social
functionality that overcomes the intended use, ought to
be preferred despite being “off label”. In fact, they firmly
believe that it is preferable to maximize the current benefit
while assuming an undefined risk. Although it is not
easy to relate this trend to a specific current of thought, it
certainly shares some points in common with utilitarianism,
starting from the Benthamian one [31], if not with
pragmatism (e.g., Dewey [32]).
On the other hand, the position of those who consider
the “intended use” or rather the intrinsic purpose
for which the product was manufactured tested and
marketed, a priority, would seem evocative of Aristotelian
substantialism or eschatology. In this case, the risks
are limited by compliance with the law and the relevant
standards, which also guarantee the achievement of the
benefits. The refusal of this immediately relieves the
manufacturer and the regulator from any responsibility
related to the misuse of the object, leaving every possible
and unforeseeable risk to the individual.
available
and certified, albeit designed for a different “intended
use”, seems more “reasonable” than not protecting oneself
to everyone. However, we cannot refrain from asking
ourselves the following questions: what is the limit within
which it is possible to say, “better than nothing”? To what
extent can science and policymakers put people’s lives
at risk in order to have a prompt, but probably unsafe
answer in the wake of the "better than nothing" principle?
Regulatory frameworks and standards should be
reviewed in this regard.
Beyond the DIY solutions, low-quality outputs have
been affecting scientific production too. In fact, the
high demand for information caused an acceleration in
reporting scientific results, with many journals being
overwhelmed with unprecedented numbers of papers,
which challenged the capability of editors and reviewers
to scrutinise articles.
The unprecedented high number of retracted papers
can be a proxy for the high number of low-quality
research on COVID-19. For this reason, a rapid search
for papers regarding COVID-19 or SARS-CoV-2, and
the previous epidemic/pandemics (i.e., SARS, MERS,
Swine Flu) as a comparison, was performed both on
OvidSP and the Retraction Watch Database. As regards
COVID-19 publications, there were 124 retracted papers
out of 264,530, i.e., 4.68 per 10,000 papers (compared
to 1.16 per 10,000 papers concerning the previous pandemics/
epidemics). Although this proxy is to be taken
with a grain of salt, it should be a wake-up call for further
investigations. Similar levels of confusion could be
observed also among scientists and experts invited by
media to interpret available scientific evidence and technical
guidance.
The above-mentioned issues contributed to beget and
feed an infodemic, defined by the United Nation as “an
over-abundance of information—some accurate and
some not—that makes it hard for people to find trustworthy
sources and reliable guidance when they need it” [33],
which is inducing an unprecedented need for responsible
silence too.
Inadequacy of regulatory frameworks and norms
The pandemic creates a generalized condition of
resource limited settings (RLSs), i.e., environments lacking
means, specific knowledge, specialized personnel,
medical devices and drugs within inappropriate medical
locations. While this condition was already familiar
to low- and middle-income countries, COVID-19 has
overwhelmingly created RLS conditions in high-income
countries, such as Europe, the USA and Japan, for the
first time since World War II. This demonstrates how
regulatory frameworks for medical devices and PPE
are inadequate to RLS conditions. In fact, these regulations
usually take into consideration standards that are
too stringent and generic, proving impossible to fulfil in
RLSs and, in times of the pandemic, difficult to adhere
to universally. For example, the numerous tests and
verifications required to assess the conformity of market
respiratory protective equipment or eye protection
equipment for healthcare purposes wasted time. One
reason for this is that these standards are influenced by
big manufacturers interested in having the largest market
share. As a result, commercial standards for PPEs require
testing in conditions that are not relevant for hospital
workers (e.g., high temperature typical of heavy metals
industry). Hence, international standards and norms followed
the principle of generalism, losing universality and
creating unnecessary burdens for small manufacturers
[34]. In this regard, the WHO has published, for the first
time, technical guidance on PPE specifically relevant for
healthcare settings [35, 36]. Differently to ISO standards
for masks and respirators, the WHO guidance focuses on
essential parameters, such as filtering capability, fit and
breathability for masks.
Recalling the two aforementioned ethical perspectives,
considering existing medical device regulation too
generic to be universal, does not mean adhering to the
utilitarian-pragmatic current tout court. There may be a
contextualised response, regulated on the basis of tests,
complying with flexible standards, or rather standards
that are purposely designed to take into account different
niche conditions. However, the use of any object must
be certified and not random, and subject to tests relating
to its specific intended use. Only in this way, people and
their rights can be safeguarded, and science can prove
to think deeply, act consciously and remain silent, when
appropriate.
Contextualism is the basis of situational ethics [37],
which seems to be the most adequate response to the
specific needs of everyone and be able to face emergencies.
In fact, it starts from the particular situation and
tries to find universalizable answers, applying a heuristic
and inductive method, progressive negotiations and
interdisciplinary exchanges.
Conclusions
One year after the start of the pandemic, the need for
ethic guidance is still tangible in everyday circumstances
and essential during crisis or in RLSs. Respecting fundamental
ethical principles while negotiating among different
criteria (hospitalization demands vs available ICUs,
generalism vs particularism, action vs responsible-action)
requires clear guidance, deep knowledge, and peer-topeer
discussion among experts of different disciplines.
The need for extreme specialization should never result
in the fragmentation of knowledge.
Exactly a century, i.e., the Short Twentieth Century,
separates COVID-19 from the last pandemic, the socalled
"Spanish Flu", which flagellated Europe in 1918–
1919. According to Hobsbawm, “no period in history
has been more penetrated by and more dependent on the
natural sciences” and “yet no period, since Galileo’s recantation,
has been less at ease with it”. This chasm between
scientists and the general public is still open and, in some
cases, fomented by populisms, which leverage on people’s
fears evoking war atmospheres, which have nothing
to do with the catastrophic failure of many national
healthcare systems’ response to this crisis. After a century,
the dependence of medicine on biomedical science
and engineering is evident, while their contribution to
the definition of effective policies and norms is still negligible.
Finally, the Cartesian fragmentation of knowledge,
or rather “thinking in silos”, has persisted across the last
century, calling for the creation of more fora where multidisciplinary
discussions can be promoted. Three main
needs emerged clearly: the need for responsible thinking,
the need for responsible action and the need for responsible
silence, when required and appropriate [38].