Umbilical cord blood is a rich source of stem cells that
can be used in treatments for blood and immune system
disorders. It is also used for research into novel therapies
not yet ready for clinical application [1, 2]. The use of
the stem cells in these applications depends on
individuals banking their cord blood in either public, private,
or public-private hybrid banks. It is an individual’s
choice to bank their cord blood and to do so in either a
public or private bank. That decision has the potential to
be influenced by numerous sources, including health
care practitioners and family and friends [3]. But the
media – including the popular press, social media, and
communication efforts of both public and private entities
– can also have an impact [4–7]. Research shows
that there are issues around the public’s awareness and
knowledge of cord blood uses, and that information
sources are “varied, fragmented and inconsistent” [3].
Private banking is a for-profit industry through which
parents pay to store umbilical cord blood for potential future
use. There are currently seven private banking companies
marketing in Canada, typically charging an initial
fee of approximately $1000.00 CAD, followed by a yearly
charge of approximately $125.00 [8]. Public banking is a
form of donation where the tissues are generally used to
help other patients or for research, is free of cost, and is
overseen by government agencies. In Canada, the first private
banks began operation in 1996 [9]. With the exception
of Quebec, which began public banking in 2004 [10],
there was little public banking in Canada until the creation
of the national program in 2013 [11]. In this respect,
Canada was significantly behind other countries, such as,
for example, the United Kingdom, which had an operational
public bank program in 1996 [12], and the United
States which established its National Cord Blood Program
in 1992 [13]. In Canada and abroad, policy statements and
government discourse often recommend public cord blood
banking over private banking, except in cases of an established
prior condition in the family that could benefit from
cord blood use [1, 14–18]. This is because the potential for
autologous or familial allogeneic use offered by private banking
is extremely low (a point confirmed by usage data) [1],
private banking is costly, and it can elude regulatory oversight,
in turn impacting overall blood quality [1]. In contrast,
public banks provide public health benefits and regulatory
oversight helps to ensure the effectiveness of processes while
minimizing risk [1, 14, 15, 19].
Provincial and federal governments stress the tendency
for private banks to oversell the potential for
cord blood use, especially in relation to speculative
stem cell therapies not yet supported by clinical evidence
[14–16, 19]. Academic research has described
public banks as operating on a “regime of truth” but
characterizes private banks as operating on a “regime
of promise.” [20, 21] Private banks can wield the
power of hope to their marketing advantage, exacerbating
problematic “promissory” [22] and “hyping”
[23–26] aspects of health science. For example, as of
June 8, 2020, one public bank stated on its website
contained a news link to a story indicating that a
“boy with brain injury” showed “‘remarkable’ improvement
after experimental stem cell procedure”, also
stating that its services offer “the opportunity to collect
and save your baby’s cord blood stem cells for
potential medical uses to treat life-threatening diseases
(createcordbank.com). Another bank claims that
its services are a “once in a lifetime opportunity to protect
your child’s future health” (futurehealthbiobank.com/caen).
The factual divisions between public and private
banking options are expressed on popular websites likely
to be accessed by future parents (i.e. https://www.babycenter.
ca/ [27] or www.webmd.com [28]), and private
banking marketing initiatives have received ample coverage
in popular Canadian press [29–32].
Recent research shows that, in the North American
popular press, the topics of public and private banking feature
significantly when cord blood is discussed [33]. Overall,
private cord blood banking is portrayed more in
relation to concerns/risks than benefits, and strong narrative
messaging often accompanies this portrayal [33, 34].
As discussed in the academic literature, it is common for
private banking to be marketed as a type of “biological insurance”
used by parents wishing to do the very best for
their children and families [20, 29, 33, 35]. This is noted
when private companies label themselves as “family”
banks [8, 20, 29, 35]. On the other hand, donating blood
to public banks can often be an unacknowledged process,
and some have argued that it requires significant improvement
[21, 36–39]. Ultimately, an individual’s decision on
what to do with cord blood can largely hinge on obtaining
accurate, up-to-date knowledge. Private banking marketing
efforts, including information provided on their websites,
can significantly influence decision making.
Specifically, they can potentially take advantage of [future]
parents’ strong desire to protect existing and/or future
children.
Here, we assess the regulatory landscape governing
private cord bank marketing in Canada, with a focus on
determining the permissibility of advertising claims relating
to future, as yet unproven therapies that would
use banked cord blood.
Main text
Health Canada
Health Canada’s role in the regulation of private cord
blood banking depends on the functions banks choose
to perform. Private banks that store for allogeneic use
(i.e., use in a different individual) are subject to routine
inspections and the Safety of Human Cells, Tissues and
Organs for Transplantation Regulations [16, 40]. However,
direct-to-consumer marketing usually pertains to
private cord blood banking for future autologous or familial
allogeneic use, and these banks are regulated
under the Food and Drugs Act [16, 41]. Through this
and the Blood Regulations, cord blood “products cannot
be manufactured, prepared, preserved, packaged or
stored under unsanitary conditions.” [16, 42]
As was noted in a recent position paper released by
Health Canada, all cell therapies are “drugs” as defined
in the Food and Drugs Act, and are regulated under it
and the associated regulations [43, 44]. This means that
any cord blood therapies used by banks or their partners
in the future would need to complete the clinical trial
process and be approved by Health Canada. Institutions
wishing to perform treatments in the future would be
limited to approved therapies, and would not be able to
perform unproven or unapproved therapies in the manner
private clinics recently have in the context of stem
cell therapies [45–47].
Health Canada has the ability to regulate marketing of
drugs and medical devices pursuant to its jurisdiction
[48]. The service of private blood banking is neither a
drug nor a medical device [49]. Also, because the marketing
of private cord blood banking for autologous use
often relates to speculative future cell therapies that do
not exist and are not being advertised for current clinical
use, most private blood bank marketing seems to fall
outside Health Canada’s regulatory scope. As such, we
must turn to other areas of the law for instructive input.
Truth in advertising
The marketing practices of private cord blood banks in
Canada are regulated by the Competition Bureau pursuant
to the Competition Act [50]. There are also industry
standards for advertising, though they are not legally
binding. Ad Standards has the Canadian Code of Advertising
Standards, a code of conduct which is based in
substance on underlying advertising law [51, 52]. Ad
Standards also has a voluntary complaint system through
which a council reviews concerns and renders decisions,
which can then be appealed if desired [53]. Though the
institution lacks significant enforcement capability, it
can report the improper marketing behaviours of uncooperative
companies directly to the Competition Bureau.
Under the Competition Act, individuals and companies
are prohibited from knowingly or recklessly making representations
that are “false or misleading in a material
respect.” [50] All performance claims must be supported
by an “adequate and proper test” showing that the advertised
product or intervention has the claimed effect.
This means that some evidence must be available to support
the marketing claims. However, under existing
truth-in-advertising precedent, that test does not have to
follow a rigorous scientific process [54]. The test only requires
establishing that a product has an effect beyond
chance [54].
Similar to Health Canada’s noted inability to regulate
these claims, the applicability of the truth-in-advertising
law relating to claim substantiation to the unproven future
therapies predicted in private cord bank advertising
is questionable. This is because the actual product or
service offered is the banking of blood, not the predicted
or hypothesized future treatments that may be mentioned
in marketing. It is possible the suggestion that
unproven hypothetical future treatments could make
blood banking a great investment for one’s future health
may not always trigger regulatory oversight. This could
depend on the extent to which future therapies are hypothesized
rather than claimed to be inevitable or guaranteed.
In this sense, private cord banking marketing is
distinct from directly advertising the benefits of unproven
therapies, as the latter clearly requires substantiation
of a performance claim under the requirements set
out by the Competition Bureau and enabling law [55].
Yet, while the representations of private cord blood
banks relating to future hypothetical treatments may not
always be subject to the legal requirement for substantiation,
the main provision of the Competition Act prohibiting
false advertising still appears to be directly
applicable. As noted, section 74.01 states promotional
content is reviewable if it is “false or misleading in a material
respect.” [50] The standard of materiality is met
when the “literal meaning or general impression conveyed
could influence the ordinary consumer to buy or
use the advertised product or service” [56] – that is to
say, when it could “influence a consumer’s behavior or
purchasing decisions.” [51] (Notably, this is very similar
to the United States’ standard for deceptive practices,
which is met if a practice is likely to mislead consumers
and “affect consumers’ behavior or decisions about the
product or service” [57]; it is also similar to the United
Kingdom’s standard for misleading advertising, which is
met when marketing, “by reason of its deceptive nature,
is likely to effect [traders’] economic behavior” [58].)
The Supreme Court of Canada has addressed the legal
meaning of a general impression in the context of Quebec’s
Consumer Protection Act, a provincial statute that is
largely based on the Competition Act. In Richard v. Time,
Inc, the Supreme Court held that assessing a general impression
requires “describing the general impression that
the representation is likely to convey to a "credulous" and
inexperienced consumer; and [2] determining whether
that general impression is true to reality” [59].
While this precedent has not yet been reaffirmed in
federal Competition Act proceedings, it is highly instructive
of the manner in which general impressions
will be assessed federally. The case suggests that consumers
are, for the purpose of assessing truth-inadvertising
claims, to be considered to be “credulous
and inexperienced.” This means that the standard for a
“general impression” to be considered misleading is low.
Statements about potential future health benefits from
banking blood that do not currently exist, if they form
part of the general impression of a private bank’s representation,
could easily mislead a "credulous" and inexperienced
consumer – especially in the emotional
context of pregnancy or birth.
Further, the private banking of cord blood is generally
not, solely as a service in itself, of any use or benefit to a
customer/patient. Generally, all of the potential benefit
of the banking is derived from the potential future use
of the biological material for health interventions directed
toward the customer/patient or his or her relatives.
Therefore, the crux of the service, that is to say
what the private bank is “really selling,” is the potential
for future health benefit. Indeed, a slightly improved
storage technology – that is to say a measurable improvement
to the de facto service offered – is arguably
much less likely to sway consumer behavior than, for example,
the promise of a future stem cell therapy that
could cure a loved one. Since the potential for future
health benefit is the key reason why private banking exists,
it is very likely that a court would find claims about
future health breakthroughs and technologies to be material
to consumer decision making. And when we consider
that the best available medical evidence indicates a
“low probability of using one’s own cord blood for autologous
transplantation, which studies have estimated
are between 1 in 20,000 and 1 in 250,000,“ [16] we can
say with confidence that some private cord blood banking
claims are materially misleading.
In sum, truth in advertising law remains the most
valuable enforcement tool for claims about hypothetical
future treatments for which scientific support is preliminary
or non-existent. Nonetheless, the Competition
Bureau will need to engage in enforcement to effectively
minimize this sort of advertising. Enforcement should be
feasible given that only seven private companies operate
in Canada, though public complaints would certainly aid
in spurring the Bureau into action.
Other relevant law and policy
In addition to truth in advertising law, the common law relating
to negligence, misrepresentation, and fiduciary obligation
can be helpful in contexts where health professionals
are presenting banking options to patients. Common law requires
that these professionals practice to the standard of “a
prudent and diligent doctor in the same circumstances,“ [60]
a standard that is generally incompatible with interventions
that are not evidence-based [46, 61]. Physicians also have a
legal duty of care to patients who are making medical decisions,
and pursuant to this duty they must disclose all information
a reasonable person in the patient’s position would
want to know [62, 63]. While the service of preserving cord
blood is itself evidence-based, advertising for yet unknown
future therapies is not. Hence, disclosure requirements likely
mandate that physicians inform patients about the problems
with these representations, and the facts and probabilities relating
to the low chance of utility from private banking. In
Canada, based on the statements of provincial governments
such as those in Alberta and British Columbia, “doctors do
not recommend that you bank cord blood on the slight
chance that your baby will need stem cells someday,” and patients
should “consider donating the cord blood to a public
bank instead.” [14, 15]
For most health-related advertising, health professional
standards of practice, codes of ethics and disciplinary tribunal
precedents are applicable and set a high standard
of conduct [46, 64, 65]. This is because marketing by
health professionals often relates to a medical intervention
or a health product used directly by a patient on
their body, which triggers both the noted legal obligations
but also these standards. However, the applicability
of these policies could be questionable in the context of
private cord blood bank marketing. To our knowledge,
there is no requirement that patients consult with a
bank’s health professionals prior to entering into an
agreement to store cord blood with a bank, and while
physicians and other medical professionals may hold positions
at various levels in a bank’s business structure,
client contact is likely to be minor and not to constitute
a physician/patient relationship that would trigger additional
professional standards and obligations. Still, if a
physician is involved, he or she would be bound by relevant
standards and ethical requirements regarding advertising,
and if a private bank were under a physician’s
ownership it is also likely these standards would apply.
Conclusions
When making decisions about biobanking, consumers
must be presented with accurate information about the
likelihood of private banking resulting in benefit. Disclosures
should also include a consideration of the opportunity
cost of storing privately instead of donating to a
public bank and possibly contributing to a life-saving
therapy for someone else. Both public health and personal
financial harm can occur when misleading advertisements
are used to convince patients to use a private
instead of a public cord blood bank.
Here we have argued that private cord blood banking
advertising that includes claims relating to speculative
future health benefits from unknown or
unproven therapies potentially breaches advertising
law. Though we have used Canada as an example,
and there may be legal differences in other jurisdictions
that manifest as slightly different limits on the
extent of permissible prognostication, the general
proposition holds that such marketing is materially
misleading in a way that is likely to impact consumer
decision making – and especially the decision making
of a "credulous" and inexperienced consumer [59].
Regulatory bodies such as the Competition Bureau,
industry associations such as Ad Standards and nonprofit
advertising watchdogs such as Truth in Advertising
should all act to encourage enforcement of
existing law, to help prevent new parents from being
persuaded to privately store tissue that is likely of no
personal utility and may result in significant financial
and public health cost.