Background
The legalization of Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID)
in Canada came into effect in 2016 with the passing of
Bill C-14. MAID was defined in Bill C-14 as (a) the
administering or prescribing by a clinician of a substance
to a person, at their request, that causes their death; or
(b) the prescribing or providing by a clinician of a substance
to a person, at their request, so that they may
self-administer the substance and in doing so cause their
own death [1]. Prior to this legislation, MAID was prohibited
by the Criminal Code of Canada which stated
that anyone who aids or abets a person in committing
suicide would commit an indictable offence and that no
person may consent to death being inflicted on them [2].
As a consequence of this prohibition and prior to the
passing of Bill C-14, consenting patients with a grievous
and irremediable medical condition (e.g., end stage
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) who experienced enduring
intolerable suffering were only offered palliative care.
A recent Canadian survey of 1407 physicians showed
that only 29% would consider providing MAID if it was
requested by a patient [3]. Given the implications of Bill
C-14 on the future practice of medicine, it is also important
to understand medical residents’ attitudes towards
MAID and the factors that contribute to their
decision to participate. All residents will, at one time
during their training, find themselves working in tertiary
care centres, providing care to hospitalized patients who
are frail and may be suffering from a grievous and irremediable
medical condition (i.e., patients who would be
eligible for MAID under Bill C-14). Yet, studies in the
U.S. and Canada indicate that residents may not be receiving
adequate training in providing end-of-life care,
nor are they taught the medical ethics of providing care
to a potentially non-autonomous, dying patient [4–6].
This gap in medical training will be further complicated
by the introduction of MAID, as well as the lack of
experience among educators to teach residents how to
field requests for assisted dying.
Results from existing U.S.-based studies suggest that
residents are hesitant to participate in MAID (1–40%),
but may be supportive of their colleagues’ involvement
[7–11]. Similarly, in Mexico, residents have expressed
limited support (18–29%) for MAID [12, 13]. These
studies, compared to the results from surveys of practicing
physicians, indicate that residents may be more
willing to participate in MAID than established physicians
[7, 9, 10, 13, 14]. These studies also suggest that
religion, gender, and the amount of years in clinical
practice may also impact medical residents’ decision to
participate in MAID.
Until recently, however, there have not been any formal
investigations of Canadian residents’ perceptions of
or willingness to participate in MAID. MacDonald
et al.’s study [6] of Canadian family medicine residents’
attitudes towards MAID was the first of its kind. From
their survey of 71 preceptors and 62 residents in the
Queen’s University family medicine residency program,
they found that most residents would participate in
MAID (69%). However, the generalizability of their findings
is limited by the single-site study design. Furthermore,
while they found that residents may be willing to
participate passively as an observer or as a part of a team
providing MAID, it’s unclear if they would actively provide
MAID on their own. This distinction is important
because active participation raises stronger ethical concerns
for clinicians. Studies have demonstrated that physicians
are accepting of indirect end-of-life activities
such as withholding or withdrawing life sustaining treatments
(i.e., an active decision-making process to stop or
not start a given intervention that would prevent a patient
from dying), but not physician-assisted suicide [15].
While MAID, in a strict sense, refers to the administration
or provision of a substance that ends the patients’
life, addressing a patient’s request for MAID in clinical
practice is more complex. It requires exploring the nature
of the patient’s request, facilitating their request,
and assessing their eligibility. In our study, we used the
term “participate in physician hastened death (PHD)” to
refer to participation in MAID in a broad sense. This
would include exploring patients’ requests and assessing
eligibility in addition to the provision of MAID by lethal
prescription or injection. In this respect, MAID can
be seen as a part of a continuum of end-of-life care
that ranges from discontinuing or withholding treatment,
to actively participating in PHD, and finally the
provision of MAID.
As the opinions and factors that shape Canadian residents’
willingness to participate in MAID have not been
fully described, the objectives of our study were to: [1]
Describe Canadian family medicine residents’ attitudes
towards PHD and the provision of MAID; and, [2] identify
the factors (e.g., demographics, clinical exposure to
death and dying) that may influence their decision to
actively provide MAID.
Methods
The survey
We conducted a cross-sectional study of family medicine
residents in Canada to determine their opinions on PHD
and MAID and the factors that may influence their decision
to participate. All family medicine programs in
Canada were invited to participate. We included residents
in their postgraduate year (PGY) 1 or PGY2 but
excluded medical students and staff physicians. Residents
in enhanced skills programs (PGY3) were also excluded
as some of them could be pursuing specialization
in palliative care. As there were no previous Canadian
studies at the time to base a survey instrument on, we
adapted our survey from studies conducted in the U. S
and Mexico [5, 11, 12, 14]. We modified some questions
to reflect the Canadian context (e.g., legal definitions,
eligibility) while preserving questions that have shared
meanings and were found to be prior predictors of participation
in MAID (e.g., religion, gender, years in practice).
The survey was pilot tested, internally, for face
validity by three staff physicians from the Department of
Palliative Care at The Ottawa Hospital. This study was
approved by the Ottawa Health Science Network Research
Ethics Board.
An e-mail containing the survey link, consent form,
and recruitment letter was sent to participants by their
program coordinators. Participation was voluntary and
anonymous. The survey was made available between December
2016 and April 2017 in English or French. In the
end, 6 of 17 programs were included, which represented
a total of 839 eligible participants. Programs that were
excluded from this study either did not respond to our
invitation or grant permission to distribute our survey.
Metrics
Our survey (See Additional file 1: Questionnaire on
MAID) captured residents’ demographic characteristics
(age, gender, ethnicity, training, and faith), clinical exposure
to death and dying (e.g., managing pain and suffering,
declaring death) and attitude towards PHD and
MAID using an example of a patient who fulfills all the
criteria for MAID under Bill C-14. Residents’ agreement
with various statements (e.g., would you believe the patient
is asking for PHD; assess for incapacity; withdraw
treatment; participate in PHD; provide MAID by lethal
prescription or injection) was captured using Likert
scales that included an option for “unsure”.
Analysis
Data analysis was performed in R version 3.4.0. Statistical
significance was set at p < 0.05 and, where relevant,
we also reported differences at p < 0.01 and p < 0.001.
Participants with missing responses (n = 26) were not excluded
from the study, but the missing values were excluded
from the calculation of the descriptive statistics
and the regression models. Due to the limited sample
size, the Likert scale responses were subsequently collapsed
into residents who would willingly participate
(“agree” and “strongly agree”), those who would not participate
(“disagree” and “strongly disagree”), and those
who were neutral or unsure (“undecided” and “neutral”)
for the analysis. Clinical exposure to death and dying
was also summarized as categorical variables (e.g., 0, 1–
10, and 11+ cases). Logistic regression models were used
to examine the significance of descriptive variables on
residents’ willingness to participate in PHD and MAID.
Results
Demographic characteristics
Overall, 6 of 17 family medicine residency programs participated,
including the University of Saskatchewan, University
of Manitoba, University of Toronto, University of
Ottawa, McGill University and Laval University. These
institutions represent 4 of the 10 provinces in Canada
(Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec). For the
analysis, we further collapsed them into three regions:
Ontario (University of Toronto, University of Ottawa),
Quebec (McGill University, Laval University) and Prairie
(University of Saskatchewan, University of Manitoba). In
total, 247 residents participated in the survey with an
overall response rate of 27%. Their characteristics are described
in Table 1. The mean age was 28.8 years (SD =
29.9 years). There were more female (n = 175) than male
(n = 72) participants. Christians (48.6%) were the largest
religious group, followed by those who were non-religious
(34.4%) and of other religions (15.8%), which included
participants who self-identified as Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist,
Hindu, Sikh, Aboriginal, or all others. The largest
ethnic group in our study was Caucasians (73.7%).
Willingness to participate in PHD and MAID
The proportion of residents who agreed with different
activities across the spectrum of end-of-life care is summarized
in Table 1 and is organized in the order of increasing
involvement (i.e., from treatment withdrawal to
administering a lethal injection). Willingness to participate
decreased with more direct forms of end-of-life
care. For example, while 52.0% of residents were willing
to withdraw treatment for a patient meeting eligibility
criteria, fewer residents were willing to actively participate
in PHD (40.9%), or participate in MAID by lethal
prescription (30.9%) and lethal injection (24.3%).
The willingness to withdraw treatment varied across
demographics. Quebec residents and Caucasian residents
were significantly less willing to withdraw treatment.
Male residents were more willing to withdraw treatment,
although this difference from female residents was not
statistically significant. Medical residents in the ‘other
religions’ category were more willing to withdraw treatment
than their counterparts. The willingness to participate
in PHD differed across religions and the level of
adherence to religious practices. Non-religious residents
(53.9%) and those from other religions (50.0%) were
more willing to participate in PHD compared to Christians
(29.0%). Similarly, residents who were “not” or “not
strictly” practicing their faith were more willing to participate
in PHD than those with strict adherence to religious
practices. The willingness to participate in MAID
by lethal prescription was also notably higher among
residents who were “not” (34.6%) or “not strictly”
(27.8%) practicing their religion compared to those with
strict adherence to religious practices (6.7%). Similarly, the
proportion of residents who were willing to participate in
MAID by lethal injection was higher among those who
were not religious (31.6% vs. 17.0% for Christians) or “not
practicing” their religion (26.9% vs. 3.3% for residents with
strict adherence to their religious practices).
Clinical exposure to death and dying
Increased exposure to death and dying was correlated
with greater odds of agreeing to participate in different
end-of-life activities (Fig. 1). Experienced residents with
11+ cases of declaring death, completing death certificates,
and talking to families after death were more likely
to participate in MAID by lethal prescription or by lethal
injection than residents with less experience. Experienced
residents also displayed a trend towards greater
willingness to participate in PHD overall. However, this
correlation was only statistically significant among residents
with exposure to talking to families after death.
Predictors of resident participation in PHD and MAID
Logistic regressions were performed to determine which
factors were significantly and independently correlated
with different end-of-life activities (Table 2). Increased
likelihood of willingness to withdraw treatment was seen
in Ontario and Prairie residents compared to Quebec.
Higher likelihood of willingness to participate in PHD was
observed among residents “not” (OR = 17.38) or “not
strictly” (OR = 5.17) practicing their religion, as well as residents
practicing a non-Christian religion (OR = 3.84). The
likelihood of willingness to participate in MAID by lethal
prescription was increased if they were “not” practicing
their religion (OR=10.55) or practicing a non-Christian
religion (OR = 3.57), but decreased if they were female
(OR = 0.38). Similarly, higher likelihood of willingness to
participate in MAID by lethal injection was seen among
residents “not” practicing their religion (OR = 8.54).
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to examine the independent
effect of different levels of clinical exposures
to death and dying with residents’ perspective on endof-
life activities. Although increased clinical exposure to
death and dying was crudely correlated with increased
willingness to participate in MAID (Fig. 1), when these
were examined in multivariable models, only a few activities
were significantly correlated with our outcomes (see
Additional file 2: Table S1). Specifically, residents who
had 11+ cases of declaring death or completing a death
certificate were more likely to be willing to participate in
MAID by lethal prescription and lethal injection. Additionally,
residents who had more clinical exposure to
death and dying (11+ cases) in the form of talking to
and counselling family members after death had greater
odds of expressing a willingness to participate in PHD
and MAID by lethal injection.
Discussion
Our study examined residents’ attitudes towards PHD
and MAID and sought to determine factors that were associated
with their future willingness to participate.
While 40.9% of the residents would actively participate
in PHD, fewer residents would participate in the
provision of MAID by lethal prescription or lethal injection.
Christians and residents with higher levels of religiosity
were consistently less likely to be willing to
participate in MAID. We also found that residents with
higher levels of exposure to death and dying were more
likely to be willing to participate in MAID. However,
after adjusting for the effects of other factors in our logistic
regression models, only a few specific exposures to
death and dying remained statistically significant. Overall,
the strongest predictors of willingness to participate
in MAID from our multivariable analyses were: [1] Not
practicing a religion, and [2] participating in a religion
other than Christianity. Interestingly, our model also
showed that Ontario and Prairie residents were more
likely to withdraw treatment than their counterparts in
Quebec, and that females were less likely to prescribe a
lethal drug than males.
Our findings showed that non-religious residents and
those from other religions were more likely to participate
in PHD when compared to those who selfidentified
as Christian. Christian residents may be less
likely to participate in MAID due to religious arguments
which suggest that suicide is as morally objectionable as
murder. Furthermore, the act of carrying out a request
for assisted suicide represents an injustice that cannot be
excused [16]. Though there are other religions (e.g.,
Judaism, Sikhism) and sects within specific religions that
also oppose assisted deaths, our sample size may not
have been large enough to detect these perspectives.
Nonetheless, our observation based on comparing the
views of residents who self-identified as Christians and
those whose belief lies in other faiths is consistent with
several others studies, which also found lower agreement
to participate in MAID among Christians [8, 11, 13–15]
and echoes the current opinions about MAID among
some Christian physicians in Canada [17]. Although one
of our regression models suggested that residents who
are Christians may be more likely to participate in
MAID by lethal prescription, the relationship was not
statistically significant and the direction of association
reversed when we removed the level of adherence to
one’s religion from the model (results not shown); this
suggests that Christian residents’ willingness to participate
in MAID is strongly influenced by their level of adherence
to their faith. Results from our regression
models also suggested that residents from other religions
were more likely to participate in PHD and MAID by lethal
prescription than non-religious residents. Although
this finding is interesting, the generalizability of this observation
may be limited as our study population was
predominantly Christian or non-religious, and the category
of “other religion” is a conglomerate of different
faiths. As variations in residents’ agreeability with MAID
between these other religions have not been welldescribed,
it is difficult to draw clear conclusions from
this and should be explored in future studies.
Female residents were less likely to be willing to participate
in MAID by lethal prescription than their male
colleagues. We also observed that females were also less
willing to participate in PHD and participate in MAID
by lethal injection, although results were not statistically
significant in our regression model. While this is noteworthy,
existing literature have been inconclusive on the
role of female gender and the influence it has on medical
residents’ and physicians’ perspective on PHD or MAID;
previous studies have suggested that female residents are
less accepting of PHD [18], but others show no difference
[9, 11] or even the opposite trend [12].
Quebec residents were less likely to respond to a request
for MAID by withdrawing treatment than their
colleagues in Ontario and the Prairies, but more likely to
agree with the provision of MAID, although these differences
were not statistically significant in our regression
models. This was not surprising since Quebec was the
first province to legalize assisted death [19] and has
completed more cases of MAID than any other province
in Canada [20]. Quebec has also sought clarification on
the court’s definition of “reasonably foreseeable” in the
assisted dying framework to broaden its access to those
currently denied MAID [21]. As Quebec continues to
push the boundaries of MAID, it could be speculated
that residents who are training in Quebec are becoming
more familiar and less hesitant to address requests for
MAID when compared to their peers in other provinces.
However, our study finds that the majority of Quebec
residents are still hesitant to provide MAID. Their reluctance
may be underscored by the fact that lethal prescription
in Quebec is currently not a regulated practice
under Quebec’s landmark end-of-life care bill that enabled
patients to choose MAID, known as Bill 52 or the
Act Respecting End-of-Life Care, and by the College of
Physicians of Quebec.
Having additional years in clinical practice is likely to
play a role in residents’ willingness to participate in
MAID. Our study suggests that residents are more
agreeable to participate in PHD than physicians in
Canada (40.9% vs. 29%) [3] but less agreeable than Canadian
medical students (71%) [22]. This should be interpreted
with some caution, however, as each study’s
phrasing of questions on MAID differed slightly and
this is known to influence participants’ agreeability
with MAID [15]. Nonetheless, this difference in attitude
across different stages in clinical practice
echoes previous U.S., Mexican and Canadian studies,
which found that staff physicians were more hesitant
to participate in MAID [6, 7, 10, 18]. In addition,
one study demonstrated that residents with more
years in clinical practice (e.g., fellows in their 5th–
8th year of oncology training) were more hesitant to
participate in PHD than residents in their first 3
years of post-graduate training [13]. Some studies
have speculated that early residents may be more
willing to “throw in the towel” when severe health
complications arise, due to their clinical inexperience
or poor knowledge of palliative care [8, 10]. Residents
may also be unduly influenced by the severity
of cases they encounter, the grueling hours of residency,
apathy towards patients and “burnout” [8].
Our results suggest that residents with more exposure
to death and dying actually had increased agreement
to participate in MAID. This finding seems to
contradict the idea that increased palliative care
knowledge would lead to a decrease in participation
in MAID. Further work will be needed to determine
if palliative care knowledge specifically shapes residents’
attitudes towards MAID.
Our study showed that family medicine residents in
Canada may be hesitant to participate in PHD and
the provision of MAID. Despite our small sample
size, this observation is consistent with other studies
on residents’ standpoints on MAID [7–14, 18]. There
remains some variability between our study and
others that are likely due to differences in the methodology
used as well as other social, demographical,
and geographical factors of the study populations
[15]. Since most existing studies were single-centred,
opinions often only reflect the local acceptance of
assisted death. For example, residents in our study
were less willing to participate in MAID than a recent
Canadian study at one university [6]. This difference
could be explained by the sample population (being
single-centred vs. multi-centred) or, possibly, because
their scenario for residents was more passive (i.e., observing
or participation in MAID as a part of a team),
which has been shown to be more acceptable to physicians.
As MAID is now a part of medical practice in
Canada, more studies on regional variability are
needed to inform the future training of our medical
residents.
Limitations
Our study is limited by its sample size (n = 247) and response
rate (27%). Although our survey invited all
training programs in Canada, we were unable to recruit
residents from Western Canada and the Maritimes.
Poor response rates are not uncommon for national
surveys of residents in Canada; a recent national resident
survey by the Resident Doctors of Canada had a
response rate of 15.8% [23]. Nonetheless, our sample
size is the largest among similar studies in North
America [7–13, 18] and our overall findings are consistent
with these studies. We were able to
characterize Canadian residents’ attitudes towards
MAID and address some concerns with past surveys,
as ours was sent to multiple jurisdictions that operate
under different provincial legislation, included multiple
languages (to include French speaking residents),
and used a simplified assisted dying case. Although
the phrasing of our question regarding participation
in PHD could have been more specific, it was
intended to capture participation in MAID in a general
sense, which would include indirect participation
in MAID (exploration of patient ideas and assessment
of eligibility) and the actual provision of MAID (lethal
prescription and injection). Our study’s participants
seemingly understood this difference implicitly, as
suggested by the finding that residents were more
agreeable to participation in PHD in general than the
actual provision of MAID. Further studies focusing
on this specific distinction would help clarify residents’
attitudes on indirect MAID activities. The inferences
from our study may also be limited by the
short data collection period (December 2016 to April
2017), which may have prevented greater participation
and imply that our data may be reflective of residents’
perceptions only at that point in time. Our study examined
the attitudes of family practice residents,
which may not reflect of the attitudes of residents in
other subspecialties. Finally, it would also have been
interesting to assess other factors that may have influenced
residents’ willingness to provide MAID such as
their own psychological well-being, personal values, or
views on the role of a doctor [24]. Future studies,
where possible, could consider these factors as well as
assess for possible changes in the perceptions of residents
over time and between different specialties.
Conclusion
As MAID in Canada evolves, residents will need to acquire
the skills to provide end-of-life care that may include
assisted death. Our study demonstrates that
residents are mostly hesitant to provide MAID and that
a major predictor of their willingness is religion. Sex and
exposure to death and dying were also found to potentially
affect the willingness of residents to provide
MAID, although further study is needed to clarify these
relationships.
