Background
Bedside rationing and clinical ethics committees
In publicly funded health services there is a need to ration
healthcare as claims on healthcare exceed available
resources. Many countries have set up systems and institutions,
such as the UK’s NICE, to promote fair priority
setting. Less work has been done on bedside
rationing – the practice of making rationing and allocation
decisions close to patients, typically by practicing
clinicians themselves. Important dilemmas arise in bedside
rationing; however, in practice, clinicians might
not be aware of priority setting principles or mechanisms
for promoting fair bedside rationing, and might
lack support from managers, guidelines, legislation, and
politicians for the difficult rationing decisions that
sometimes have to be made [1].
Clinical ethics committees (CECs) have been proposed
to be of some value in mitigating both these deficiencies
[2]. CECs are multidisciplinary committees
tasked with increasing clinician awareness of ethical
problems and solutions in their workday and with providing
deliberations and advice on difficult clinicalethical
problems. CECs have long been features of
many hospitals in the Western world. Recently it has
been argued that CECs might also play several constructive
roles in issues concerning priority setting, resource
use and bedside rationing [2].
Legitimacy in rationing: two theoretical frameworks
However, problems of bedside rationing often have a
special feature that distinguish them from other clinicalethical
problems. As bedside rationing issues concern
scarce resources, the outcome is of relevance to further
stakeholders than the actors directly involved, especially
when the decision requires resources that could have
been spent differently. For a resource driving outcome
to be legitimate, therefore, more than the assent of the
clinicians and patient directly involved is required. There
is then a question whether CEC deliberations about
issues of bedside rationing can contribute to the legitimacy
of processes conducted and conclusions reached.
Thus we ask: What does it take for the CEC to be a legitimate
actor in bedside rationing dilemmas in the
hospital?
Limit-setting decisions in health carried out on a
population level can be subjected to regulations by specific
criteria for just allocation of health care. However,
as pointed out by Daniels and Sabin [3], we cannot
expect people to agree on what specific criteria or principles
should be applied to promote justice in these decisions.
Rather, we must ensure that the way the criteria
or principles are reached – the decision-making processes
– are such that people perceive them as fair and
legitimate. The procedural approach that Daniels and
Sabin advocate, ‘Accountability for Reasonableness’
(A4R), stresses the importance of transparency and accountability.
This framework consists of four procedural
conditions that are necessary for the outcome of priority
setting processes to be legitimate: “transparency about
the grounds for decisions; appeals to rationales that all
can accept as relevant in meeting health care needs
fairly; and procedures for revising decisions in light of
challenges to them”; and in addition, there must be institutions
in place to enforce the previous three requirements
[3].
When subjected to this kind of regulating process, the
decisions that are the outcomes of the process can be
justified as legitimate. However, the kind of rationing decisions
Daniels and Sabin have in mind are those concerning
patient groups, not individuals.
Clinical priority setting decisions about individual
claims on healthcare (‘bedside’) can also be perceived
as indirectly subject to similar conditions of procedural
justice, as clinicians are expected to comply with
evidence-based clinical guidelines when there is no
obvious reason to consider them irrelevant for the case
at hand. The development of evidence based clinical
guidelines inevitably relies upon normative considerations
[4–7] which can – and should – also be subjected
to accountability. Norheim has developed a
framework wherein the acceptability of processes of
development of guidelines are evaluated, and where
guidelines themselves are considered as tools for priority
setting [8, 9].
Evidently, clinical guidelines cannot provide conclusive
guidance on every clinical decision that has to be made.
For instance, while emergency department triage is
guided by principles, decisions ultimately rely on discretionary
considerations of how these principles apply to
the particular cases at hand. Sometimes there might be
reasons to deviate from guidelines by providing or
limiting care and the choice whether to do so constitutes
a dilemma. At other times there are conflicting views as
to whether existing guidelines apply or not. In such situations,
what can make decisions legitimate?
To shed light on this question, Bærøe developed a
framework to complement the A4R framework [10].
This approach was inspired by the identified lack of
transferability of legitimacy from macro-level decisions
about claims of patient groups to micro-level claims of
individuals [11]; the contextual conditions for making
ethical judgments do not coincide. Based on analyses of
the concept of a ‘healthcare claim’ and of clinicians’
scope of responsibility respectively, as well as an appreciation
of the theoretical grounding of A4R, the framework
details conditions for legitimacy for clinical
decisions with priority-setting consequences at the
micro (bedside) level. Together, the A4R and Bærøe’s
approach can be seen as mutually supporting accountable
and legitimate decisions throughout a publicly
funded healthcare system.1
A role for CECs in bedside rationing?
Against this backdrop of two theoretical approaches to
what makes rationing decisions legitimate we will explore
the role of CECs in such decisions. We focus on
situations of choice that have implications for priority
setting/resource allocation and rationing and where the
decision-makers are healthcare personnel (or managers)
with the discretion to make judgments about bedside rationing.
We make one crucial assumption: CECs do not
have the mandate to make bedside rationing decisions,
only to assist in decision-making. There can be different
reasons for this. For example, it is not practical that
others than those who are responsible for the overall
care are delegated this responsibility, and CECs have not
originally possessed any particular competence that
would make them better suited to carry the political
mandate of distributing health care. The question is then
to what extent these committees nevertheless have the
potential to influence the overall legitimacy of these
decisions.
After setting out the seven criteria for legitimacy in
Bærøe’s framework we present two empirical, real world
priority setting dilemmas wherein CECs were involved,
outlining six roles CECs played in the two cases and
might play in priority setting cases in general. In order
to reach general conclusions with relevance across particular
settings, we then discuss the legitimacy of these
roles rather than the particular cases in question. For
these roles to be considered legitimate in lack of any
particular, formal decision-making authority, they will
have to be assessed according to requirements addressing
the broader picture of both macro- and micro-level
requirements for fair priority setting in general. Bærøe’s
framework is a response to exactly this complex, general
challenge as it addresses the overall legitimacy of the
implicit priority setting taking place on the micro-level
under influences of macro-level decisions. Therefore,
when being without any formally assigned authority, the
roles of CECs in contributing to bedside rationing will
have to be subjected to at a minimum the same requirements
of legitimacy as clinician/managerial bedside decisions.
With Bærøe’s normative framework as the
backdrop we then discuss whether and how CECs by
fulfilling the six roles contribute to the legitimacy of the
decisions reached. Leaning up on Ives and colleagues’
recently published consensus-based standards of practice
for empirical bioethics [12], we acknowledge the requirement
for unpacking and openly exposing how the integration
of empirical findings and normative arguments
takes place within this piece of empirical bioethics work.
Also, we will clarify the fundamental epistemic assumption
for this approach.
Based on a diversity of empirical cases, Magelssen
et al. identified several roles that CECs play in bedside
rationing under the normative aim of considering their
practical, productive contribution. However, such ‘positive’
roles might not be justified as ‘legitimate’. In order
to make further normative judgements about ‘legitimacy’,
the relevance of these roles is therefore assessed
according to a normatively more broadly construed
ethico-political framework of ‘legitimacy’. By doing this,
we assume a constructivist approach to what tasks CECs
can be justified or not in carrying out; our understanding
of the ‘should and should not’ is socially constructed.
Moreover, when translating theoretical work into a field
of practice, we assume the epistemic requirement of
establishing empirical knowledge to allow sound conclusions
[13].
Main text
Reasonable clinical judgments and aspects of legitimacy
Bærøe’s framework for reasonable clinical judgments
with priority-setting consequences consists of six requirements
on clinicians and one requirement on the
self-regulation of the medical profession, requirements
that will now be explained briefly. The starting-point is
the recognition that clinicians have dual responsibilities;
towards the patient in front of them and towards the
entire patient population of the health care system
(which shares the same public funding), respectively,
coupled with the call to ensure equal treatment across
individuals and groups (horizontal equity), as well as
justified unequal treatment among individuals and
groups (vertical equity). This leads to four different aims
of justice that surround clinical decision-making in
health:
(a) horizontal equity demanding equal treatment of
cases considered equal within the clinician’s own
patient population
(b) vertical equity regarding discrimination between the
needs of the clinician’s own patients
(c) contributing to vertical equity by unequal treatment
of unequal cases within the whole patient
population of a healthcare system
(d) contributing to horizontal equity by equal treatment
of equal cases within the whole patient population
of a healthcare system.
Reflection on these four aims of justice led to the
framework consisting of seven requirements summarized
in Table 1. The framework can appear daunting,
but the gist is not that each clinical decision must conform
fully to all requirements in order to be legitimate;
rather, the requirements together form an ideal to strive
towards and are helpful in showing how the legitimacy
of decisions might be increased.
These requirements reflect a conceptualization of ‘legitimacy’
in terms of both procedural and epistemic dimensions.
Requirement 7 underscores the procedural
aspect of the legitimacy of the judgments made by clinicians
in individual cases; if these conditions are in place,
these decisions can be approved as legitimate. Requirements
1–6 all work towards epistemological steering of
the outcome of the judgement towards reasonableness
by specifying what to justify and demands on the justification.
Requirement 6 explicitly demands a fair-minded
approach for justification. Requirement 3 introduces the
formal claim on impartiality, and reflects that recognition
of the moral equality of stakeholders should structure
the reasoning. Requirements 1–2 and 4–5 all imply
formal issues considered relevant to apply when promoting
fair-minded judgements about bedside rationing.
When these requirements are considered in a broader
societal and political context, it becomes clear that the
legitimacy of the normative basis clinicians derive their
justified claims on healthcare on, is not an isolated professional
concern. Health authorities in a publicly funded
system cannot accept a clinical practice based on whatever
clinicians would agree among themselves to consider
fair, unless this normative basis also resonates well
with general, accepted political principles for distribution
within society at large. To ensure this to happen requires
taking into account input from other stakeholders than
the clinicians themselves. This brings in a broader, political
dimension to the conceptualisation of ‘legitimacy’
regarding bedside rationing. Stakeholders, e.g. patients,
proxies, other healthcare personnel and tax-paying citizens
in general, must also be allowed to influence the
common normative basis for deriving prioritized and rationed
health care claims. As a prerequisite, the normative
principles justifying individual limit-settings will
have to be publicly accessible and transparent, and opportunities
for appeal and revisions made available for
anyone interested in doing so.
CECs’ involvement in bedside rationing
Any justified, legitimate role of CECs involved in bedside
rationing – considered as a procedural condition itself –
can now be assessed according to whether and how
these committees manage to strengthen the procedural,
epistemic and political dimensions of legitimacy produced
by the decision-making processes. A recently published
paper presents an overview of potential roles
CECs can take on in bedside rationing, based on real
word examples [2]. This provides us with a very useful
starting point to identify how CECs actually can
influence bedside rationing/resource allocation. We are
interested in how these committees can do so in a normatively
justified manner. Therefore, we will discuss
how these approaches contribute to legitimacy in line
with the requirements for reasonable clinical priorityand
limit setting and the additive, political requirement
that stakeholders are given the opportunity to influence
the normative basis for these decisions.
An analysis of 38 Norwegian CECs’ work with ethical
problems of priority setting and resource use identified
six roles that CECs can play in handling such cases
(Table 2) [2]. We illustrate the roles with two cases
drawn from the Norwegian study.
We now present two CEC cases concerning bedside
rationing, taken from Magelssen et al. [2] and summarized
and adapted by the present authors.
Case 1
The hospital CEC was called on to give advice on the
care of a patient who received continuous ventilator
treatment in the home. A large care team was required,
and municipal authorities wanted the patient to move to
a nursing home to reduce costs and improve continuity
of staffing – against the patient’s own preference. A
team of CEC members went to the patient’s house to
discuss and note the opinions of the patient and spouse.
Next, the CEC held a meeting where other stakeholders,
including municipal authorities and carers and hospital
staff, came together to discuss what was perceived as a
conflict between patient autonomy and fair resource use
and justice. The CEC organised both the deliberations
and the written consultation report by a structured deliberation
method. In the report, the CEC detailed the
information that had been presented to the committee,
and discussed the trade-off between values and principles,
the role of national priority setting criteria, and
legal aspects. The committee’s advice to the municipality
was to offer future care in the nursing home only.
Case 2
A new drug had shown some effect for patients with
metastatic lung cancer. Yet cost-effectiveness was very
low with high drug costs and only modest effects. The
national decision-making body had not yet concluded
whether the drug should be covered by public funds and
offered in public hospitals. The CEC was contacted by a
physician as some patients now wanted to buy the drug
themselves and have it administered by the hospital;
how was the physician to respond? In Norway’s publicly
funded healthcare system this practice would be unprecedented.
There were no private clinics in the city that
would offer to administer the treatment. If the hospital
were to provide the treatment, then this would entail
substantial additional use of resources such as outpatient
visits, clinician time and attention and additional radiological
examinations and blood tests. The CEC consulted
several stakeholders and concluded that the principle of
equal access, fundamental to Norwegian healthcare policy,
should take precedence, and that it was therefore
unacceptable that only those who were able to pay
should receive the drug in a public hospital. Although
the clinician was thankful for the CEC’s support and
clear arguments, patients were dissatisfied and protests
reached the media. The CEC’s proposed policy was later
adopted hospital-wide by the management. The CEC
also brought the dilemma to a national level, to be discussed
in the National council for priority setting. A
2016 government white paper on priority setting outlined
a similar policy, which was then adopted in parliament:
when the evaluation of public coverage for new
drugs is underway, the drugs will not be administered in
public hospitals at the patient’s expense in the
meantime.
CECs as analysts
In the two cases the CECs acted as analysts. The CECs
discussed the cases together with the different stakeholders,
applying, explaining and clarifying relevant
moral principles in the process. As an analyst, the CEC
can take on the role as a dialogue partner and assist
decision-makers in structuring their reflection towards
reasonableness according to all requirements 1–6 in
Bærøe’s framework. This presupposes that CEC members
collectively possess the relevant competence in priority
setting criteria and connected moral arguments
and political theory to guide accordingly. In our experience,
clinicians often possess only rudimentary knowledge
in this area. However, many CECs employ an
ethicist or philosopher who could perhaps assume special
responsibility for this body of knowledge. For CECs
to legitimately take on the role as analyst according to
the framework, some measure of this kind of competence
is certainly required. At the same time, the fact
that CECs consist of several members that can contribute
to enlighten more aspects of the issues than an individual
clinician may manage on their own is likely to
strengthen the epistemic dimension of reasonable justification
of the decision according to requirements 2–6. It
might matter here whether the CEC handles the case as
a full committee or whether only some CEC members
are involved in the consult. As for the political dimension
of involvement of stakeholders underscored by the
framework, this dimension is not strengthened by the
CEC contributing as an analyst.
CECs as advisors
A role as advisor implies the ability of CECs to reach a
conclusion about reasonable bedside rationing. In the
two cases, applying and weighing the morally relevant
factors led the CECs to propose certain conclusions as
the ethically most appropriate courses of action. The
ability to give sound, justified advice relates to requirement
1–6 of Bærøe’s framework and hinges on the same
skills highlighted above that enable the CEC to analyse
the case; if not present, an advisory role cannot be legitimate.
However, even though we may assume that the
total competence of a CEC transcends the relevant competence
of a clinician in illuminating a case, another
issue occurs. Granting CECs an advisory role based on
the privileged position of bringing in both disciplinary
competence and multiple individuals’ perspectives might
potentially be counter-productive. It might undermine
the individual, epistemic project of the authorised
decision-maker, the clinician, to reach fair conclusions.
It is crucial that clinicians themselves – who are carrying
the responsibility of the decisions – aim to develop
adequate reasoning to apply consistently across cases.
Reasoning together with the committee can certainly be
a useful part of such an endeavour, but leaving it to the
committee to produce advice (rather than help the clinician
reach a conclusion) seems to create a mismatch
between authorised discretion and responsibility. However,
we find it likely that participation in CEC deliberations
can provide clinicians with knowledge and a
vocabulary for priority setting, thus equipping them to
make future bedside rationing decisions on a sounder
and more independent basis than before. Again, the advisor
role of CECs alone does not support the political
dimension of legitimacy.
CECs as moderators
In both the two cases the CECs acted as moderators by
structuring the deliberation process to give a hearing to
arguments from the involved stakeholders. In case 1, different
healthcare services (here, municipal and hospital,
respectively) were brought together. In line with Bærøe’s
framework, CECs are expected to organise processes
that promote fair decision-making when acting as moderators.
An often-invoked philosophical underpinning
for CECs is discourse ethics, with its demands that all
relevant stakeholders participate in deliberations held on
equal terms, and that the best arguments rationally evaluated
should prevail [14, 15]. These requirements
resonate well with the framework’s demands on 2)
searching for all relevant arguments, 3) impartiality, and
6) providing reasonable justification for entitled claims
on care. Furthermore, CECs promote transparency, as
stressed by the framework, by producing detailed case
reports where conclusions are justified by arguments.
However, there are further, more specific process requirements
for priority setting decisions to promote fairness
and legitimacy. The first is that there are more
stakeholders than those that are directly involved in the
case and likely to be present in the CEC meeting (i.e. patients,
next of kin, healthcare personnel and managers),
namely any other adversely affected patients, and other
patients who could benefit from the opportunity costs.
To promote impartiality (requirement 3 in the framework),
the CEC should take the perspectives of any
stakeholders not present into account in the deliberations.
In the role of moderator the CEC is facilitating
processes. For this to be a legitimate role, they must also
possess knowledge and ability to translate relevant theoretical
and practical insights on procedural fairness
onto fuzzy, real-world conditions. This would for example
not only require that stakeholders’ concerns are
voiced, they will also have to be listened to and their
concerns addressed in ways that give stakeholders reason
to consider the conditions for the process fair [16]. In
this respect case 1 appears to showcase an asymmetry in
the CEC’s treatment of the patient and spouse on one
hand and health professionals and managers on the
other. Did the patient and spouse get to participate in
the moral dialogue proper, or did they only get to voice
their concerns? Were they allowed to contribute to and
challenge the description of the values at stake and the
definition of the ethical problem? Finally, according to
the fair, procedural conditions in the A4R framework of
Daniels and Sabin, it is crucial that stakeholders can
make appeals about the criteria that justify priority setting,
and arguably also when implemented in individual
decisions. Again, to support impartiality (and thus legitimacy),
CECs would have to be open to deliberate about
potential appeals from stakeholders in the aftermath of
consultations and assist in directing claims to the correct
formal body.
CECs as disseminators
In case 1 in particular, the CEC also acted as a disseminator
in contributing to raised awareness and knowledge
of priority setting principles and moral arguments. CECs
act as disseminators when they make troublesome issues
known to stakeholders and the public and when they inform
stakeholders of institutionalised values, legal regulations
and cultural, normative concerns to take into
account (including the requirements set out above). In
doing this, CECs disseminate knowledge that – when
being correct and conveyed in ways that do not create
misunderstandings – can only help support legitimacy
along the three dimensions. For many CECs, in addition
to case consultation an important function is to organize
topical seminars and otherwise educate clinicians about
issues in clinical ethics [17]. Raising issues of bedside
rationing for discussion and informing about priority
setting criteria and ethical principles can be a valuable
way of creating awareness and encouraging clinician
self-reflection and discussions within the professions (as
per criteria 1 and 7 of Bærøe’s framework respectively).
CECs as coordinators
CECs can also support legitimacy by influencing the political
agenda by acting as coordinators, passing on principled
issues from the clinical level. Case 2 illustrates the
necessary interdependence between micro-, meso- and
macro-level priority setting decisions. In case 2, the CEC
raised the issue to the hospital management level, resulting
in a hospital-wide policy which was in line with the
CEC’s advice. Later the CEC also ensured that the issue
received attention at the national level. A principled
worry here, however, is whether different CECs would
deem cases similarly as to whether the issues raised
should be brought to higher levels of the organization or
the political level. If it is left to the arbitrary judgments
of CEC members (and their values and interests) when
to do this or not, this does not support justified vertical
equity on a population level (requirements 4–5) in the
framework) and certainly not the procedural and political
dimension of legitimacy. More precisely, legitimacy
would ideally require transparent rules for when not to
lift issues up for principled discussion. This would be to
avoid that issues others want to have discussed on a
principled level are stopped by the judgments of the
members of the committee.
CECs as guardian of values and laws
Finally, the CEC can act as a guardian of values and
laws, in pointing out accepted social values and their
impact on the case at hand. In case 2, the social value of
equality of access was argued by the CEC to be particularly
relevant. CECs have to impose self-regulation
(according to requirement 7 of the framework) in order
to be accountable towards health authorities and stakeholders.
This involves critically assessing and justifying
the values they purport to promote. In so far as CECs at
the same time also strive for impartiality in addressing
and scrutinizing stakeholders’ personal values – to also
critically test the established regulations and expectations
– this enhances all dimensions of legitimacy. If, on
the other hand, CECs insist on narrowly understanding
new clinical issues in light of the values previous cases
have been appreciated according to, this undermines the
same dimensions of legitimacy.
Prerequisites for contributing to legitimacy
The discussion above has shown that CECs are able to
contribute to procedural, epistemic and/or political legitimacy
to the extent that they fulfil the six roles that
CECs can play in issues of priority setting. However, the
discussion has also highlighted prerequisites for CECs
being able to fulfil these roles. These prerequisites may
be grouped into three main categories: 1) the ability to
adequately represent all stakeholders; 2) the ability to
deliberate – and critically revise this deliberation on appeals
– in a systematic manner that promotes impartiality
and reasonableness, drawing on relevant clinical,
ethical and legal arguments; and 3) transparency with respect
to the deliberation and conclusions.
The extent to which CECs will be able to fulfil the prerequisites
and thus contribute to legitimacy in practice is
an interesting question which should be investigated empirically.
The seven requirements for legitimacy of clinical
decisions with priority-setting consequences and the
requirements set out in the discussion of the six roles
for the CEC could form the basis of evaluation criteria
for CEC consultations on the topic.
Conclusions
On the basis of criteria for legitimacy of clinical decisions
with priority-setting consequences and roles that
CECs might play in case consultations involving priority
setting issues, we have shown that CECs have the potential
to increase the legitimacy of such decisions. However,
there are important prerequisites that must be in
place for the CEC to contribute to legitimacy.
It seems likely that a CEC consultation will serve to
increase the overall legitimacy of the decision above
what single clinicians would achieve on their own even
though not all prerequisites are fully in place. However,
there is a danger that a CEC consultation that is
flawed in respect of the prerequisites can confer a misleading
‘stamp of approval’ on the deliberation process
and moral analysis. There is then a risk of bias and unjustified
solutions and decisions based on fallacious
reasoning or inadequate processes [18]. Involvement of
the CEC might then serve to decrease legitimacy of
decisions made. This is why close attention to the
workings of CECs when handling issues of bedside rationing
is so crucial.