Medical professionalism is a representative term that
embodies the nature, obligations, and identity of medical
doctors [1]. The importance of medical professionalism
has been emphasized in medical education [2–7] because
of the misconduct and improper ethical attitudes
reported in recent newspaper articles in Korea [8–11].
The medical profession has been perverted to careerism
that seems to guarantee good income and secure job
status, instead of a professional vocation with defined
virtues that is a vocation [12].
We start with the question of Korean physicians’ understanding
of medical professionalism. Traditional
medicine had been practiced for many centuries in
Korea before Western medicine was introduced. Asian
medical practitioners have traditionally been expected to
be concerned healers who cure sicknesses of body and
soul; indeed, they are also respected for these virtues.
Doctors in general are recognized as professionals who
carry out a socially important role, similar to those of
clergy and lawyers [13]. An understanding of medical
professionalism has been assumed to be transferred informally
from mentor physicians to young physicians
without an official education [14]. However, current
medical education is oriented towards medical skills,
competency, and evidence-based science, and the importance
of medical professionalism has been neglected
in Korean medical education because of a lack of an appropriate
text and teaching methodology [15–19].
Western medicine was introduced to Korea during a
short period of modernization at the time of Japanese
colonization [17, 18]. It emphasizes the physician’s scientific
knowledge and medical skill; that is, competence is
valued over moral attitude. In this approach, the physician–
patient relationship is not considered an important
element in acquisition of the medical good: the patient’s
healing. The compassion of the physician for the patient’s
vulnerability is taken for granted in Confucian culture.
However, this approach has been criticized as paternalistic
as medical consumerism in Korea has favored a focus on
the patient’s rights. Moreover, industrialization encourages
the pursuit of personal profit, and an altruistic attitude
and social responsibility have been disregarded as outdated
Confucian values [19].
According to an old saying, the good doctor treats diseases
of the body; the better doctor heals sickness of the
soul; and the great doctor cures both of these and societal
illness as well. The individual and collective obligations
of physicians are to restore the health of the
individual and of society [20]. The essence of physicians
lies in their role as both healers and professionals [14].
The primary role of a physician is to care for sick people
and restore their health. Physicians have a social responsibility:
they must be concerned about public health issues
and understand the societal expectations of the medical
profession. However, the notion of social responsibility of
physicians as medical professionals has, until recently,
rarely been discussed in Korea.
Public concern about medical professionalism and
medical ethics has increased due to two dramatic events
in Korean medical history [21]. The first was a legal case
involving a patient’s spouse who secured the patient’s
discharge from hospital against the physician’s advice,
after which the patient died. The patient’s brother sued
the hospital, the physician for medical negligence. This
event reveals the conflict between social expectations of
physicians and physicians’ own views of appropriate behavior.
The public regarded the case as irresponsible behavior
by the physician that caused the premature death
of the patient. In contrast, physicians viewed the case as
a violation of the physician’s autonomy. The second case
was a physicians’ strike against a governmental regulation
that stipulated separation of the privileges of prescribing
and dispensing drugs. Physicians understood
this move as impairment to medical professionalism,
whereas the public felt it was a safeguard against abuse
of power by the medical profession. The need for increased
medical professionalism has been voiced by both
the public and the medical profession for the last two
decades, and the medical societies have called for medical
professionalism to be taught and restored as a feature of
the profession [22].
The roles and responsibilities of physicians must be
redefined, and medical ethics must be promoted among
Korean physicians. Physicians must understand these
roles and responsibilities towards patients, their peers,
and society if medical professionalism is to be reestablished
in Korean society. The purpose of this study was to
demonstrate, through physicians’ ratings of importance of
the various values or virtues of medical professionalism,
that even physicians who are not familiar with the term
‘medical professionalism’ embody the concept through
their history of devotion to medical practices that are consistent
with these values.
Method
This study was based on an anonymous survey (see
Additional file 1) of Korean physicians about their understanding
of medical professionalism as a feature of
their vocation. Medical professionalism encompasses all
of the essential qualities that doctors must possess.
However, the survey was designed to investigate only the
overall attitudes and morals of Korean doctors, because
there is no question that all doctors are required to have
medical knowledge and the clinical ability to practice
medicine. We focused on the six crucial virtues of medical
professionalism addressed in numerous studies—patient
autonomy, responsibility, honesty, altruism, veracity,
and integrity. The protocol and survey were approved
by the IRB of Songeui Medical Campus, the Catholic
University of Korea in March 2011(Approval Number
CUMC11U043). The Cronbach’s alpha for a pilot study
of 37 physicians in Seoul was 0.87. The importance of
each answered item was rated on a 5-point scale, and
mean responses for each item were compared. The survey
was distributed nationwide to 950 physicians, and
721 (75.89 %) returned completed surveys between
April 1 and July 31, 2011. The survey was distributed
to physicians in university hospitals, local hospitals,
and clinics, the names and addresses of which were
acquired from web postings, telephone directories,
and colleagues.
The survey started with questions about familiarity
with “medical professionalism” and about medical professionalism
as a vocational feature of medicine. The
various virtues of medical professionalism were not described
explicitly, but were expressed within descriptions
of different clinical contexts. Since each physician might
understand each virtue differently, specific situation in
which each virtue is implied is presented instead of each
particular virtue. Each item was intended to imply one
of the following aspects of medical professionalism: veracity,
patient autonomy, integrity, responsibility, altruism,
and honesty [1, 23–25]. The survey also asked
respondents to choose a set of core values of medical
professionalism and to offer methods for promoting
medical professionalism among Korean physicians.
Results
Table 1 presents the findings regarding physicians’ general
conceptualizations of medical professionalism. Most
physicians (67 %, 486/721) responded that medical professionalism
is a feature of the vocation of medicine (see
Table 1). There were age-related differences (p < .0001)
in this finding, with the highest frequency of affirmative
responses about professionalism among those in their
60s and the lowest ratings among those in their 20s (see
Table 2). Comparison of particular items between those
who advocated medical professionalism as a vocational
feature and those who did not is also important, but is
beyond the scope of this study.
As Table 3 shows, Korean physicians prioritized the
values of medical professionalism in their practice in the
following order: veracity, respect for patient autonomy,
integrity, responsibility, altruism, and honesty.
Veracity and honesty are thought to have similar
meanings. But, veracity in this context refers to the particular
matter of truth-telling to patients or patients’
families regarding medical errors of self or other colleagues;
hospital infections; and the diagnosis, development,
and prognosis of disease. Veracity requires a
relationship of mutual respect and reliance between patients
and physicians [26]. ‘Honesty’ was used here to
refer to medical practice without any deception. In
Korea, the national health insurance service determines
and authorizes the price and cost of each particular
order or treatment in medical practice, and physicians
are aware of the orders and treatments that are reimbursed
by the service. Medical decisions that deviate
from the normally reimbursable orders or treatments
can result in referral to the health insurance review and
assessment service, which will often levy an enormous
fine against the physician and request that the bill be
returned to the patient. Korean physicians tend to complain
that national health insurance coverage restricts
their professional discretion and encourages their unethical
behaviors. In particular, the health insurance service’s
preference for reducing the number of claims can discourage
physicians from recommending and implementing the
most appropriate treatments. Some physicians recommend
unnecessary and expensive tests to patients for financial
reasons, and some physicians make slight changes
in diagnoses so that patients can receive health insurance
coverage [20].
Those who responded that medical professionalism is
a feature of the medical vocation rated the six values in
the following (descending) order of importance: veracity,
respect for patient autonomy, responsibility, integrity, altruism,
and honesty (see Table 4).
The physicians were asked to choose the most important
component sets for medical professionalism: “responsibility
and duty” (549 respondents, 76.46 %),
“veracity, integrity, and honesty” (411 respondents,
57.24 %), “rapport with patients and conversational skill”
(264 respondents, 36.77 %), “benevolence, altruism, and
compassion” (252 respondents, 35.10 %), “trustworthiness”
(192 respondents, 26.74 %), “public service” (163
respondents, 70 %), “patient autonomy” 9,120 respondents,
16.71 %), “virtue and good heart” (108 respondents,
15.04 %), and “collegial relationships” (95
respondents, 13.23 %) (see Table 5).
The respondents presented the following suggestions for
promoting medical professionalism and boosting values
among Korean physicians: a continuing professional development
(CPD) incentive and CPD credits; reinforcement
of medical ethics activation of regional medical societies;
reorganization of medical insurance and adequacy of medical
insurance reimbursements; use of role models; emphasis
on medical professionalism and self-regulation
within medical associations; reinforcement of doctors’ involvement
in and relationship with professional societies;
public service; and cooperation between Western and
Asian medicine (see Table 6).
Discussion
The term “medical professionalism” implies elements of
both “medicine” and “professionalism.” Medicine is delivered
by doctors who have professed to use their medical
knowledge and skill only for the good of the patient.
Medicine as a profession is maintained by doctors who
develop, comply with, and embody the medical code
[27]. Therefore, medical professionalism is maintained
and enriched by the virtuous person who makes a lifelong
commitment to maintain integrity as a doctor. Starr
stated that “A profession is an occupation [that] regulates
itself through systematic, required training and
collegial discipline; that has a base in technical specialized
knowledge; and has a service rather than a profit
orientation, and is enshrined in its code of ethics” [28].
Indeed, medical professionalism is a complex concept
that defies a unitary definition. Medical professionalism
is classified not as an singular domain but as a
multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary domain that includes
medical ethics and medical humanities as well
as medical science [6, 23].
Cruess et al. [29] emphasized the relationship between
a profession and a vocation. According to Cruess, a profession
is a vocation (calling) that requires specialist
knowledge and skills acquired through training and education,
and the professional is expected to use these
characteristics to serve others. To be involved in a profession
means to promise to follow ethical codes such as
expertise, integrity, morality, altruism, and promotion of
the common good. These duties are the basis of a contract
between society and the profession. The society
grants exclusive rights to the professional and the privilege
of self-governance to those who adhere to the profession’s
code of conduct. Therefore, a professional
society and its members have accountability to the particular
community they serve, to society as a whole, and
to the profession. Cruess expanded the definition of a
professional and applied it to medical professionalism.
He argued that a doctor who has acquired, trained, and
served with professional knowledge and skills and who
complies with the medical ethics code is ensured the
status and protection that society affords the medical
profession. Therefore, the definition of medical professionalism
has been developed not only by medical professionals
but also with the input of society. Defining
medical professionalism strictly within medical societies
may cause limitations and bias. Because even major figures
in a medical society may be unfamiliar with the wider
social context of professionalism, they might overlook
important traits or exhibit bias when defining medical
professionalism [5]. Society empowers medical professionals
by granting them appropriate privileges and responsibilities.
Major medical society figures represent
competency, appropriate roles, and responsibility for
both patients and society as essential qualities that the
medical profession needs to convey to society.
Wynia et al. [30] identified the characteristics of medical
professionalism by analyzing three elements of the relationship
between doctors and society. First, professionalism
defines necessary moral duty as a commitment to
medical service and societal values. Second, commitment
to medical service and values results in the professionals
following a code of ethics, which eventually contributes to
establishment of an ethical professional culture. Third,
these attitudes help medical professionals maintain their
professionalism by emphasizing the importance of professional
ethics in the public domain. The ethical culture of
the medical profession functions as a moral ground on
which medical professionals defend healthcare values and
exercise political leadership to resolve various social conflicts
related to medicine.
The Royal Academy of Medicine has stated that a
strong motivation to be devoted to others is the primary
characteristic required for a medical professional [25].
According to the Academy’s understanding of medicine
as a vocation, a good doctor “is an interdisciplinary hybrid
person who has the moral duty and passion to treat
patients with the necessary scientific and medical skills.”
The sociologist Freidson [31] also holds that professional
labor could be a secular calling or vocation and not a religious
one. Therefore, a good doctor who embodies a
high level of medical professionalism is one who practices
medicine as a vocation, regardless of personal acknowledgement
for doing so.
According to the survey, over two-thirds of the physicians
responded that medical professionalism is properly
a part of the profession of medicine. Factors highly correlated
with this response were physician experience and
age. As Aristotle defined virtue as a stable disposition
that is formed through habitual acts, physician’s professionalism
is formed throughout medical practice over
the years. Pelligrino noted that a virtuous physician is
not simply born, but is formed through years of deliberate
practice. Time and experience are essential factors
to nurture, cultivate, and promote medical virtues.
As physicians accumulate practice, they are more likely
to regard medical professionalism as an element of
their vocation [32].
Moral duty and responsibility were the component set
that was advocated most highly as indicative of medical
professionalism. Part of the survey included cases involving
medical moral dilemmas in practice to determine the
virtues most valued by Korean physicians. Regardless of
whether the respondents endorsed medical professionalism
as an element of the vocation, they listed veracity, respect
for patient autonomy, integrity, responsibility, altruism,
and honesty as important characteristics of medical professionalism.
Korean physicians tended to emphasize moral
norms, such as veracity and respect for patient autonomy,
rather than altruism, as basic virtues or ordering principles
of medical professionalism. The survey results reflect the
current status of medical professionals in a country with a
national health insurance system and a government-led
healthcare policy. Korean physicians are overwhelmed with
excess documents and are expected to comply with everchanging
policies. Therefore, physicians find it difficult to
exercise their discretion and display the virtues of a medical
professional; they feel a lack of autonomy as professionals
despite their altruistic mindset.
The Royal College of Physicians has stated that all doctors
must abandon their sense of supremacy, autonomy,
and privilege as medical professionals [25]. However, apprehensions
about status and autonomy among Korean
medical professionals are somewhat different from those
among doctors in the UK. The national health insurance
system and strict implementation of medical law restrain
medical practice and result in Korean physicians’ struggling
to maintain a sense of professional integrity. When
physicians feel restrained and unable to exercise their autonomy,
they become defensive and remain passive in
medical practice. Such behavior tarnishes the value of the
medical profession, and could have detrimental effects on
patient care. Furthermore, health and medical services
may deteriorate as a result. In particular, both patients and
doctors become victims in the event of a medical accident
[33, 34]. Doctors may find it difficult not only to exercise
autonomy, but also to establish a code of ethics and contribute
to social justice.
It is presumed that the life-long experience of doctors
gives them insight and wisdom, which is consistent with
Aristotle’s virtue ethics. According to Aristotle, time and
experience are essential to acquire appropriate virtue in
practice [35]. It is expected that experienced physicians
tend to be good at communicating with patients, which
helps them acquire an integral perspective of medicine.
It is also consistent with Ho’s (2011) research on the
virtues of medical professionalism in non-Western
countries [36]. Ho questioned whether medical professionalism
developed by Western physicians could be
adapted to non-Western countries with different social,
historical, and cultural backgrounds, and found a difference
between the core virtues of medical professionalism in
Western countries and those in Chinese culture. Confucian
thought is popular among people influenced by Chinese
culture, and Ho concluded that its core value, Zi Zhong
(conducting oneself with dignity), is similar to integrity in
medical professionalism. This also explains why Korean
physicians in their 50s and 60s, who one would expect to
be more influenced by Confucian culture, placed a higher
priority on integrity than did other age groups.
In our study, Korean physicians reported responsibility
and obligation as core medical professionalism virtues in
their practice, which reflects essential virtues according
to the medical code of ethics. However, the physicians
also recognized the importance of altruism and empathy
as traditional medical professionalism virtues and reported
that they realize these virtues in practice whenever the
sociocultural conditions facilitate it. In conclusion, physicians
tended to have an appropriate attitude toward
medical professionalism, yet they felt that the social environment
did not enable achievement of their potential
as medical professionals. The finding that Korean
physicians hold the more normative values like responsibility
and veracity in higher esteem than other virtues
reflects their lack of autonomy due to excess governmental
limitations in the healthcare system. The health
insurance review and assessment service evaluates the
‘adequacy’ of treatment provided to the patient [37].
The ‘adequacy’ evaluation identifies whether the treatment
errs on the side of too much or too little, according
to the tendency of most hospitals’ treatment and
referral decisions for similar cases. Korean physicians
are forced to comply with health insurance review and
assessment service referrals rather than finding the best
available and appropriate treatment for a particular
patient. Assurance of physicians’ discretion is essential
for patient satisfaction and quality of care [38].
The Korean healthcare system is experiencing a dilemma
between extending health care insurance coverage
and effectively managing the healthcare insurance
budget. The government forces physicians to reduce
healthcare service spending rather than raising the level
of reimbursement. The degree and quality of healthcare
service for a particular patient should left primarily to
the physician’s medical expertise and his or her conscience.
Government’s reinforcement of regulations and
monitoring of physicians’ decisions is not the best way
to ensure ethical behaviors in medical practice. To promote
ethical culture, it is necessary to allow physician’s
autonomy and to encourage a self-policing system
within the medical profession [38]. According to medical
law, article 26, the Korean Ministry of Health and Welfare
has the right of administrative sanctions and license
management. But the Ministry only passively recognizes
the self-determination of the Medical Association and
exercises disciplinary action by judicial authorities due
to practical reasons such as labor shortages [39]. The
Medical Association’s initiative and active participation
is required to reform moral culture in medical practice.
The survey results demonstrate the necessity of
implementing a CPD program to reinforce the autonomy
of the medical profession and to promote medical
professionalism in Korea. Physicians’ autonomy requires
responsible behaviors by physicians as moral
agents. Therefore, the Medical Association should
provide physicians with opportunities for continuing
education and training to promote ethical behavior.
Dissemination of ethical culture among physicians will
change societal attitudes toward medical professionals,
build trusting and respectful relationships, and contribute
to a sound medical culture.
The survey results showed that physicians do not
recognize the importance of values such as “collegial relationships”
or “public service,” and these findings reflect a
lack of collective medical professionalism, i.e., an inability
and unwillingness to exercise self-governance, to nurture
professional attitudes among colleagues, and to establish a
moral culture as a professional group. Transformation
based on social change is inevitable for Korean physicians
and medical societies. As medicine cannot exist apart from
society, the social responsibilities of physicians must be
emphasized more than has been the case previously.
The survey also showed that Korean physicians are
aware of the need to strengthen the ethical elements of
medical professionalism and proposed CPD as a means
of achieving this. Implementing a CPD program for
medical professionalism, including vocation, competence,
ethical elements, and leadership, will enable doctors
to maintain a moral basis for their work. Such a
program could lead to establishment of a new and improved
medical professionalism in Korea. It is time to
initiate a movement for new medical professionalism in
Korea. In this way, patient trust and the reliance of society
on the medical community can be restored [25]. It is
encouraging that physicians who responded to the survey
agreed on the necessity of CPD to promote medical
professionalism. An effective CPD program will assist
physicians to recognize the relationship between medical
professionalism and the vocation and will help produce
a sound medical culture. The physicians suggested reinforcing
medical ethics as an additional way of promoting
medical professionalism, which reflects their recognition
of the medical ethics crisis. Social blame for the unprofessional
behavior of some physicians has caused public concern
over the apparent lack of medical professionalism in
present-day Korea. Therefore, a CPD program based
on the relationship between medical professionalism
and the medical vocation should consider both medical
ethics and bioethics.
A solid education program is important to produce
good doctors who practice medicine in an exemplary
manner. In particular, the program should emphasize
the teaching of students and the medical professionalism
of young physicians. Nevertheless, just as making a
good doctor is similar to making a good person, designing
such a program to do either is challenging [40].
The Catholic University of Korea operates an outstanding
program known as the “Omnibus Program,” which
has the goal of “producing good doctors” [41]. The program
began in 2007 and is an empathic and holistically
oriented humanities curriculum. A good doctor from a
humanities perspective includes not only knowledge of
scientific medicine but also of being a “humane doctor.” It
is important to teach medical ethics and humanities as the
foundation for developing medical professionalism; therefore,
a continuing CPD program for practicing physicians
should also include studies in the humanities.
Conclusion
Korea has a relatively short history of medical professionalism,
which is not yet entrenched in medical education or
in the clinical context. The medical community must
recognize the importance of appropriate identification and
implementation of medical professionalism for Korea in
the 21st century. Contemporary medical professionalism
should address social concerns including public healthcare
and social welfare, as well as the healing relationship between
patient and physician. The country has a national
health insurance system and a government-oriented health
policy. Korean physicians need more opportunities to
exercise self-governance and autonomy to be socially
responsible for medical education and medical practice.
A medical profession equipped with autonomy and independence
will contribute to formation of a good
medical culture.
Medical professionalism is the basis for trust in the patient–
doctor relationship, and is a core element of being
a good doctor [40–42]. The traditional virtues of medical
professionalism, such as altruism, honesty, integrity, and
competency, must be maintained. Professionalism in
medicine involves an ongoing conversation about what
it means to be a good doctor [43]. Patients need good
doctors—doctors who make patient care their primary
concern, who are competent, keep their knowledge and
skills up to date, establish and maintain good relationships
with patients and colleagues, are honest and trustworthy,
and act with integrity and within the law [44].
As mentioned in the Health Foundation’s new definition
of medical professionalism, medical practice involves
not only doctors but also all other healthcare
professionals. doctors and patients has become more of
a partnership [45, 46, 47, 48]—one that is essential for
creating patient-centered medicine [49]. However, our
study targeted only physicians and did not investigate
the public’s understanding of medical practice in Korea.
As medicine is practiced within a particular social and
cultural context, further studies should explore the perspectives
of other stakeholders, such as patients, their
families, governmental officials, and other medical professionals.
Different opinions and appropriate feedback
from various parties will contribute to establishment of a
new and solid medical professionalism in Korea.