Since the days of AIDS denialism [1-3], South Africa’s
policy on HIV/AIDS has seen a transformation with the
introduction of national treatment, testing and prevention
campaigns [4]. Despite an increase of 1.2 million
new infections since 2008, the rate is stabilising and
access to treatment is improving [5]. By mid-2012 31.2%
of people living with HIV (PLHIV) were on treatment,
up from 16.6% in 2008 [5] and South Africa has now
passed the “tipping point” whereby more people are
accessing treatment than there are new infections [6].
This has come on foot of a successful testing campaign
which has seen rates of HIV/AIDS testing increase [7].
However with 6.4 million people (12.2% of the population)
living with HIV/AIDS [5], South Africa has the highest
number of HIV/AIDS infected individuals worldwide and
HIV/AIDS continues to be a considerable challenge facing
the country [8].
Yet life is improving for PLHIV. The availability of
anti-retroviral therapy (ART) has helped increase life
expectancy from 49.2 years prior to the availability of
ART to 60.5 years by 2011 [9]. PLHIV in South Africa
can now also expect to have 80% of normal life expectancy
provided they start treatment before their CD4
count drops below 200 [10]. Yet this increased provision
of treatment has a significant economic impact on the
nation. Although a recent renegotiation of a fixed dose
ARV resulted in a 40% price reduction, South Africa’s
programme is the largest treatment programme in the
world and a considerable economic burden for the state
[11]. In August 2012 the US government announced that
it would cut the United States President’s Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) budget for South Africa
in half by 2017, at which point South Africa will have to
cover the full cost of its HIV/AIDS programme. The
process of the government taking full responsibility for
the programme has led to the closing of HIV/AIDS
treatment centres created by PEPFAR and patients’ moving
to government run centres, centres which regularly
face long waiting times and medication shortages [12].
Equally problematic is the high prevalence rate [8]. Thus,
while treatment and prevention campaigns can reduce infection
rates and improve the quality of life for PLHIV,
treatment and prevention campaigns are not enough to
bring the epidemic in South Africa under control.
News that the “Berlin patient” [13] and the “Mississippi
baby” [14] have both been “cured” [15,16] of HIV likely
brought hope to PLHIV in South Africa that a cure for
HIV/AIDS is within reach, a hope which may be fuelled
by further announcements of other babies who have
also been cured [17]. Although these early reports of
HIV/AIDS cures have been somewhat dampened by the
reports of the return of HIV in the “Mississippi Baby”
[18] and the “Boston patients” [19], it appears that the
search for a cure is gaining momentum. Yet these new
developments bring a fresh set of ethical challenges that
must be addressed prior to the commencement of any
trial aimed at curing HIV/AIDS in South Africa. Of
particular concern is that at some point during such a
clinical trial, participants who are doing well on their
ART may have to go off their treatment and try some
new, experimental intervention [20]. Participants will be
asked to assume the documented risks of treatment
interruption [21], despite the very low possibility of personally
benefiting in any early phase trial. The recent
setbacks of these early cases of cure illustrate that there
is a lot that is still unknown about HIV/AIDS cure
research and there is the real possibility that HIV may
return in any early phase trial.
With such unknowns, it is critical that the conduct of
the trial meets the highest ethical standards. Concerns
about trial design and the potential withdrawal of ARVs
must be discussed and addressed. Equally important is a
robust informed consent process that informs participants
about these risks. However with growing evidence
in South Africa that trial participants do not understand
the information provided during the consent process
and have unrealistic expectations of possible personal
benefit, questions must be asked about the current
consent process [22-25]. This paper will examine the
informed consent process in South Africa and consider
whether additional safeguards must be put in place to
protect participants in future HIV/AIDS cure research.
In particular it will discuss the experiences of the informed
consent process during clinical trials in South
Africa and the potential implications they may have on
any future trial aimed at finding a cure for HIV/AIDS in
South Africa. Good ethical oversight is imperative in this
process and the role that RECs should play in this oversight
will be discussed.
Discussion
Informed consent in South Africa: the legal landscape
Informed consent is a fundamental ethical principle that
was first codified in the Nuremberg Code in the wake of
the Nazi experiments [26,27]. It has since been replicated
in all major ethical codes including the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Declaration
of Helsinki and the Council for International Organisations
of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) guidelines. In South Africa,
the principle is enshrined in both the Constitution and the
National Health Act 2003, highlighting its importance.
The national research ethics guidelines Ethics in Health
Research: Principles, Structures and Processes require that
all participants must be informed of the risks and benefits,
purpose of the research and the procedures to which they
will be subjected to. These must be understood and consent
must be voluntary and based on this information.
The guidelines are cognisant of the fact that due to access
to health care and their education levels, many people involved
in research in South Africa are considered to be
vulnerable and researchers must be mindful of this vulnerability
[28]. The clinical trial guidelines further detail what
should be included in the informed consent form (ICF).
For all clinical trials, the original signed consent form
must be kept with the trial records with one copy stored
in the patients’ records and a second copy given to the
participant to take home [29]. These guidelines have also
been supplemented with specific guidance on informed
consent in HIV Preventive Vaccine Research guidelines
[30], and other international guidelines on HIV/AIDS
research, such as the UNAIDS documents, may also be
followed in clinical trials [31]. Together, these guidelines
regulate the informed consent process in South Africa and
detail the procedure and protections which must apply to
all HIV/AIDS clinical trials.
Experiences with informed consent in South Africa
Despite ample guidelines on the matter, obtaining informed
consent in clinical trials is problematic in South Africa.
This challenge can be partly attributed to the dual purpose
of the ICF: the institution or principal investigator (PI) use
it as a tool to indemnify them from litigation as a result of
the increasingly litigious culture emerging in Western societies
[32], while the ethical guidelines focus on informing
the participants of all the risks associated with the
research. Thus from a document which has its origins in
promoting ethical research, it has evolved to become an
increasingly legalistic document which can be difficult to
read and decipher its contents [33]. This is challenging as
a document which is primarily designed to offer legal protection
will be markedly different to a document aimed at
protecting trial participants through enabling them to
make an autonomous choice. However the South African
guidelines do require that research must be explained in
“a clear, simple and culturally appropriate manner” thus
one could assume that effort is given towards establishing
the comprehension of the ICF. Yet there is growing evidence
that certain key requirements of informed consent
are not met in clinical trials in South Africa and basic understanding
is lacking [22-25,34], including during HIV
vaccine trials [35,36].
The belief that consent is not voluntary or is somehow
linked to care is emerging as a common misconception
in four reported studies. In one antenatal clinic, it was
found that 93% of participants thought that they could
not withdraw from the study and 28% thought that they
would not receive care if they did not participate in the
study [22]. These findings were replicated in a similar
study in Bloemfontein where 24.2% thought they could
not withdraw at any time and 92.3% believed that they
would not receive good medical care if they did withdraw
from the study [23]. Recently it was shown that
half of those surveyed felt that they did not have a
choice about getting tested for HIV/AIDS, with many
believing that access to healthcare was contingent on
their consent to the test [25].
This lack of understanding also extends to key aspects
of the trial itself. Participants in an influenza trial
underwent a thorough informed consent procedure
that involved a community meeting, an individual discussion
with a study nurse and a discussion with the study
doctor on the day of the trial. Despite these repeated
consultations, participants did not understand concepts
such as randomisation or placebo and 38% of participants
stated that they would not have continued with
the study if they had known that they would receive an
inactive placebo [24]. Similarly, the Bloemfontein study
found that although participants had at least 8 years of
education, they lacked a basic understanding of the clinical
trial and their consent could not be considered to be
informed [23].
Clearly comprehension of the often complex information
is problematic and there is evidence to suggest that
the ICFs are not understandable by the general population.
The readability of the forms have been found to be
above the education level of the general population [34].
South Africa is ranked 146th out of 148 countries for education
in light of its low primary and tertiary enrolment
rates [37] and functional illiteracy is at 16.5% [38]. There
is therefore likely to be a great imbalance in knowledge
between the researcher and the participant [39], but the
consent process does not appear to address this imbalance
and the basic concepts of the trials do not appear to be
appropriately communicated or understood.
With such challenges facing understanding of the trials,
it is unsurprising that it has been indicated that therapeutic
misconception (TM) may be a problem in South
Africa [24], a trend which has been seen elsewhere
[40-42]. TM occurs when research participants assume
that decisions will be made based on their best clinical
interest [43]. In other words, research is confused with clinical
care. This is distinct from the therapeutic misestimation
where the participant may underestimate the risk or overestimate
the benefit [44], and therapeutic optimism which
occurs when participants are unduly optimistic about the
potential success of the research [40]. What distinguishes
TM is that participants fail to “grasp that the risks they face
from participating in research protocols are inherently different
from those involved in receiving ordinary treatment”
[43]. They fail to appreciate that decisions will be made
based on the best interest of the trial. Thus the participant
cannot be said to be making a free, fully informed decision.
There is very little empirical data on TM and motivations
to participate in a trial in South Africa, but a recent
study analysing motivations for enrolling on a Phase 3 oncology
study has suggested that participants do expect
benefit from participating in a trial. The participants were
quite optimistic about the outcome of the trial and this is
not something which should be discouraged, but they had
a poor understanding of phase 3 research and believed
that the clinical trial posed very little risk to them [36].
These findings indicate that participants did not understand
the information provided during the informed consent
process and suggest that TM may also be an issue in
South Africa.
Informed consent and HIV/AIDS cure research
In an attempt to protect them from legal liability, disclosure
of information by the research team is unlikely
to be a problem in South Africa. Rather the challenges
lie in comprehending this information. Researchers are
not absolved of their duty during the consent process by
simply providing the participants with information. The
ethical guidelines task the PIs with ensuring that participants
understand the information provided, but must all
information be understood and what are the implications
for future HIV/AIDS cure clinical trials if they are not
satisfied?
It has been proposed that the rationale for the study,
technical issues, technical consequences, methodological
issues, practical aspects involved in personal participation,
the costs and benefits of participation in the study and the
personal implications of participation in the study should
be at least understood before involvement in a HIV vaccine
trial [33]. These certainly should also be disclosed for
HIV/AIDS clinical trials, with a strong focus on the risks
of the trial as there are likely to be very real risks in early
phase HIV/AIDS cure research. For HIV positive individuals
who are otherwise healthy and on highly active ART
with an undetectable viral load who take part in a cure
trial, it is possible that they will be asked to stop taking
their treatment [20,45]. All but one of purported cases of
a “cure” for HIV has seen the disease return demonstrating
the real risk that HIV may return. Furthermore in two
Boston patients who underwent treatment similar to
the Berlin patient, HIV/AIDS returned in both patients
resulting in one becoming resistant to their treatment
[46]. In addition to these documented risks is the possibility
of unknown side effects associated with the
treatment. Current evidence suggests that there may
be real challenges in effectively communicating key
concepts of the trial to a study group that will be largely
drawn from a poorly educated population. Thus can we
realistically expect participants to be able to sufficiently
understand the very real risks and benefits of enrolling in
an early phase HIV/AIDS cure trial?
In addition is the real concern of TM. Africa has a
history of people willing to try unproven “cures” in the
hope of being free from HIV, thus demonstrating that
people may be willing to assume great risks in the hope
of a cure [47,48]. The pursuit of this hope may lead
them to enrol in an early phase HIV/AIDS cure trial
despite being told that there will unlikely be any individual
benefit for them. TM is a real problem in early phase
research as unlike in phase 3 or 4 studies, there is unlikely
to be any direct medical benefit and the research
can be in no way linked to a participants’ clinical care. In
light of the Malan study and evidence that PLHIV will
try unproven treatments in their search for a cure, the
research team must guard against TM in HIV/AIDS
cure research. The simple use of the word “cure” as one
of the study aims may be enough to ignite the possibility
of TM. Yet participants cannot be misled; if it is hoped
that the clinical trial will find a cure for HIV, this should
be stated in the patient information leaflet and ICF, but
care must be taken around contextualising the research
to participants. The challenge for the research team is if
after a thorough informed consent process the research
team suspects that the participant is simply enrolling
because of the remote possibility of a cure, should they
be refused to join the trial?
The South African guidelines focuses on understanding
only and do not directly address this point. Horn and
Grady describe understanding as “having an accurate
grasp of the available options and the consequences of
choosing one over the other”. If a participant understands
the risks and benefits and the implications for their enrolling
in a study, but due to some irrational hope that they
may be cured they still enrol, technically they satisfy the
requirements of informed consent. The risks are understood
but are disregarded in the hope of a possible cure.
However is their desire for a cure affecting a participant’s
voluntariness? Or have they simply decided that the risks
are worth taking, despite the low probability of success?
Horn and Grady argue that TM cannot be tolerated as
it “fundamentally misrepresents the choice of research
participants”. Clearly an ability to understand the difference
between clinical care and research is essential and
would fall under the requirement of understanding under
the South African guidelines. Participants who do not
understand the difference between research and clinical
care do not understand the basic fundamentals of research
and thus cannot give free, informed consent. Yet it is less
clear for the overly optimistic participant who has decided
that the risks are worth taking despite the low probability
of success. On this point, Horn and Grady consider that
the therapeutic misestimation, whereby the participant
may underestimate the risk or overestimate the benefit,
can be tolerated when the benefit or risk is not large [44].
Turning back to the requirement of understanding in the
South African guidelines, the therapeutic misestimation is
arguably a misunderstanding as they fail to appreciate the
degree of risk or benefit, but it may also be a symptom of
being unduly optimistic. They may fully understand the
risks and the low probability of benefit, but continue to
hold onto their belief. Is undue optimism something we
should guard against particularly when their optimism is
unlikely to materialise in early phase trials or is it enough
that they understand the risks and benefits?
The role of RECs in cure research
Clearly trusting the integrity of the research team to
make an ethical decision is necessary. They are to conduct
the trial in accordance with the protocol submitted
to the REC and South African ethical guidance and ensure
that the elements of informed consent have been
met. The guidelines focus on the need for disclosure and
comprehension but offer little practical guidance on how
this is to be achieved. The onus is indeed on the PI to
ensure that the informed consent process meet these
criteria. The degree of therapeutic misestimation that is
acceptable before it conflicts with the requirement of
comprehension is not one that can be succulently stated
in any guidance. Rather it is a decision that must be
made by the research team. Equally, they must determine
if the participants sufficiently understands the information
provided for the consent to be valid. There is also a role
for the RECs in overseeing the ethical conduct of future
HIV/AIDS cure trials. They can provide a number of gate
keeping functions, including a role in promoting the comprehension
of participants whilst guarding against TM.
First they must be assured that information is not simply
conveyed to participants, but there is a real effort to
ensure participants understand the risks involved in the
research as well as the basic principle of informed consent.
Simplified ICFs do improve understanding [49], but they
alone may not be enough. The Coletti study evaluated a
prototype informed consent process for HIV vaccine trials
and it found that there was a substantial increase in knowledge
and understanding of the trial [50]. A similar consent
form could be developed for cure research. Part of
this could also include the development of an educational
tool that can visually convey certain aspects of the research.
This should be in addition to the ICF and the
understand the basics of the trial but misestimate the riskbenefit
ratio. Is it ethical to permit such participants to enroll
on an early-phase trial?
This is not a call for new or additional guidance.
Current guidelines addresses issues such as community
participation, involvement of vulnerable populations,
children and women as well informed consent and monitoring
informed consent [31]. They do require that the
investigator must be assured that the participant understands
the information and methods to evaluate understanding
are encouraged [31]. However in light of the
considerable risks of treatment interruption and the
relatively healthy pool that the participants are likely to
come from, there is a need for a discussion to inform both
REC members and researchers on the informed consent
process and the safeguards which must be put in place to
address concerns about understanding and TM. What
must be understood is likely to vary according to the trial
design and the intervention used, but a general discussion
on the understanding of treatment interruption as well
as whether therapeutic misestimation is permissible is
needed. This will assist the research team in determining
whether the consent is informed and also help
RECs when they evaluate the information in the patient
information leaflet, the ICF and any educational tool or
assessment of understanding.
Summary
Moving forward, a discussion is necessary on the essential
elements that should be understood during the informed
consent process in South Africa. Requiring complete understanding
of all the procedures involved in a HIV/AIDS
cure trial will likely result in no participant meeting the
consent criteria. A degree of misunderstanding and confusion
of these complex scientific concepts is to be expected
and must be acceptable. However some agreement is necessary
on the degree of misunderstanding that is acceptable
and on what particular issues.
Research is currently underway at Stellenbosch University
in Cape Town to investigate the views of participants
on some of the issues raised here. In collaboration with
the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill and the
University of Carolina, Guangzhou, this project aims
to consider the social and ethical aspects of HIV Cure
research. Findings from this study can inform these
discussions in South Africa and also inform research
teams in developing their protocols and RECs in reviewing
these submissions. In the interim, RECs should discuss the
possibility of some of the measures discussed here with the
PIs in any trial aimed at curing HIV/AIDS to increase understanding
and bolster the informed consent process.