Background
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-
2), was first identified in China in December 2019
and has since progressed to cause a major global pandemic
[1, 2]. Although COVID-19 shares some clinical
manifestations with other respiratory viral infections
such the common cold (rhinoviruses and common
human coronaviruses) and influenza, it has a number of
differences including prolonged viral shedding that may
last many weeks, progression to more severe disease in a
proportion of patients in the second week of illness, and
extrapulmonary manifestations including cardiovascular
and thromboembolic disease [3, 4]. The disease differs
in frequency and severity between ethnic groups and
although these differences are most likely driven by socioeconomic
factors, it has been suggested that biological
factors may also contribute [5, 6].
Key features of the immune response to the virus
are lymphopenia (possibly caused by apoptosis via the
P53-signaling pathway in T-lymphocytes [7], via angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE2) protein receptor) [8],
and an increase in inflammatory cytokines (cytokine
storm) such as interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and interleukin
(IL)-6 [9], which can result in multiple-organ dysfunction
syndrome (MODS) and acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS), a major cause of death in COVID-19
[10].
Transcriptome analysis of whole blood is a useful tool
for profiling the host immune response to an infectious
disease. The approach has previously been applied to
other respiratory infections, and has identified characteristic
gene signatures associated with influenza and
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection [11, 12]. It has
shown particular value in tuberculosis where, in addition
to identifying clinical cases [13], it has potential to identify
contacts with asymptomatic disease exposure [14],
as well as those with latent infection who will progress to
develop symptomatic clinical TB disease [15].
We examined the whole blood gene expression profile
in patients with COVID-19 disease to assess whether
there are differences from other viral respiratory infections;
whether there are any differences between ethnicities;
and whether the transcriptome varies according to
clinical disease manifestations.
Methods
Participants and sample collection
The COVID-19 case group were enrolled from the inpatient
wards and emergency department of the National
University Hospital, Singapore between 1st April and
26th May 2020. Cases were required to be over the age
of 18 and meet a virological case definition for COVID-
19 (detectable viral gene by PCR in throat and/or nasopharyngeal
swab(s); or in a sputum sample taken within
the 7 days prior to the study day). Demographic and
clinical data were collected including details of exposure;
presence of abnormal findings on respiratory examination;
whether supplemental oxygen was required; and
presence of abnormal findings consistent with infection
on a chest X-ray. A whole blood sample was drawn into
a Tempus RNA preservation tube (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Massachusetts, USA) and stored at − 80 °C within
2 h from collection until the time of analysis.
The control group was recruited through an established
database of healthy volunteers for clinical research studies.
They were required to have no history of travel to
high-risk areas; no known exposure to a proven or suspected
COVID-19 case in the previous 14 days; no upper
or lower respiratory tract infection or any other active illness
at the time of visit; and no past or current history
of serious chronic disease such as autoimmune disease.
Whole blood was collected in an RNA preservation tube
and stored as described above. Participants were contacted
by telephone at 2 and 4 weeks after the study visit
to ask about the development of symptoms of COVID-19
after the study visit and any participants with developing
symptoms were excluded.
The study was performed in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and approved by the Singapore
National Healthcare Group Domain Specific Review
Board (NHG DSRB; reference code: DSRB 2020/00286),
and all participants gave written informed consent.
Extraction of total RNA from peripheral blood and RNA
sequencing
Samples were thawed and total RNA was extracted;
DNAse-treatment was performed using the columnbased
Tempus™ Spin RNA Isolation kit (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) in the Biosafety Level 3
(BSL-3) Laboratory at the National University of Singapore
(NUS). RNA was quantified using the Agilent 2100
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, California, USA).
Complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries were constructed
using the NEBNext ® poly-(A) mRNA Magnetic Isolation
Module and Ultra ™ Directional RNA Library Prep
kit (New England Biolabs, Massachusetts, USA). RNA
sequencing was performed on Illumina Novaseq 6000
(2 × 151 bp) at NovogeneAIT Genomics Singapore Pte
Ltd, Singapore.
RNASeq data analyses and functional annotation
Sequenced reads (paired-end FASTQ files) were mapped
to the Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38
release 86 (GRCh38.r86) by using STAR aligner (version
2.3.0e) [16]. The aligned reads were counted for
each gene using HTSeq (version 0.6.1) [17]. Sample
read counts were adjusted for library size and normalized
using Trimmed Mean of M-values (TMM) method
and multidimensional scaling plot was used to detect
any outlier samples (none found; Additional file 1: Fig. 1)
using Bioconductor package EdgeR (version 3.18.1) [18].
Gene expression in the COVID-19 case group was
compared with the healthy control group using EdgeR
(3.18.1). All bioinformatics parameters were according
to the standard instructions for gene expression analysis
(Additional file 1: Fig. 2). Genes were considered differentially
expressed if they had a false-discovery rate (FDR,
Benjamini-Hochberg) [19] of less than 0.05 and at least
a log2 fold change of ± 1. The nature of the differentially
expressed genes was explored further by creating a comprehensive
network representation of the proteins associated
with the genes in the signature using Search Tool
for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING;
version 11.0b) [20]. Analysis of the associated functional
pathways was performed using the GeneOntology (go)
and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
database on STRING using default settings (false-discovery
rate < 0.05).
The list of differentially expressed genes was compared
with lists of genes reported in previous whole-blood gene
expression studies in patients with Influenza or respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) infection (FDR < 0.05, log2 fold
change of ± 1) [11, 12], and the overlap was tested using
hypergeometric probability. The pathway analysis was
performed in the same way for RSV and influenza from
the published gene lists [11, 12].
The analysis of differential gene expression was
repeated with stratification by Chinese or South Asian
ethnicity (i.e. differential expression of genes in cases
compared to controls, both groups limited to a single ethnicity)
and analysis of pathways. The association between
the relative magnitudes of overexpression of individual
genes in the two ethnic groups was assessed by Spearman
rank correlation and the difference by Wilcoxon signedrank
test.
To evaluate the relationship between a gene expression
profile and demographic and clinical factors we first
reduced the list of genes to a smaller, more robust core
by splitting cases and controls randomly into two datasets
using the python software’s “random ()” function.
The differential analysis comparing cases versus controls,
as described above, was repeated separately in the two
datasets and the induced genes that overlapped between
both sets were taken as the “final disease signature”. A
disease score was calculated for each COVID-19 case
using the normalized gene expression values of the genes
in the final disease signature, following an approach
described previously [21–23]. Briefly, the disease scores
for each patient sample were computed by taking the difference
between normalized gene expression values of
all induced genes and repressed genes (both relative to
controls).
The purpose of the disease score method is to assess
the relationship between the final disease signature and
clinical parameters. The relationship between this disease
score and various dichotomous variables including
sex; age (above or below median); ethnicity (South Asian
versus Chinese); presence or absence of chest X-ray
(CXR) abnormality; time from onset of illness (above or
below the median); and quantitative PCR cycle threshold
(qPCR CT) from the nasopharyngeal/throat (hereafter
termed “nasal”) swab taken closest to time of the study
blood draw (limited to 1 week before or after the blood
draw; CT value above or below median) was assessed by
Mann–Whitney U test. The relationship between the disease
score and time from disease onset or qPCR CT, each
expressed as continuous variables, was evaluated using
Spearman’s rank correlation. All analyses and figures
were generated using the R software or custom Python
scripts.
The sample size for COVID-19 cases and healthy controls
was determined by pragmatic considerations of the
feasibility of sample collection given clinical constraints
at the time of conducting the study and by previous experience
of other host transcriptome studies in infectious
diseases where groups of approximately 20–50 individuals
typically allow detection of robust differential gene
expression in a study group of interest.
All methods were performed in accordance with the
relevant guidelines and regulations.
Results
All extracted RNA samples passed the quality control
requirements (RNA integrity number > 7) for RNA
sequencing, and a minimum of 85 million raw sequencing
reads (Additional file 1: Table 1). On average, 98%
of the reads were successfully mapped to the human
genome GRCh38.r86 (Additional file 1: Table 2).
We enrolled 45 COVID-19 cases (82% male; median
35 years; 36% Chinese, 53% South Asian, 11% other
ethnicity) and 19 healthy controls (58% male; mean age
31 years; 53% Chinese, 47% South Asian). The median
duration of illness (based on symptoms in 43 patients)
was 4 days (range 1–10 days) prior to the study day.
The median qPCR CT value of nasal swabs (CT values
available in 35 patients) was 25 (range 13–37). Fourteen
COVID-19 (31%) cases had abnormal chest X-rays, 5
(11%) had abnormal respiratory examination findings
and 4 (8%) required respiratory support (2 required supplemental
oxygen and 2 required mechanical ventilation)
at the time of the study.
We found 135 differentially-expressed protein-coding
genes (117 induced, 18 repressed) in COVID-19 cases
compared to healthy controls (Additional file 1: Table 3).
Of these, 16 (14 induced, 2 repressed; Additional file 1:
Fig. 3) have been reported previously in RSV infection; 40
(all induced; Additional file 1: Fig. 4) have been reported
previously in influenza infection (fold change values of
overlap genes were not associated between COVID-19
and either or the two infections); and 13 (induced) in
both infections (Additional file 1: Tables 4–5; p < 0.01
for overlap) [11, 12]. Analysis of the COVID-19 induced
genes by GO identified 141 pathways of which 111,
mostly representing generic viral infection and inflammation
pathways, were found in one or both of RSV [11]
and Influenza [12] (Additional file 1: Table 4). However,
30 pathways were unique to COVID-19 patients, including
protein pathways related to P53 apoptosis (Additional
file 1: Table 6). Analysis of induced genes using KEGG
revealed 11 pathways, 7 of which were found in one or
both of RSV [11] and influenza [12] (Additional file 1:
Table 7). Four KEGG pathways were unique to COVID-
19, including the pathways of viral carcinogenesis and
acute myeloid leukemia. No enriched GO or KEGG pathways
were found for the 31 repressed genes.
We identified 148 genes (122 induced, 26 repressed)
that were differentially expressed in cases of South Asian
ethnicity (n = 24; 23 male, 1 female cases versus 5 male,
4 female controls) and 297 genes (170 induced, 127
repressed) that were differentially expressed in cases of
Chinese ethnicity (n = 16; 11 male, 5 female cases versus
6 male, 4 female controls) compared to their respective
ethnicity-matched controls. There were 76 genes
(69 induced, 7 repressed) common to both ethnicities;
221 genes that were unique to Chinese and 72 genes that
were unique to South Asian ethnicity. Pathway analysis
of these unique genes revealed 78 enriched GO and
3 KEGG pathways in Chinese (Additional file 1: Table 8)
and 21 enriched GO pathways and no enriched KEGG
pathways in South Asian patients (Additional file 1:
Table 9), mostly related to immune and inflammatory
responses with no major qualitative difference in types of
responses between the two ethnic groups.
The final COVID-19 disease signature, obtained by
reduction in two randomly split datasets, comprised 67
induced protein-coding genes (all present in the analysis
of cases as a single group; Fig. 1), associated with 82 GO
and 10 KEGG pathways. These pathways included 75 GO
and 8 KEGG pathways enriched in the single group analysis;
and 10 GO and 2 KEGG pathways (including viral
carcinogenesis and acute myeloid leukemia) that were
identified as unique to COVID-19 in the single-group
analysis (Additional file 1: Table 10).
The median COVID-19 disease score, based on the
magnitude of expression of these 67 genes in the final
disease signature, was significantly higher in cases studied
less than 4 days after illness onset (Table 1, Fig. 2A);
and in cases with nasal swab qPCR CT values below 25
(Table 1, Fig. 2B). The score did not differ by other factors
examined (Table 1).
Discussion
We identified a whole-blood RNA expression signature
for COVID-19 patients comprising 135 differentiallyexpressed,
protein-coding genes. This signature is biologically
plausible as a signature for COVID-19 disease
as many of the genes overlap those previously published
for other respiratory viral diseases, in particular influenza
and RSV, and contains many enriched pathways for
generic responses to respiratory viral infections such as
Type-1 interferon and inflammatory responses [24]. The
scale of the COVID-19 pandemic. We sought but did
not find evidence of enrichment of organ-specific pathways
that may be relevant to COVID-19 pathogenesis.
In particular we did not find any related to ACE-2 receptor
genes (common in lung and heart epithelium tissues)
which is known to be the route of entry of SARS-Cov-2
into cells [8], although it is not surprising this is absent
in the whole-blood transcriptome given that ACE2 is
not commonly expressed in immune cells; gene expression
studies (based on study of specific cellular receptor
genes) in other tissues might yield different results [30].
A number of studies have described inter-ethnic differences
in the risk of acquiring COVID-19 and the risk
of progression to more severe disease, findings which
are likely to be explained by socioeconomic factors [6].
We found a number of differences in the profile of gene
expression and the associated protein pathways between
the two major ethnic groups in our dataset, but these
were mostly in generic pathways expected in the immune
response to infection which likely represent variation
associated with the relatively small sub-group sample
sizes rather than meaningful inter-ethnic differences. The
two ethic groups studied are both at the lower end of the
range of COVID-19 disease severity compared with other
ethnic groups, based on epidemiological (non-transcriptomic)
data in the UK population [6, 31, 32], and comparison
of outcomes between similar ethnic groups in
Malaysia did not show a difference [33].
There is a strong clinical need for a test that could indicate
underlying disease severity and predict those with mild
COVID-19 disease who are most at risk of progressing to
severe forms of disease. Given that the progression is most
likely driven by the immune response rather than the virus
per se, an immune-based test may hold the best promise
for this indication. As a first step, we evaluated whether a
quantitative disease score based on the magnitude of gene
expression was related to clinical parameters. Our finding
that the score was associated with the time from illness
onset (score lower with greater time from onset of
illness) and CT (qPCR) on nasal swabs (score higher with
greater viral burden on the nasal swab) suggest initial biological
plausibility for the responsiveness of the score to
clinical disease/viral burden. Other studies have shown an
independent relationship between qPCR CT and disease
outcome [34–38]. We did not find any direct relationship
between the disease score and indicators of disease severity.
However, we studied a group of patients with relatively
mild disease and the chest X-ray we used to assess disease
severity is an imprecise measure that may underestimate
the extent of lung pathology. Given the heterogeneity of
clinical presentation a much larger study would be required
to address this including greater representation of patients
with more severe disease and with better markers of disease
severity such a pulmonary CT imaging. This evaluation was
intended as an initial proof of concept that an integrated
measure of gene expression (the risk score) might relate to
clinical disease parameters—for this score to be clinically
useful it would need to be reduced to a smaller number of
genes that could be measured using a simple test (such as
lateral flow) and would need to be shown to improve the
accuracy of prediction of those at risk of disease progression
over and above the prediction available from readilyavailable
clinical parameters.
The main limitation of our study is the relatively small
sample size, although it proved sufficient to identify a signature
and analyse associated pathways. However, the gene signature
requires further validation in an independent dataset.
The number of genes in our final signature is relatively large
and for the approach to have potential clinical use as a rapid
test, further reduction to a small number of key genes by RTPCR
would be required. The healthy controls were selected
on the basis of absence of exposure to COVID-19 and
absence of symptoms; we did not perform a nasal swab PCR
to detect asymptomatic carriage of COVID-19. However, at
the time of the study community transmission of COVID-19
in Singapore was at a very low rate (approximately 35 new
cases per day, in a local community population of 4 million)
at the time the study was conducted [39], and we followed
the participants for four weeks after the study to
rule out subsequent development of symptomatic disease.
Even if a small proportion of the controls had undetected
infection, this would not explain the findings of differential
gene expression in the COVID-19 cases—if anything the
bias would be towards decreasing the level of relative gene
expression. Clinical data collection in COVID-19 cases was
necessarily limited due to constraints of patient access and
investigation accompanying stringent institutional infection
control protocols. Similarly, constraints on laboratory access
and sample transportation meant that we could not collect
and process other blood samples for a more comprehensive
immunological profile that might provide additional context
for the transcriptome findings.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have measured a whole-blood transcriptome
in patients with COVID-19 that has indicated
the possible value of this approach for further characterizing
disease pathogenesis and the host response to
infection.