Background
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) infection is regarded as a global
health issue. The global chronic HBV infection rate in
2015 was estimated at 3.5% involving 257 million people,
of which 15–25% died of HBV-related cirrhosis or
liver cancer [1]. Caused by severe acute exacerbation
of chronic hepatitis B (CHB), HBV-related acute-onchronic
liver failure (ACLF) is a severe life-threatening
disease that exhibits a high 28-day mortality rate of more
than 15% [2]. Several risk factors have been suggested to
be involved in this common complex disease, including
hereditary factors, host characteristics, viral factors, and
vigorous immune responses [3–5]. However, the pathological
processes are still poorly understood.
Host genetic factors likely play a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of HBV-related ACLF. Our group has
recently performed a SNP-based genome-wide association
study (GWAS) of this disease, and identified a
highly associated variant rs3129859*C [6]. The related
single nucleotide variation is located in human leukocyte
antigen (HLA)-DR region and likely participates in the
function of the HLA-II-restricted CD4+ T-cell pathway
[6]. Previous results deepen our understanding of HBVrelated
ACLF and confirm the importance of host genetic
factors in the pathogenesis of the disease. In addition to
SNPs, copy number variations (CNVs) as another main
type of genetic variations also exhibit a high diversity in
human population and are associated with many human
diseases [7]. For example, susceptible CNVs on chromosome
1p36.33 [8] and 15q13.3 [9] were proved to be
highly correlated with HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), and CNVs on chromosome 5q35.3 [10]
may potentially affect HBV infection by integrating the
HBV P gene into natural killer cells. However, direct
evidences of association between host CNVs and HBVrelated
ACLF remains unknown.
In this study, we used Affymetrix Genome-wide
Human SNP Array 6.0 to identify high-quality CNV genotyping
data for HBV-related ACLF in a Chinese population,
and then performed a CNV-based GWAS aiming to
expand the scope of genetic screening and further study
the underlying genetic and molecular mechanism of
HBV-related ACLF.
Methods
Participants, CNV detection and quality control
A Chinese population with 780 qualified participants
was screened from our previous study (population group
of “GWAS stage”), including 389 patients with HBVrelated
acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF, cases) and
391 asymptomatic HBV carriers (AsCs, controls) (Additional
file 1 and Additional file 2) [6]. The detailed diagnostic
criteria for HBV-related ACLF and AsC were also
described previously [6]. Standard procedures were conducted
to extract the genomic DNAs from leukocytes in
peripheral blood. Raw signals of copy number variations
(CNVs) were detected using the Affymetrix genomewide
human SNP array 6.0 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara,
California, USA), and the CNV genotypes were further
determined plate-by-plate using Birdseye (version 1.5.5)
under the JCH model (Japanese and Chinese model) [11].
High quality CNV calls should meet five criteria [12]:
logarithm of odds (LOD) score ≥ 10, Size ≥ 1000 bp, the
number of probes per CNV (NP) ≥ 10, Size/NP ≤ 10,000,
and call rate ≥ 0.95. In addition to Birdseye, the software
PennCNV (version 1.0.4) [13] was also applied as a
complementary algorithm to determine CNVs using the
default parameters (Fig. 1a). For the distribution of CNV
numbers per sample, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was
used to measure the goodness of fit for normal distribution,
which was accomplished by R scripts.
Determination of common and rare CNVs
A CNV event (CNVE) was clustered from a series of
CNV calls that descended from a common ancestral
mutation event [12] and had a pair-wise reciprocal overlapping
rate of over 50%. Contributing CNV calls of a
CNVE may have slightly different breakpoints in the
genome. The physical extent of the CNVE was defined as
the minimum region covering over 90% of these related
CNVs. Meanwhile, the carrier frequency of a CNVE
was defined as the proportion of individuals that carried
the contributing CNV calls. The common and rare
CNVs were CNVEs that have frequency values of > 5%
and < 1%, respectively. Additionally, rare CNVs were further
filtered by the genome size of > 100 kb. Genes within
CNVEs were extracted based on the annotation file from
the UCSC Genome Browser (version NCBI36/hg18). All
of the above steps were implemented in our in-house Perl
scripts.
Global burden and genome‑wide association study
Plink-1.07 [14] was used to test whether HBV-related
ACLF patients exhibit a greater burden of rare CNVs relative
to AsC controls. Statistical significance was established
through 10,000 times of permutation. All rare
CNVs were divided into three groups according to the
genomic size, and each size interval was further divided
into three types: duplication, deletion and the combination
of them. In addition, two aspects were considered
during the detection, including the number of segments
per person (RATE) and the proportion of sample with
one or more segments (PROP). P values < 0.05 were considered
statistically significant. Fisher’s exact test was
conducted to perform genome-wide association analysis
for both common duplication and deletion CNVs. The
odds ratios (ORs) were calculated from the formula of
(
nA × ma)/(na × mA), where nA
and mA
are the total numbers
of participants who carry the target CNVs in cases
and controls, respectively. The na
and ma
are the total
numbers of participants who exhibit normal condition in
the detected region or carry the other types of CNVs in
cases and controls, respectively.
Transcriptome analysis and miRNA target prediction
Transcriptome data was collected from NCBI by querying
the project number of PRJNA360435, of which
5 ACLF patients (Patient1-T0 to Patient5-T0) and 4
healthy individuals (Control1-T0 to Control4-T0) were
selected for further analysis [15]. Raw RNA sequencing
data from purified CD14+ monocytes was downloaded,
which was sequenced by Illumina NextSeq 500 with a
single end of 75 bp. In order to calculate gene expression
levels, filtered sequencing data was aligned to the UCSC
human gene sets (version NCBI36/hg18) using SOAP2
[16]. Only the unique alignment results were considered
to generate reads per Kb transcriptome per million
mapped reads (RPKM) values that represented for the
relative expression level. The RPKM method eliminates
the influence of gene size when comparing expression
levels between genes. Based on the expression pattern,
the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was applied to filter samples
exhibiting large distribution bias among samples.
To observe the expression pattern of the HLA-A gene in
more patients with HBV-related liver failure, we queried
the key words in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
Profiles database from the NCBI. Expression data of 17
HBV-related ALF samples were obtained under an accession
number of GDS4387. The potential miRNA binding
sites were predicted using MegaBLAST [17] based on
the mature sequences downloaded from miRBase [18].
Results with the highest score, located in 3′UTR (protein
coding genes), and mapped 2–8 bp at the beginning of
mature miRNA were considered for further analysis [19].
Enrichment of KEGG pathway
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway enrichment was conducted in three steps.
Firstly, all target genes (TGs) were queried against KEGG
orthology (KO) in the database (https ://www.kegg.jp)
to determine the related pathways. Secondly, a hypergeometric
test was used to predict KEGG pathways that
were significantly enriched in TGs relative to the genomic
background of all genes with KEGG annotations. Thirdly,
a Bonferroni correction was calculated to control type I
error due to multiple comparisons (threshold: corrected
P ≤ 0.05).
Results
CNV detection
For 389 HBV-related ACLF cases and 391 AsC controls,
the Birdsuite and PennCNV algorithms yielded 77,987
CNVs (21,891 duplications and 56,096 deletions) in total
with a median size of 569,849 bp. All CNV calls were
clustered into 6,819 CNVEs, where 4,413 (64.72%) were
singletons (Fig. 1a and Additional file 3). The frequency
distribution of CNV number per individual (CNPI) was
close to the normal distribution (P value = 2.2 × 10–16,
Fig. 1b). Meanwhile, the mean values of CNPI were statistically
different between the HBV-related ACLF and the
AsC group (P value = 0.02, Fig. 1c), which were 117 ± 83
and 106 ± 26 (mean ± SD) respectively. In total, 352 and
1,874 CNVEs were classified as common and rare CNVs
(Fig. 1a), respectively, where 331 common CNVs (~ 94%)
could overlap (coverage rate > 0.5) with the CNVs from
the HapMap database.
Global burden analysis of rare CNVs
Overall, HBV-related ACLF patients exhibited a significantly
higher number of rare CNVs per person
than the AsC controls (P value = 0.03; Ratio of RATE:
2.78/0.66), but the proportion of samples containing rare
CNVs showed no difference between the two groups
(P value = 0.42; ratio of PROP: 0.29/0.28) (Table 1). In
detail, HBV-related ACLF patients revealed a high burden
of the deletion segments with the size of 100–200 kb,
of which the RATE value was more than 4 times than
that of AsC controls (P value = 0.04). A total of 1805
genes were contained in the deletion regions (Additional
file 4). They are significantly enriched in the leukocyte
transendothelial migration pathway (P value = 4.68 × 10–
3). Four major sub-functions are affected, including tail
retraction, cell motility, docking structure, and transendothelial
migration. Twelve key functional nodes (gene
products) lost one or more related gene copies, where the
most affected node was cell adhesion molecules (CAMs)
(Additional file 5) and its mean expression level was relatively
lower in HBV-related patients than the healthy
controls (Fig. 2a). In other aspects, there was a higher
proportion of patients containing the duplication segments
with the size of 100–200 kb (P value = 0.02), which
covered 172 genes but no KEGG pathway was significantly
enriched (Additional file 6).
Association study of common CNVs
A total of 17 strong disease association signals were
detected (Threshold P value: ~ 0.01), including 9
duplications and 8 deletions, respectively (Fig. 3 and
Table 2). The peak one was a duplicate CNV on chromosome
1 p36.13 (~ 38 Kb, P value = 1.99E−04), which
had the largest OR value (2.66) among all associates
and contained the gene MST1L (macrophage stimulating
1 like). The duplicated CNV was enriched in HBVrelated
ACLF patients and was associated with greater
copies of MST1L compared to the AsC controls, which
may further increase its expression level. Transcriptome
data showed that the relative expression level of
MST1L was significantly higher in HBV-related ACLF
patients than in healthy controls (P value = 8.20e−4,
Fig. 2b).
The second-strongest associate was a deletion CNV
on chromosome 6 p22.1 (~ 33 Kb, P value = 3.45e−04),
which was enriched in AsC populations and contained
a long non-coding RNA gene HCG4B (HLA complex
group 4B). HBV-related ACLF patients tended to contain
relatively more copies of HCG4B than AsCs. The
mean expression level of HLA-A was higher in HLA-A
in HBV-related ACLF or ALF patients than that in
healthy controls (Fig. 2c, d). More copies of HCG4B
likely resulted in greater gene expression of HLA-A,
and the positive correlation may be caused by the competing
endogenous RNAs (ceRNA) of lncRNA. A total
number of 6 potential sponging microRNAs between
HCG4B and 3′UTR of HLA-A were predicted, where
miR-6823-5p had the largest prediction score (Additional
file 7). Except for two top signals, the 6 remaining
associations could also contain gene elements, notably
a duplicate CNV on chromosome 8 that covered 7 beta
defensin genes (Table 2).
Discussion
Aiming to explore the risk CNV in HBV-related ACLF,
we performed a global burden analysis and a genomewide
association study of 389 HBV-related ACLF cases
and 391 AsC controls. A series of high-quality CNVs
were identified using SNP array technology, where
over 94% of common CNVs overlapped with the Hap-
Map database, providing a strong foundation for subsequent
studies. Our results showed that HBV-related
ACLF patients tend to contain more short rare CNVs
(100–200 Kb) than AsCs, indicating a CNV burden difference
between the two groups of patients. Moreover,
a total number of 17 common CNVs were found to be
significantly associated with HBV-related ACLF. These
findings suggested that host genetic copy number variations
likely play an important role in disease onset.
Further studies implied that genes within related CNVs
may participate in decreasing natural immunity and
enhancing host inflammatory response during HBV
infections.
Compared to AsC controls, HBV-related ACLF population
exhibit a higher burden of rare CNVs with the
deletion genotype (Table 1), which resulted in a lower
copy number of genes related to the leukocyte transendothelial
migration pathway (LTMP). The most affected
genes are cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) [20], which
are the key genes regulating transendothelial migration
and play an important role in the firm adhesion of leukocytes
during transmembrane transport [21] (Additional
file 5). Transcriptome data revealed that low CAM gene
copies may further decrease its expression level (Fig. 2a).
As one of the important types of leukocytes, natural killer
(NK) cells have been found that its peripheral number,
cytotoxicity and killing activity were decreased or downregulated
in patients with HBV-related ACLF [20]. NK
cells are main cellular responders after HBV infection,
and the abnormal status can induce severe liver injury
[22, 23]. Evidence has shown that NK cells facilitate the
cellular immunity of HBV-related ACLF mainly through
perforin and granzymes, or interacting with target cell
death receptors [22, 24, 25]. Low gene dosage of CAMs
may reduce the migration activity of NK cells and further
reduce its cellular immunity.
For association studies, the strongest association signal
was a duplication segment with a length of ~ 38 Kb,
covering only the MST1L (Macrophage stimulating
1 like) gene (Table 2). MST1L is homologous to macrophage
stimulating protein (MSP), and its first 6878 bp
sequence was 96.1% identical to MSP [26]. MST1L was
once thought a pseudogene of MSP due to the frameshift
and termination mutations. However, Yoshimura et al.
found that MSP homologous genes could express in
HepG2 cells [27], suggesting that MST1L may have transcriptional
activity. Transcriptome data from monocytes
confirmed this possibility, and revealed a significantly
high expression level in HBV-related ACLF patients
(P value = 0.05) (Fig. 2b). Li et al. found that some proinflammation
molecules, such as TNFα, chemokine
(C–C motif) ligand 2 (Ccl2), intercellular adhesion molecule
1 (Icam1), IFNγ, and interleukin 1 beta (IL1β) [28],
were highly expressed in the liver of MSP-treated mice,
indicating a possible pro-inflammatory effect of MST1L.
Therefore, more copies of the MST1L gene likely increase
its expression in HBV-related ACLF patients, and may
further enhance the intensity of hepatitis inflammation.
The second top associate was a deletion CNV containing
a long non-coding RNA gene of HCG4B, and
was enriched in the AsCs population. Transcriptome data indicated that the expression of HCG4B was positively
correlated with HLA-A, which may be regulated
by competing with the sponging microRNAs. Chen et al.
also identified a similar expression relationship (r = 0.45,
P value = 1e−3), and predicted the potential sponging
microRNAs [29]. In our study, miR-6823-5p was predicted
to be the most likely candidate that could both
bind to the HCG4B and 3′UTR of HLA-A (Additional
file 7). As one of the important components of the major
histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I), HLA-A can
influence the CD8+ T-cell response to infected hepatocytes
[30] and the levels of cytokine production that
greatly associated with the development of autoimmune
inflammation [31]. Low copies of HLA-A and its expression
level in AsC controls may alleviate inflammation and
reduce the risk of ACLF under unknown situations.
Notably, an associated duplicated segment on 8p23.1,
containing a cluster of six β defensin genes (DEFB), also
tended to appear in HBV-related ACLF patients. DEFB
may act as an effective pro-inflammatory factor and also
have a strong antiviral effect [32, 33]. Multiple copies of
DEFB can enhance host immune activity. Firstly, DEFB
can function as chemokines that modulate immune cell
migration properties and the localization of target cells
such as monocytes, macrophages, immature dendritic
cells (DCs), memory T cells, and mast cells [34–37]. Secondly,
DEFB are pro-inflammatory and increase the levels
of secreted pro-inflammatory molecules TNF-α and
IL-6 levels [38].
Our GWAS results indicated a potential excessive
inflammatory response in HBV-related ACLF patients or
an alleviated inflammatory response in AsC individuals.
An excessive inflammatory response may induce tissue
damage and organ failure [39], and the systemic inflammation
is a potential major driver of ACLF [40]. The
related plasma levels of cytokines such as IL-6, IL-10,
G-CSF and GM-CSF were higher in ACLF patients
(P < 0.05) than that in controls [40], and could be associated
with the severity and mortality of ACLF [2]. Other
than the intensity of the inflammatory response, inflammation-
induced tissue damage also depends on the
intrinsic capacity of host organs to endure the inflammatory
response (individual difference) [39], which is one of
the possible reasons that a certain number of AsC individuals
contain the risk CNVs but do not reveal symptoms
of ACLF.
There are some limitations in the present study. Firstly,
there is still a lack of other cohorts or effective experimental
techniques to verify the positive results. Secondly,
the transcriptome data is not from the samples of this
study, and only reflects gene expression in monocytes.
Although it can partly illuminate what HBV-related
ACLF patients face, more data in regards to this complex
disease should be collected to fully illustrate the true
expression pattern among different immune cell subsets.
Thirdly, although we have initially observed the possibility
of a competitive relationship between HLA-A and
HCG4B, the sponging miRNA should be further predicted
and validated by further exact methods, perhaps
by using small RNA sequencing technology and double
luciferase reporter gene experiment. Lastly, it is difficult
to assess the true effect of these potential risk CNVs in
different populations due to the inherent differences
among individuals (such as the capacity of enduring the
inflammatory response) or other unknown factors.
Conclusions
The current study observed significant difference in burden
of rare CNVs between HBV-related ACLF patients
and AsC controls, and also identified a series of disease
associated CNVs. The risk CNVs in ACLF patients may
further lead to changes of host immunity. Firstly, fewer
copies of leukocyte transendothelial migration related
genes in patients likely decrease the host cellular immunity.
Secondly, copy number variation of genes such as
MST1L, DEFB and HCG4B can potentially enhance the
inflammatory response of patients during an HBV infection.
Our results confirmed that host CNVs can affect the
onset of HBV-related ACLF. Future work should foucus
on the influence of gene dosage on related pathology,
especially abnormal inflammatory response.