Background
There are currently over 6000 monogenic diseases according
to OMIM [1]. Different DNA alterations may
cause a disease, however the main reason of monogenic
diseases is a pathogenic single nucleotide variant (SNV).
SNVs account for approximately 90% of all records in
ClinVar [2] database (Fig. 1a), 23% of which are pathogenic
or likely pathogenic (Fig. 1b). Modern molecular
genetic techniques, early diagnostics and advanced
symptomatic and pathogenic treatment for many hereditary
diseases are now available. Despite significant
advancement in treating orphan diseases true cure is
possible only by direct correction of mutated genes.
Genome editing is thought to be the main breakthrough
in treating monogenic diseases. The CRISPR/Cas9 system
is one of the most popular tools to make changes in
genome. It’s based on inducing targeted single- or
double-stranded break (DSB) in DNA which is then
repaired by either non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)
or homology directed repair (HDR). Both approaches
are used for the development of new genome editing
therapeutic approaches – HDR is used to correct targeted
mutations while NHEJ can be used to universally
skip exons with any pathogenic mutations [3]. However
all developed methods have very low efficiency with high
level of unwanted events mainly due to the DSB. Moreover
it was reported that DSB may be the reason of large
deletions and rearrangements [4]. NHEJ is the dominating
DNA repair mechanism, but it’s not precise and
small insertions and deletions at the place of DSB are
typical. Even in those cases when HDR successfully occurs
the majority of DSBs are repaired by NHEJ.
New methods [5] can solve this problem by direct correction
of individual nucleotides without inducing DSB
repaired by NHEJ. CRISPR-Cas9-based single nucleotide
editors developed recently may help to overcome the
main obstacle in precise correction of SNVs. Their main
characteristic is the direct change of the targeted nucleotide
without inducing DNA breakes.
There are two major types of base editors (BEs).
Earlier developed C- > T editors are built of CRISPRnuclease
fused to cytidine deaminase [6]. Cas9/Cpf1
together with small guide RNA (sgRNA) target the
construct to a specific DNA locus and cytidine deaminase
converts C to T. Later developed A- > G editors
use adenine deaminase. Consequently both systems
depend greatly on the properties of the CRISPR protein.
Cas9 has a major PAM sequence NGG placed at
the 3’end of the targeted locus. Cpf1 uses PAM at
the 5′-end of the sgRNA. We use numerating of the
nucleotides in this work starting from the PAM: − 1,
− 2, − 3… for Cas9 and + 1, + 2, + 3 for Cpf1. Both
systems can typically edit nucleotides in the range of
4–11 nucleotides (− 17 – − 10 for Cas9) (Fig. 2). The
width and position of the editing window depend on
the properties of the deaminase and the linker between
the deaminase and programmable nuclease.
There are engineered nucleases with different PAMs
which enlarges the number of potentially targetable
DNA sequences. BEs don’t need double-stranded
DNA breaks because the can successfully work with
nicks of the single DNA strand. This fact is very important
for the development of safe DNA-editing systems
with low risk of off-target events.
Here we describe all known BEs. We also performed
analysis to find all possible pathogenic variants which
can be efficiently targeted by any of the described systems
and present them for further selection and development
of targeted therapies.
Methods
ClinVar database (GRCh37_clinvar_20171203) was used
to search and select mutations available for current
single-base editing systems. We included only pathogenic
and likely pathogenic variants for further analysis.
Genome assembly hg19 was used as a reference.
Generally in order to target the specific mutation the
Cas9-based system needs a PAM sequence. For every
potentially editable mutation the PAM sequence should
be in the interval dependent on the sgRNA length and
width of the editing window of the specific BE. So the
PAM sequence was searched in the window with coordinates
[lengthsgRNA – Y; lengthsgRNA – X + lengthPAM]
starting from mutation location (Fig. 3, a). Where
lengthsgRNA is typically 20 for most of the systems,
lengthPAM is typically 3 and X and Y are the coordinates
of the editing window for the particular BE if to count
nucleotides from the 5′ end of the sgRNA. These calculations
allowed to find the PAM in such a distance from
the mutations that if and when BE would be applied the
mutation will be found in the editable window.
If a PAM was found, we analyzed the editing window
to find sequences with only one nucleotide (mutated)
which can be edited without risk of changing neighboring
nucleotides (Fig. 3, b). Detailed characteristics of the
analyzed BEs are presented in the Table 1.
The code of the script to search the database and to
analyze the sequences was written in R and is available
in the Additional file 2.
Results
Editing systems are able to convert G(C) > A(T) and
A(T) > G(C), which allows in theory to correct 68% of all
mutations registered in ClinVar (A(T) > G(C) – 21% and
G(C) > A(T) – 47% respectively) (Fig. 1,c). We selected
only pathogenic and likely pathogenic mutations – 21%
of all ClinVar records. Therefore, the total number of
analyzed mutations was 27,310.
We developed the R script to analyze 21 editing system
currently reported in 9 publications. Every system
has different working characteristics such as the editing
window and PAM sequence which are summarized in
the Table 1. C > T BEs have a lot of PAMs with the most
popular NGG, and editing window is in the range of −
20 to − 5. For G > A mutations there are 2 systems with
NGG/NGV/GAT PAMs and typical window from − 17
to − 12.
Firstly, we searched for available PAMs near the target
mutation (Fig. 2,a). Exact area of searching depends on
the length of the editing window and length of the
sgRNA. It was possible to find several PAMs in the designated
area, which were analyzed individually. For all
C > T BEs, we found 6415 potential targets which constitutes
93% of all T > C pathogenic mutations. ABE systems
can edit 13,683 mutations (67% of G > A
pathogenic mutations).
Then we analyzed editing windows around selected
mutations to check for the presence of other C(G) or
A(T) nucleotides which could be nonspecifically edited
together with targeted mutations. We selected only
those mutations, which have no other targets near them
(Table 2). As a result, for C > T systems we select 3196
variants, it is approximately 46% of all pathogenic mutations,
and 6900 mutations (34% of all pathogenic) for
A > G systems.
The first successful single-base editor was presented in
2016 by A. Komor with colleagues [6]. The editor consists
of nuclease-deficient Cas9 fused with APOBEC1 cytidine
deaminase. Cas9 with sgRNA targets the complex to
DNA. Deaminase converts any cytosine into uracil in the
range of 8 nucleotides from − 18 to − 11 of the targeted
sequence from PAM with the overall frequency of 37%.
Uracil is later repaired to thymine. The width and exact
position of the window depends on the protein structure
and linker length. Uracil glycosylase inhibitor was introduced
to the complex to inhibit U-to-C back conversion.
And finally the authors partially restored nuclease activity
to cut the strand complementary to the converted nucleotide.
This editor was called third-generation base editor –
BE3. Later the same authors managed to develop
additional systems with different editing windows and
PAM sequences by changing deaminase linker length and
Cas9 enzyme [7]. They succeeded in reducing window by
different mutations: − 17 to − 12 for A-BE3(R126A), − 17
to − 13 for Y-BE3(W90Y), − 16 to − 14 for FEBE3(
W90F + R126E) and − 16 to − 15 for YEEBE3(
W90Y + R126E + R132E). Also, authors analyzed new
Cas9 variants with altered PAMs: NGAN (VQR-Cas9)
with − 17 to − 10 window and YE1-VQR-BE3 with − 16 to
− 15 window, NGAG (EQR-Cas9) with − 17 to − 10 window,
NGCG (VRER-Cas9) with − 19 to − 10 window. In
addition, they use Cas9 homolog from Staphylococcus
aureus (SaCas9) with PAM NNGRRT (− 15 to −9 window)
and an engineered SaCas9 variant containing three
mutations (SaKKH-Cas9) with PAM NNNRRT (− 15 to −
9 window).
K. Nishida with colleagues presented a very similar
editor based on another enzyme – activation-induced
cytidine deaminase (PmCDA1) and nCas9 (D10A) [8].
The main difference was the editing window from − 20
to − 16 nucleotide of the targeted sequence. System
demonstrated approximately 60% editing frequency in
mammalian cells, with off-target mutations in lower than
1.5%. We found that nCas9(D10A)-PmCDA can target
2544 A(T) > G(C) mutations and 566 of them may be
corrected without affecting nearby nucleotides.
W. Jiang with his team made a system with the longest
editing window from − 16 to − 5 [9]. In 2018 J Hu et al.
described modified Cas protein (xCas9) with increased
number of PAMs: NG, GAA, and GAT [10].
Not only PAM sequence but also its position relative
to the targeted mutations limits the usage of BEs,
especially in the AT-rich regions, which are difficult
to find PAMs typical for Cas9-based systems. Cpf1
has a different PAM sequence – TTTV which is also
recognized upstream from the targeted sequen
unlike NGG which goes immediately after targeted
DNA. Cpf1 fusion with APOBEC1 allows targeting
AT-rich sequences [11]. There are 2 systems with different
editing windows: dCpf1-eBE from 8 to 13 and
dCpf1-eBE-YE from 10 to 12.
J. Gehrke and his team tried to develop more precise
BE3-based systems depending on the nucleotides neighboring
the targeted mutation with TCR > TCY > VCN
hierarchy [12].
Most of the pathogenic mutations are G(C) > A(T)
substitutions (47%) (Fig. 1, C). That is why adenine base
editor would be of great practical importance allowing
correction of almost half of all mutations. However there
are no natural enzymes able to convert A(T) to G(C). By
direct genetic and protein engineering adenine base editor
(ABE) was developed by Gaudelli NM et al. [14].
ABE consists of adenine deaminase TadA and Cas9 protein
(ABE7.10). Substitution of adenine to guanine occurs
in a window from − 17 to − 12 nucleotides of the
targeted sequence with a probability of 60%. ABE7.10
base editor can target 7044 G(C) > A(T) mutations in the
− 17 / -12 nucleotide window. Over 2/3 of them (2568)
can be specifically targeted in the regions without other
A(T). With modification of Cas9 and availability of additional
PAMs [9] the system managed to target almost 3
times more mutations - 6829.
The full list of all targetable mutations is available in
the Additional file 1.
Discussion
Single base editors (BE) are very promising genetic tools
for safe targeted correction of single nucleotide variants.
They reduce the risk of indels aroused during repairing
double stranded breaks. However base editors have wide
editing windows and this fact which limits their potential
use in editing targeted single nucleotides. Usually each
nucleotide is repeated in DNA sequence in the range of
8–10 nucleotides which is the typical window width of
base editors. Though there is a significant progress in
the development of new BE with narrow editing windows
[11] unfortunately, none of the BEs is ideally specific.
Even recently developed highly specific editors
claimed by the authors to edit 1–2 nucleotides at some
tested loci still have a window of several nucleotides edited
at very low frequency [13]. It means that if there are
several targets in the window, the enzyme can edit all of
them, but not only the desired target. It’s reasonable to
select the most safe targets for possible genome editing
with BE especially for the development of treatment
in vivo. Therefore we analyzed editing windows around
selected mutations to select only those which can be edited
absolutely safely.
We demonstrated that about 37% of all pathogenic
and likely pathogenic single nucleotide variants can
be safely edited without chances to convert neighbor
nucleotides. These mutations are found in 2364 genes
and are responsible for the development of 4000 diseases
or syndromes (based on MedGen https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen/). It’s interesting to note,
that 779 mutations can be edited by more than 3 analyzed
BEs, which opens great potential for optimizing
editing protocols.
For example one pathogenic variant NM_001005463.2:
c.196A > G described in ataxia with delayed development
(OMIM 617330) can be targeted by 13 different systems
with 17 different sgRNAs (Table 3).
The non-mutated T in the genome is highlighted in
bold capital letter. Since the real BE converts C > U > T,
all A > G mutations were also converted to complementary
sequences and algorithm was applied to the complementary
sequence (containing C as a mutation but
not G) if necessary. That is why the table contains only
“T”s as reference nucleotides. Despite big difference in
the editing length none of the windows contains Cytosine,
which could be unintentionally edited together with
T > C (A > G).
Conclusions
CRISPR/Cas9 base editors allow to precisely target 46%
of all T > C pathogenic mutations and 34% of all G > A
pathogenic mutations. Protein engineering helps to develop
new enzymes with even narrower window of editing
which makes the editors more precise. Newly
engineered Cas9 enzymes recognize various PAM sequences.
Additionally the linker length between Cas9
and deaminase may help to shift the editing window to
further widen the capabilities of base editors. However,
even now the list of mutations which can be targeted
with currently available systems is huge and allows to
choose and to develop new targeted genome editing
therapies.