Thalassemia is a common hereditary hemolytic anemia
in Thailand. About 30–40% of Thai population carries at
least one of the abnormal globin genes [1]. Clinical severity
of thalassemia varies greatly and could be classified
as non-transfusion dependent thalassemia (NTDT)
which requires occasional blood transfusion in specific
situations and transfusion dependent thalassemia patients
(TDT) which requires regular blood transfusion
[2, 3]. Long-term blood transfusion and increased iron
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract lead to iron
overload, which can result in peroxidative damages to
cells, organelles and membranes. The cellular damage
associated with iron overload is mainly mediated by the
state of oxidative stress and the effect of free oxygen radicals
on various cell components and tissue [4–6].
Telomeres are the terminal section of chromosomes
consisting of hexameric protein repeats amino acid (5′-
TTAGGG-3′). The telomeres play roles in stabilization
of chromosomes, protection of DNA from end to end
fusion and reparation of DNA. At each cell division,
telomeres become shorter and finally reach a critically
short length when their function will be lost. This means
that cells can no longer divide and results in cellular
aging and apoptosis [7, 8].
The length of the telomeres in leukocytes can be used
as an indication of good health, aging and longevity of
the cell. Some human disorders associated with shorter
telomere length originate from defective function of telomerase,
an enzyme that extends the telomeres of chromosomes.
Certain diseases originating from mutations
in genes controlling the DNA repair system also result
in accelerated telomere shortening and premature aging.
One such condition is aplastic anemia. The mechanism
of anabolic hormones is their effect on telomere length.
The anabolic hormones are used to treat aplastic anemia
and telomere-associated diseases. According to this information,
development of the drugs that effect telomere
length or factors that influence telomere length will be
useful for thalassemia patients [7–10].
There is limited data about telomere length in patients
with thalassemia. Chaichompoo et al reported that the
rate of telomere shortening in patients with betathalassemia/
hemoglobin E disease was accelerated when
compared to normal individuals. Oxidative stress is one
of the factors contributing to erosion of telomeres and
cell replication capability. It was also demonstrated that
the telomere shortening was associated with the clinical
severity of thalassemia [11].
There is limited data about telomere length in TDT
patients who have more iron overload and oxidative
stress. We conducted the study in patients with TDT
who had severe clinical symptoms. Both alpha and beta
thalassemia patients were included to define the clinical
factors that were associated with telomere shortening.
Methods
Study population and definition
We conducted a cross-sectional study in patients with
TDT, aged 18 years and up, who attended Adult
Hematology clinic at Chiang Mai University Hospital.
TDT was defined as a patient with thalassemia who required
red cell transfusion at least 3 times per year.
Clinical and laboratory measurement
We collected clinical and laboratory parameters at the
time of enrollment to identify factors associated with
telomere length including age, sex, history of splenectomy,
iron chelation, and factors associated with clinical
severity including: pre-transfusion Hb level (mean
steady-state Hb level in the previous 10 visits), units of
red blood cell transfusion per month, serum ferritin
(maximum, minimum, mean of serum ferritin at multiple
times every year). All patients were investigated for
telomere length, liver function test (LFT), non-transferrin
bound iron (NTBI), hemolysis parameters, MRI for cardiac
T2 star (T2*) and liver iron concentration (LIC).
Thirty healthy individuals, age and sex-matched, were included
as controls and were tested for telomere length.
Blood samples and genomic DNA extraction
Blood samples (10 mL) were collected from the patients
and healthy individuals in ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) tubes. Peripheral blood leukocytes were
collected from blood samples by gradient density centrifugation
through HiSep (HIMEDIA, Mumbai, India) and
stored at − 80 °C before they were used. In our study, we
used the Blood DNA Extraction Kit (OMEGA, Norcross,
GA, USA) to extract genomic DNA from the peripheral
blood leukocytes.
Telomere length measurement
Telomere length was measured by using a real-time
quantitative PCR as described by Cawthon, RM et al.
[12]. The telomere/single copy gene (T/S) ratio was calculated
as the ratio of telomere repeat copies (T) to
single-copy gene copy number and albumin gene (S) to
represent the average length of telomere, which by definition
is 1.00. The specificity of all amplifications was determined
by a melting curve analysis. DNA from healthy
individuals which have a T/S ratio of 1.00 were used as a
reference DNA sample (the ‘standard DNA’). Four concentrations
of the standard human genomic DNA samples
were prepared by 3-fold serial dilutions (70 ng,
23.33 ng, 7.77 ng, and 2.59 ng per well), and aliquoted in
duplicate to a 96-well PCR plate. The primers for amplification
of the scg albumin are albumin forward primer,
albu: 5′-CGGCGGCGGGCGGCGCGGGCTGGGCGGA
AATGCTGCACAGAATCCTTG-3′ and albumin reverse
primer, albd: 5′-GCCCGGCCCGCCGCGCCCGTCC
CGCCGGAAAAGCATGGTCGCCTGTT-3′; telomere
forward primer, telg, 5′-ACACTAAGGTTTGGGTTT
GGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTAGTGT-3′ and telomere reverse
primer, telc, 5′-TGTTAGGTATCCCTATCCCTATCCCTATCCCTATCCCTAACA-
3′. The thermal
cycling profile was Stage 1: 15 min at 95 °C; Stage 2: 2 cycles
of 15 s at 94 °C, 15 s at 49 °C; and Stage 3: 32 cycles of
15 s at 94 °C, 10 s at 62 °C, 15 s at 74 °C with signal acquisition,
10 s at 84 °C, 15 s at 88 °C with signal acquisition.
All samples were assayed in triplicates in order to
minimize the sample-to-sample variation. Once PCR has
completed, the Applied Biosystems QuantStudio™ 6 Flex
Real-Time PCR analysis software was used to determine
the T and S values for each experimental sample based on
the standard curve method (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA, USA). The results of telomere length from PCR
were expressed as T/S ratio.
Statistical analysis
Mean telomere length (T/S ratio) of patients was compared
with the ratio obtained from the controls by using
a Student’s T-test. We examined the association of clinical
factors and the T/S ratio using ANOVA (F-test).
Multivariable regression analysis was performed using a
forward selection technique. We proposed to examine
age, pre-transfusion hemoglobin level and type of iron
chelator. The correlation coefficient between the T/S
ratio and each parameter value was calculated using
Pearson’s correlation. The significance level was set at a
p value < 0.05.
Compliance with ethical standards
Informed consents were completed by all patients before
enrollment. This study was approved by the Human Research
Ethics Committee of Faculty of Medicine, Chiang
Mai University. (study code: MED-2559-03967).
Results
Sixty-five TDT patients were enrolled onto this study.
There were 37 female patients (57.4%). The median age
was 27.0 years (range 18–57). The mean pre-transfusion
Hb level was 7.1 (± 1.07) g/dL. The beta-thalassemia/Hb
E was the majority with 39 patients (57.4%) as shown in
Table 1. Thirty age and sex-matched healthy subjects
were enrolled in the control group. The median age was
30 (18–50) years. There were 19 females (63.33%). The
age and gender distribution were not different between
the patient and control groups (p = 0.07 and p = 0.55
respectively).
T/S ratio in TDT patients compared to control group
The mean T/S ratio of the TDT group was 0.72 ± 0.18.
The mean T/S ratio of the control group was 0.99 ±
0.25. TDT patients had a statistically significant shorter
T/S ratio compared to the control group (p < 0.0001).
(Fig. 1).
Factor associated with telomere length in TDT patients
The correlation coefficients were calculated by Pearson’s
method. Moderate negative correlations were seen between
the mean T/S ratio and age (r = − 0.4435, p =
0.0001), Fig. 2, and there was a positive correlation with
pre-transfusion Hb level (r = 0.2508, p = 0.044), Fig. 3.
The multivariate analysis factor showed that telomere
length shortening was associated with age (p < 0.0001)
and pre-transfusion Hb level (p = 0.02).
Sixty-three patients received iron chelation therapy,
thirteen patients received deferoxamine monotherapy and
6 patients received deferoxamine combined with other
iron chelator. Patients who received combination therapy
had higher serum ferritin level more than patients who received
monotherapy. There were 2 patients who did not
receive iron chelation because of severe adverse effects
from iron chelators. We found that the type of iron chelation
therapy resulted in a difference in mean T/S ratio.
Two patients who did not receive iron chelation had a
shorter T/S ratio (0.41 and 0.60) compared to patients
who received iron chelation, and patients who received
deferoxamine as an iron chelator had the longest mean T/
S ratio compared to other iron chelators (0.87) (p = 0.008).
There was no correlation between T/S ratio and other
laboratory parameters including reticulocyte count, ferritin
level, cardiac T2*, liver iron concentration, NTBI, or
hemolysis parameters such as reticulocytes and liver enzymes.
(Table 2) The multivariate analysis showed that
only the age (p < 0.0001) and pre-transfusion Hb level
(p = 0.027) were significantly associated with T/S ratio.
No difference was found between T/S ratio and gender
(p = 0.068), type of thalassemia (p = 0.87), and splenectomy
(p = 0.36). The majority of the population of patients
had a high LIC [LIC 7–15 mg/g 25 (36.8%), > 15
mg/g 28 (41.2%)] and there was a trend of a lower T/S
ratio in the high LIC group but this was not statistically
significant (p = 0.6).
Discussion
Telomere length is a well-known biomarker of cellular
senescence [13–15]. Our study demonstrated that patients
with TDT had a shorter telomere length as reflected by
the lower T/S ratio when compared with healthy controls.
The telomere shortening was associated with the age and
pre-transfusion Hb level. This finding suggested that patients
with severe thalassemia exhibited accelerated telomere
shortening. There was no statistically significant
correlation between telomere length and other factors
such as sex, reticulocyte count, ferritin, cardiac T2*, LIC,
NTBI, and hemolysis parameters.
A recent study in patients with beta-thalassemia/HbE
disease showed that accelerated telomere shortening was
found only in patients who had severe clinical symptoms.
Telomere length associated with aging was only
found in patients with mild clinical symptoms but not in
the groups with moderate and severe clinical symptoms.
Reticulocyte count showed a correlation with telomere
shortening. It was suggested that enhanced erythropoiesis
in beta-thalassemia/HbE disease caused accelerated telomere
shortening and demonstrated a disease-dependent
trend that was not related to aging but is associated with
reticulocytes [11]. This finding was in agreement with our
study in that the more clinical severe the symptoms, the
shorter of telomere length. The difference in our study
was the identification of pre-transfusion Hb level as an indicator
for disease severity, and not reticulocyte count.
The explanation for this may be from the cross-sectional
information as a spot reticulocyte count value may not
represent the true reticulocyte count. In addition, some
patients had other medical conditions that could influence
reticulocyte count such as endocrinopathy and heart
disease [16, 17].
Elevated body iron level leads to increased oxidative
stress and long term exposure to oxidative stress leads
to accelerated telomere shortening. Studies of hereditary
hemochromatosis showed that elevated iron levels were
associated with telomere shortening [18, 19]. However,
we found no correlation between serum ferritin level
and telomere length. This result was similar to the report
in beta-thalassemia/Hb E disease [9], but differed
from the findings in hereditary hemochromatosis [18,
19]. This may be explained by the different population
in the study and the method of body iron measurement.
However, in our study, telomere length in patients who
had LIC > 15 mg/g had a tendency to be shorter than
those in the group of low LIC but the findings were not
statistically significant. Tissue iron may represent the
body iron status of patients and is associated with accelerated
shortening telomere length.
From our study, two patients who did not receive iron
chelation due to severe adverse reactions to all chelation
drugs had a shorter telomere length than other patients
who received iron chelation. Patients who received deferoxamine
had the longest telomere length. We hypothesized
that the antioxidant effects of deferoxamine might
be the protecting factor [20]. Other previous studies
showed that an antioxidant may help to protect against
telomere length shortening [21, 22]. However, this finding
about iron chelators needs to be interpreted carefully
as patients who needed combination iron chelators may
have had higher iron burden and experienced more
chronic oxidative stress. Further studies should be conducted
to evaluate the impact of iron chelation on telomere
length.
The limitation of this study was that the telomere
length was measured only by the MMQPCR method,
but not by the Southern blot method which was the gold
standard. However, our previous study validated the
MMQPCR method which was described by Cawthon
et al. by comparing with the standard telomere length
analysis. The results confirmed that the MMQPCR technique
was a good method to measure telomere length. It
would be interesting in the future to explore the telomere
length in NTDT patients and compare with TDT
patients and controls, as the disease pathophysiology is
different and NTDT patients have a wide spectrum of
disease severity.
Conclusion
Our study showed that patients with TDT had shorter
telomeres. Telomere shortening in TDT thalassemia patients
was an age-dependent process and was associated
with greater clinical severity. Iron chelation may have a
role to control telomere shortening. Further studies are
needed for drugs targeting telomeres, for example testosterone
that has been used for telomere elongation in
patients with telomere diseases [23, 24] and antioxidants
that can protect telomeres from oxidative stress [21, 22]
for their role in improving the treatment outcomes in
patients with TDT.