Background
Active adults are among the group of people who always
have been interested in ergogenic aids, including caffeine
effect on sports performance [1]. Since the 1970s, caffeine
has been researched for its role in sports performance
[1], yet researches have inconsistent results regarding the
effect of caffeine on aerobic and anaerobic exercises. This
study will determine the association between caffeine and
aerobic/anaerobic exercises, in different gyms in Tripoli-
Lebanon. McDaniel et al. [2] revealed in their research,
two types of workouts, anaerobic and aerobic exercises
which are high and low intense respectively. Khoury and
Jonville [3] studied the prevalence of people exercising in
different gyms in Beirut city. The results have shown that
out of 512 participants, most of them were men (60.9%).
Those participants aged between 20 and 50 years exercise
routinely 3–5 times per week [3]. People in Lebanon,
especially university students, tend to be addicted to caffeine
consumption. A study has shown that 97% of 800
students from different universities in Lebanon drink
around 193 mg of caffeine per day [3, 4]. Sachse et al. [5]
studied the individual variation following caffeine consumption.
The results have shown that some individuals
can metabolize caffeine faster than others, resulting in
better sports performance [6, 7].
Kaczka et al. [8] have demonstrated that supplements
including caffeine have a positive effect on anaerobic
activities, especially in delaying fatigue and increasing
strength. Madden et al. [9] also found that the rating of
perceived exertion and physical performance was higher
in the group of individuals ingesting caffeine. McDaniel
et al.’s [2] theory suggested that caffeine consumption had
a direct effect on the central nervous system by increasing
alertness and decreasing fatigue. Caffeine consumption
had a positive association with aerobic and anaerobic
exercises [2, 10]. McDaniel et al. [2] have found that caffeine
consumption increases productivity while performing
aerobic and anaerobic exercises. Yet, it had no effect
on reducing fatigue after soccer game [11], while physical
performance is only improved after caffeine consumption
when performing anaerobic activities [2, 9]. Since
the literature has inconsistent results regarding the effect
of caffeine on anaerobic and aerobic exercises, this study
is concerned with determining the association between
caffeine and aerobic/anaerobic exercises. We hypothesize
that caffeine consumption has positive association with
both aerobic and anaerobic exercises.
Methods
Study design
This Cross-sectional study conducted between caffeine
consumption and physical activity aims to investigate
the impact of caffeine consumption on perceived performance
among a group of adults that are sustaining regular
gym activity in Tripoli.
Sample recruitment and selection
Recruitment of gyms
We employed a random sampling technique by visiting
all 10 gyms in the city centre of Tripoli, Lebanon,
and recruiting adults who were active in these gyms to
take part in the study. All participants in these gyms had
access to aerobic and anaerobic activities. Our exclusion
criteria include gyms with a population fewer than 30
individuals as well as single-sex gyms. Accordingly, two
gyms were excluded for not fitting these criteria. Moreover,
one gym’s administration refused to participate in the
study. As such, a total of 7 gyms meeting these criteria
were included. The population size of all individuals who
use these gyms is 1750.
Recruitment of population
Our population included all adults who are physically
active in the area of Tripoli, Lebanon. Full lists of
customers were provided by each gym and we randomly
picked a sample from each. One gym refused to provide
a list of its customers, therefore, we estimated the total
number based on the size and importance of the gym in
the area, and the population size of similar gyms. The
population size of all individuals who use these gyms is
1750. Based on the method introduced by Krejcie and
Morgan (1970), and cited in Goyette [12, 13], we calculated
a minimum sample size of n = 193 for detecting the
effect of caffeine on aerobic/anaerobic exercise, while
accounting for 10% non-response this number increased
to 214. A total of 31 individuals from each gym were
invited to participate in the study.
Exclusion and inclusion criteria of the sample
All individuals who consume products containing caffeine
and perform aerobic and/or anaerobic exercise
in different gyms in Tripoli- Lebanon were included in
our sample. Participants not meeting these criteria were
excluded. All participants voluntarily agreed to take part
in the study research and understood what is required of
them.
Data collection
Data was collected inside the targeted gyms by the main
student. The student visited gyms for 8 days between 5
and 8 pm, which were indicated as the busiest hours by
the gym administrations. In each gym, the student stayed
at the reception desk and randomly invited participants
who had finished their exercise session to fill in the survey
in the English language. Data collection took place
after the consent and approval of the key informants, i.e.
gym administrations were obtained. On average, participants
spent 15 min filling the survey. Some participants
completed the survey on their own and others sought the
support of the student to understand and answer some
questions. There were 206 gym goers who filled the survey,
giving a response rate of 94.9%.
Data collection tool
Our main data collection tool was a questionnaire that
surveys participants about their caffeine consumption
habits, their physical activity, and their perception of
the association between these two variables [14, 15]. We
chose questionnaires due to the feasibility and convenience
of their administration, as well as their low cost and
efficiency. Additionally, questionnaires are a suitable tool
for investigating our research questions using a quantitative
approach given that they can be conducted in large
numbers, which increases the reliability and confidence
in our results.
Data analysis
Survey data were entered into SPSS, version 22, by the
main student. Moreover, various types of statistical analysis
were done using SPSS, depending on the nature and
content of the questions and answers. Frequencies and
descriptive statistics were performed for the first two
sections of the questionnaire (socio-demographic Questions
and Health Questions), duration of aerobic exercise,
frequencies of aerobic and anaerobic exercise, and frequency
of caffeine consumption.
In addition to descriptive analysis, reliability test, factor
analysis, and correlations were conducted to assess
the association between caffeine consumption and aerobic
and anaerobic exercises. Since our 16 items related
to individual beliefs about the effect of caffeine reflect
different dimensions underlying caffeine beliefs, we can
proceed with conducting a factor analysis. However, for
confirmation, the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) test and
Bartlett’s test for sphericity were conducted on the 16
items [14]. The KMO test assesses how suitable the data
is for factor analysis and it is a measure of the proportion
of variance among items that might have common
variance. The larger the proportion, the more suitable the
data is for factor analysis. KMO values between 0.8 and 1
indicate that the sampling is adequate and factor analysis
is meritorious or marvelous [14].
Independent and dependent variables
There are 3 main dependent variables (DVs) that will be
assessed in this study: (1) aerobic exercise frequency,
(2) aerobic exercise duration, and (3) anaerobic exercise
frequency. These three variables are assessed first,
based on two questions that ask respondents to describe
how frequently they practice each type of exercise, on
a scale from 0 to 7 (0 = rarely/never and 7 = multiple
sessions day). Second, the aerobic duration of exercise
was assessed asking respondents to describe their
aerobic duration with a time range of less than 30 min
to more than 90 min (< 30 min, 30–60 min, 61–90 min
and > 90 min). The independent variables (IV) that will
be assessed in this study are related to caffeine questions
that ask respondents to rate their level of agreement
on the following items using the Likert scale: “caffeine
improves athletic performance”, “workouts are better
after having caffeine”, “caffeine increases my motivation
to work”, “I would be unable to function without caffeine”,
“I can exercise longer if I have caffeine”, “caffeine picks me
up when I’m feeling tired”, “caffeine improves my mood”,
“caffeine improves my concentration”, “caffeine helps me
work over a long period of time”, “caffeine improves my
attention”, “caffeine makes me feel more energetic”, “I feel
less sleepy after having caffeine”, “caffeine at any time
throws off my sleep”, and “caffeine makes me feel more
alert”.
Results
Demographics
Results showed that out of the total of 214 invited participants,
206 participants covering 7 gyms participated
in our study. Our study yielded a response rate of 96.26%
across gyms. Participants (n = 206) included 151 males
(73.3%), 54 females (26.2%) and 1 not stating gender. The
majority of our sample (76.1%) were between the ages of
18 and 35, 14.1% of it were below 18, and the remaining
9.8% were 36 and above.
Description of exercise type and frequency
among the study sample
Our results suggest that respondents had diverse exercise
types, with 63.6% of the sample reporting that they practice
both aerobic and anaerobic exercise, 18.4% reporting
that they practice only anaerobic exercise, and 14.6%
saying that their exercise is aerobic. Across these diverse
exercise types, 54.8% of the sample has been working
for a duration of more than 6 months, indicating that
the sample is generally experienced with athletic performance
and physical activity. Additionally, 33.5% which
represents the majority of our respondents work out for a
duration of 30–60 min, Also, 30.9% of respondents spend
61–90 min during their workouts. Consequently, 14.9%
of the participants’ report that they work out for less than
30 min and 19.1% of them practice for more than 90 min
indicating that the participants work out for a good
amount of time.
For most of the following analyses, participants will
be distributed in two pools, those who practice aerobic
exercise (
n1 = 161) and those who do anaerobic exercise
(
n2 = 169). The mean frequency of exercise among pool
1 (aerobic exercise) is 4.31 days/week (SE = 0.334) and
that among pool 2 (anaerobic exercise) is 4.40 days/week
(SE = 0.143).
The majority of our participants from both pools,
anaerobic exercise and aerobic exercise, report that
they exercise for 5–6 days/week. As shown in Fig. 1,
30.7–31.8% practice anaerobic exercise 5–6 days respectively.
Additionally, 29.2–31.2% practice aerobic exercise
5–6 days respectively (Fig. 2).
Individual beliefs about the effect of caffeine
Caffeine consumption was popular in our sample, with
92.2% indicating that they use a certain caffeinated
product, most commonly coffee, soft drinks, and tea.
The caffeine expectancy questionnaire included statements
related to the influence of caffeine and asked
participants to rate their level of agreement with the
statements. Table 1 shows that participants agreed the
most with the statement “caffeine picks me up when I
am feeling tired” (Mean = 3.55, SE = 0.252) and disagreed
the most with the statement “I am easily stressed
after having caffeine” (Mean = 2.41, SE = 0.172) suggesting
that the sample is experienced with similar
knowledge about the effect of caffeine.
Reliability test
The reliability coefficients were conducted for the caffeine
questions (independent variables) that consisted
of 16 items. The resulting Cronbach’s alpha was equal
to 0.901 which is above 0.7 demonstrating a good level
of reliability. Scores demonstrated an acceptable level of
reliability. Thus, caffeine questions are consistent, all reliably
measure the same independent variable related to
individual beliefs of caffeine consumption.
Factor analysis
We found that KMO is 0.887 implying that the sampling
is adequate and factor analysis is meritorious or marvelous.
The Bartlett’s test was significant (p < 0.0001)
indicating that the items were correlated and therefore
suitable for data dimension reduction and hence factor
analysis may be useful. Thus, the results of both KMO
and Bartlett’s tests agreed that a factor analysis can be
conducted.
The output in (Fig. 3) mainly shows the presence of the
first, second and third factors as influential points with
well-presented angles. Therefore, we conclude that the
data may be reduced to three factors only which are factor
1 related to physical performance, factor 2 related to
work durability, and factor 3 related to productivity.
In the following Table 2, we show the results obtained
from the factor analysis with the percentage of variances
and the eigenvalues obtained for all factors. The first four
factors have a total of 67.8% cumulative variance. The
first three factors were included, and we excluded the
fourth one since it reflects a small number of items. In
addition, items underlying this factor were detected as
outliers.
The eigenvectors for the first three factors, are presented
in the following Table 3. All the values of the first
vector are positive, hence the vectors were sorted by the
second and then by the third vectors. Based on the eigenvectors
values, four groups of variables were identified.
The first group of items include: 3 (caffeine improves my
athletic performance), 6 (workouts are better after having
caffeine), 7 (caffeine increases my motivation to work), 13
(I would be unable to function without caffeine) and 15 (I
can exercise longer if I have caffeine).
The second group of items with values of vectors 2
and 3 as negative include: 1 (caffeine picks me up when
I’m feeling tired), 5 (caffeine improves my mood), 11
(caffeine improves my concentration), 12 (caffeine
helps me work over a long period of time), 14 (caffeine
improves my attention) and 16 (caffeine makes me
feel more energetic). The third group of items include
4 (I feel less sleepy after having caffeine), 8 (caffeine at
any time throws off my sleep) and 10 (caffeine makes
me feel more alert). The fourth group of items with all
values positive include 2 (I am easily stressed after having
caffeine) and 9 (caffeine makes me feel nervous).
Correlation analyses
These were carried out to show the association of the
three dependent variables; aerobic exercise frequency,
aerobic exercise duration, and anaerobic exercise frequency
with the three independent variables based on
the caffeine questions; physical performance, work durability,
and productivity.
Results in Table 4 revealed the correlation between
the variables. Aerobic variables were not correlated with
any of the independent variables (all p-values were not
significant) suggesting that caffeine has no association
with aerobic activities when perceived as a physical performance
enhancer, work durability enhancer, or productivity
enhancer. However anaerobic exercise frequency
has a positive significant correlation with physical performance
(p = 0.05) and work durability (p = 0.032), but
doesn’t affect productivity.
Discussion
This cross-sectional study was conducted to examine
the association between caffeine consumption and
sports performance (aerobic and anaerobic exercises)
among active people attending gyms in Tripoli, Beirut.
Thus, we studied the relation between the independent
variable (IV), “caffeine consumption” and the dependent
variable (DV), “physical activity” (aerobic and anaerobic
exercises).
Unlike our hypothesis revealing that caffeine consumption
has a positive association with aerobic and anaerobic
exercises, our results have shown a significant association
between anaerobic exercise and caffeine when perceived
as a physical performance enhancer and work durability
enhancer, nevertheless, no association has been found
between anaerobic exercise and caffeine when perceived
as a productivity enhancer. In addition, no association
has been shown between aerobic exercise and caffeine
when perceived in different aspects: physical performance
enhancer, work durability enhancer, or productivity
enhancer.
Most of our sample were male (73.3%) active exercisers.
This result converges with those which studies the
prevalence of people exercising in different gyms of Beirut
[3]. Their results have shown that most of the 512
participants were male (60.9%). This results suggest that
men in Lebanon are more physically active compared
to women. These results are also homogenous with the
US population, which revealed that 20.6% of American
adults were physically active. Out of them, 23.4% were
men and 17.9% were women [15].
The majority of our sample (76.1%) were between the
ages of 18 and 35, 14.1% of it were below 18, and the
remaining 9.8% were 36 and above. US population is
also most likely to be active between the ages of 18 and
24 suggesting that younger people are more likely to be
physically active than older people [16].
The finding that caffeine consumption was very high
(92.2%) among the gym goers in this study is similar to
a study done on different university students in Lebanon
which indicated that 97% of 800 students used caffeine
products [4]. Despite the literature showing a positive
association between caffeine consumption and both aerobic
and anaerobic activities [2], our results showed the
absence of significant association between aerobic exercises
and the three factors for the caffeine consumption
variable: (1) caffeine as a physical performance enhancer,
(2) caffeine as work durability enhancer and (3) caffeine
as a productivity enhancer. Yet, a positive association was
shown between anaerobic exercises and factor 1 (caffeine
as physical performance enhancer) and factor 2
(caffeine as durability enhancer) but no association with
caffeine as a productivity enhancer. These results diverge
from Davis and Green [10] who showed in their research
an ergogenic effect of caffeine on both anaerobic and
aerobic exercises. In addition, caffeine has an ergogenic
effect for almost all aerobic activities like running, tennis,
walking and swimming, and anaerobic exercises [2].
In addition, our data on caffeine consumption and exercise
(aerobic and anaerobic) were collected based on past
exposure and thus our findings could be affected by recall
bias. This type of bias may underestimate the measure of
association and reduce the probability of finding a significant
association [9].
On the other hand, randomized experimental studies
have found that the intake of a moderate dose of caffeine
has an ergogenic effect on male ice hockey players
[9]. Moreover, it is important to mention that caffeine
acts differently between individuals due to genetic variations.
For example, some individuals can metabolize
caffeine metabolites faster than others, leading to a better
effect on physical performance [7]. Salinero et al. [17]
also emphasized on genetic variation between individuals
regarding caffeine metabolites, linking it with the type of
exercise, habituation of caffeine and the level of training.
Our statistical results are based on analyzing subjective
answers from participants regarding perception towards
caffeine consumption as a physical performance
enhancer, work durability enhancer, and productivity
enhancer, which can be influenced by reporting bias.
Another divergent finding was experimental studies
which reported that caffeine has no effect on reducing
fatigue after soccer game [11]. However, our results
revealed that more than 50% of our participants, in the
caffeine expectancy questionnaire, agreed that caffeine
picks them up when they are feeling tired (Mean = 3.55,
SE = 0.252). Thus, our sample which represents active
people from Tripoli consumes caffeinated products
mostly to reduce their fatigue.
Our findings are convergent with a double-blind, placebo-
controlled randomized cross over study on anaerobic
activities. Madden et al. [9] revealed that perceived
effort is greater in the caffeine group compared to the
placebo suggesting that caffeine could increase overall
physical performance in anaerobic activities. Moreover,
McDaniel et al. [2] showed a 4.2 s enhancement in
anaerobic activities in the caffeine group compared to
placebo. This is coincident with our findings that anaerobic
activities have a positive association with caffeine as
an overall physical performance enhancer. Furthermore,
our results have shown that caffeine when perceived as a
work durability enhancer is found to be positively associated
with anaerobic exercise which is coincident with
the American Alliance for Health theory that caffeine has
a direct effect on the central nervous system to increase
alertness and decrease fatigue [2]. Also, a randomized
double-blind study revealed that caffeine-containing supplements
have a positive effect on anaerobic exercises
especially in delaying fatigue and increasing strength [7].
Our findings suggest that caffeine has no association
with aerobic and anaerobic exercises when perceived as
a productivity enhancer. This differs from the literature
which revealed that caffeine increases adrenaline level
resulting in better productivity when performing both
aerobic and anaerobic activities [2].
This study has some strengths and limitations. First
of all, the questionnaire included 16 items on the attitudes
towards caffeine and physical exercise, which by
conducting the reliability test was found to be reliable.
This consistency in caffeine belief could be due to our
homogenous sample where witnessing drastic variations
and ethnic differences are low [7]. Additionally, the main
added value of this study is targeting a new population,
which sheds light on how generalizable previous findings
can be to diverse populations. Also, this observational
research study could be the foundation of experimental
research that further investigates the impact of caffeine
consumption on physical activity and athleticism at
a larger scale. In other words, the findings of this study
regarding the association between caffeine and physical
performance could guide future research by highlighting
the associations that should be tested through experimental
manipulation. Such studies can lead to more rigid
conclusions on the effect of caffeine on physicality. Nevertheless,
this research suffers from some limitations,
mainly due to not assessing dose-exposure relationships
between caffeine uptake and aerobic and anaerobic exercises,
its observational nature in terms of study design
and reliance on self-report. Some questions require participants
to remember their physical activity and caffeine
consumption routines, therefore are prone to recall bias.
In addition, social desirability bias could alter the answers
to questions related to physical performance, health, and
diet. Furthermore, it would have been better to categorize
the levels of physical activity according to the Physical
Activity Level (PAL) scale. Also, the sample may not
be representative of the target population as the recruitment
was limited to only 7 gyms where our target population
of active Lebanese participants in Tripoli were
mostly found. Finally, the respondents’ answers to the
caffeine beliefs scale could be shaped by common caffeine
consumption stereotypes and misconceptions, rather
than their personal experiences resulting from consuming
caffeine. As such, factor 1 (physical performance
enhancement), factor 2 (durability enhancement), and
factor 3 (productivity enhancement) may be indicators
of caffeine beliefs that are common among the targeted
sample rather than indicators of the effects of caffeine on
respondents’ physical activity. Previous studies utilized
various data collection tools, ranging from surveys to
experimental manipulation, to address the questions on
caffeine consumption and physical activity. However, this
study is observational, using questionnaires as the main
source of data. This study will add value to the literature
by surveying the entire Lebanese population and, accordingly,
guiding further experimental research.
Conclusion
Our results did not fully support the hypotheses that
caffeine consumption has positive association with both
aerobic and anaerobic exercises. While our results have
shown that anaerobic exercise has positive association
with caffeine when the latter is perceived as a physical
performance enhancer, and work durability enhancer, no
association is found between anaerobic exercise and caffeine
when perceived as a productivity enhancer. In addition,
aerobic exercise has no association with caffeine
when perceived as a physical performance enhancer,
work durability enhancer, or productivity enhancer. Perhaps,
future research could focus on the safe doses of caffeine
that could be given for anaerobic exercises to have
an ergogenic effect. This could help us to build scientific
guidelines pertaining to caffeine’s association with sports
performance.