Type B aortic dissection (TBAD) is an acute cardiovascular
disease with high mortality and disability rates [1–3].
Medical treatment is routinely used in the clinic to treat
the uncomplicated aortic dissection. However, for the
complicated TBAD, the thoracic endovascular aortic
repair (TEVAR) is an alternative and effective tool compared
to open surgery [4–6]. Since the stent placement is
mainly guided by digital subtraction angiography (DSA),
an inaccurate viewing angle may lead to 3D vascular
structures overlap in the projected 2D images. Therefore,
the viewing angle of the C-arm plays an important role in
placing the stent grafts.
During the process of TEVAR, physicians manually
determine the angiographic viewing angles according
to their personal experiences in order to display
the whole aortic arch while eliminating any overlap of
branches. This task is subjective and may not only be
time-consuming for young physicians but also increase
the patient’s intake of X-ray and contrast agent.
Furthermore, the X-ray angiographic images with
improper viewing angles lose much aortic topological
information [7, 8], thus, affect the accuracy of the
stent placement and lead to some later complications
such as aortic rupture or retrograde dissection [9]. The
current clinical imaging angle selection requires the
participation of expert cardiologists, hence an additional
burden in the clinical setting. Therefore, the
automatic selection of angiography viewing angle is
extremely important and clinically required.
The issue of automatic optimum viewing angle
determination has attracted many researchers’ attention
because of its major clinical implications. Dumay
et al. [10] assumed that the interested vessel is a cylinder
and selected two projection images of different
angles. Then, the optimal viewing angle was obtained
through the geometry relationship of corresponding
vectors. Nevertheless, this method is only suitable for
slightly-curved vessels and requires at least two different
angles of projection images. It fails in case of large
and extended curvature. Moreover, obtaining projection
images at different angles increase the radiation
dose. Considering the intake of X-ray and contrast
agent, a series of studies used CTA data to obtain the
optimal angle in the coronary artery [11–16]. The vessel
vector was represented by the line between two
adjacent points on the centerline of the vessel of interest.
Chen et al. [17] used a predefined threshold to calculate
the minimum vascular projection foreshortening
rate. The optimal angiographic angle was obtained by
refining the overlapping rate. Considering that the aortic
branches are much larger than the coronary arteries,
the method applied in coronary arteries is not suitable
for the aorta. The imaging angle automatically obtained
through mathematically minimum methods does not
fit the clinical scenario in the aorta. The optimal angle
obtained by adding the constraint design of the realistic
clinical scenario is more suitable for the clinic.
In order to solve the aforementioned drawbacks, we
proposed an adaptive optimization method that automatically
determines the angiography viewing angle
for the TEVAR operation. The projection foreshortening
rate (PFR) is used to obtain a full display of the
aortic arch, and the projection overlapping rate (POR)
is used to avoid the overlap of branches on the aortic
arch. By combining an empirical regularization term,
the optimal angle can be automatically obtained before
TEVAR, which ensures doctors a better imaging angle
to place the stent more accurately. The contributions of
this work are summarized as follows:
1. To our knowledge, our solution is the first attempt
based on pre-operative CTA images for providing
an automatically and reliably optimal imaging angle
view for TEVAR.
2. The optimum viewing angle is obtained by optimizing
the display of the aortic arch without overlapping
branches instead of minimizing the POR and PFR.
3. Combined with the clinical scenario of the aorta, the
proposed method adaptively provides junior doctors
with an optimal imaging angle pre-operation.
4. This method has the potential to optimize the planning
time, improve the accuracy of the stent placement
and reduce the radiation exposure during
TEVAR.
Methods
Patients with aortic dissection before TEVAR usually
have a CTA examination. Based on the CTA data, the
aorta is segmented and the centerline is obtained. CTA
data are then used to simulate angiograms. The amount
of foreshortening and vessel overlap for the aortic arch
can be calculated. Without the left common carotid
artery (LCCA) and left subclavian artery (LSA) overlapped,
an adaptive optimization approach is proposed to
determine the viewing angle before the operation automatically.
Figure 1 shows the flow chart of the proposed
algorithm.
Patients and image acquisition
Our institutional review board approved this study. We
focus on the TBAD patients who needed the interventional
operation from August 2019 to December 2020: 63
patients in the acute phase underwent TEVAR identified
from 107 type B aortic dissection patients. Detailed inhospital
information is given in Table 1. Among these 63
patients, we excluded the patients with procedure unsuccess
(n = 2), patients who died in the hospital (n = 3),
patients submitted to the adjuvant procedure (n = 10),
patients who lost DSA or CTA data before intervention
(n = 10) and TEVAR covered left subclavian artery (n = 3)
from the dataset. The final patient set consists of 35
patients. The basic characteristics of patients are summarized
in Table 2. Each CT angiography dataset is acquired
before stent-graft implantation via a dual-source CT
scanner (SOMATOM Definition Flash, SIEMENS, Germany)
and the intervention is performed under the DSA
Artis Zee (SIEMENS, Germany). Two experts (cardiovascular
radiologists) work together to manually acquire
the viewing angle of the DSA during TEVAR for all the
patients. During the CTA, the patient lies on his back on
the table with his upper limbs raised vertically above the
head and is placed in a supine position during the intervention
with his arms down naturally at his sides.
Projection overlapping rate
The 2D projection principle in X-ray imaging leads to
the superimposition of all tissues and, in our case, may
lead to an overlap of the branches connected to the aortic
arch (i.e. LCCA and LSA). This overlap can affect
the placement of the stent in patients with type B aortic
dissection. The blue square in Fig. 2 shows an example
of such overlap where it is difficult to distinguish the
boundaries of each branch. Improper placement of stents
covering the branches of the aortic arch can cause organ
ischemia. The optimum viewing angle should therefore
be estimated by minimizing the overlapping rate of the
LCCA and LSA.
Let SLCCA (θ) and SLSA(θ) represent the LCCA and LSA
segments in the projection image at angle θ respectively,
the POR Poverlap can be calculated by counting the pixels
in the projection image as:
where NP(A) denotes the number of pixels of A.
Projection foreshortening rate
In the 2D angiographic image, when the X-ray direction is
not perpendicular to the aortic arch plane, the projection
is shorter than the length in 3D. In Fig. 3, we simulate
the angiographic image by computing the X-ray projections
from different directions and measure the length
of the aorta. It is estimated in image A to 26 cm, much
shorter than the actual length (30 cm) in 3D. In image B,
the aortic arch is fully displayed and does not have any
foreshortening. Direction B can be almost perpendicular
to the aortic arch plane. It is difficult to determine the
best placement of the stent when the aortic arch overlap.
Displaying the aortic arch as completely as possible in 2D
angiography permits the physicians to observe the aortic
structure information clearly, thus facilitate the accurate
placement of the stent. The PFR Pfs of the aortic arch can
be calculated by the ratio of the centerline length after
projection under angle θ to the centerline length in CTA:
where −
P represents the projection vector of x-ray, −
C (t)
is the centerline of the aorta in 3D, and T1(θ) represents
the total length of the centerline obtained at angle θ in
2-D projection and T2 represents the total length of the
centerline in 3-D.
Standard algorithm
Minimizing the foreshortening rate and the overlapping
rate can be expressed as solving the standard optimization
problem:
However such approach has two drawbacks here:
since the sum of POR and PFR is minimized, there is
no guarantee that the optimum angle will suppress any
overlapping between LCCA and LSA. In addition, the
morphology of the aorta is not taken into account. Therefore
it seems more meaningful to adopt a two steps
method by looking for angles eliminating the superimpositions
and then by selecting among them the optimal
view satisfying the PFR Pfs criteria.
Adaptive algorithm
The detail of our algorithm to obtain the optimal view
can be described as follows:
Step 1: The aorta in the CTA data is segmented and
the centerline is obtained by the method reported in Ref.
[18].
Step 2: Angiographic images are simulated for angle θ
varying from 0 to 90 degrees of the C-arm based on the
3D vascular structure.
Step 3: Calculate the POR between LCCA and LSA
by Eq. (1), and denote θno-overlap the set of angles which
lead to Poverlap(θ) = 0, that means, there is no overlap
between LCCA and LSA.
Step 4: Calculate the PFR by Equation (2) for each
given value of θ, and we choose the angle θfsmin which
reaches the maximal value of foreshortening Pfs
denoted hereafter by Pfsmax. If the angle θfsmin is too
large, an adaptive strategy is adopted to meet the clinical
requirement. To achieve this goal, we define:
Step 5: Calculate the intersection of θno-overlap and θfs,
the minimal value of this interval is chosen as the optimal
view angle θoptimal.
Results
Qualitative and quantitative analyses are performed on
the dataset described above and comparisons are carried
out between the standard approach, the proposed adaptive
method using the ground truth of C-arm angles set
by the cardiovascular radiologist during TEVAR.
Quantitative analysis
The statistical analysis is performed using Prism 7.0
(GraphPad Software Inc, San Diego, Calif). If the assumption
of normality is met, statistically significant differences
for the viewing angle result obtained from different
algorithms are evaluated using the T-test. However, if the
assumption of normality is not met, a Mann–Whitney U
test was performed. Values of P < 0.05 are considered statistically
significant.
Figure 4a shows the optimal viewing angles obtained
for 35 aortic dissection patients. The means and standard
deviations are respectively 54.67 ± 1.645 (standard
approach), 44.55 ± 0.5014 (adaptive method) and
45.79 ± 0.4474 (experts). The differences between
the standard algorithm and experts are significant
(p < 0.0001), no significant difference is observed between
the experts and the adaptive results (p = 0.0678).
Figure 4b summarizes these results. The red line
depicts the absolute angle difference between experts and
the standard minimization approach and the green line is
the absolute difference between our proposed algorithm
and expert settings. It can be seen that the adaptive viewing
angle optimization has less error than the standard
one. The distributions of the angle differences between
the three frames are presented in Fig. 4c and d, respectively.
While in the former case (4C) only twenty percent
of differences are less than three degrees, when looking at
the adaptive versus experts angle setting, the differences
are less than five degrees, and most of them less than
three degrees.Qualitative analysis
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed
method, the clinical CTA is used to simulate a 2D
angiographic imaging system. Figure 5 shows the simulated
angiographic view by experts (first row) used
during the intervention, the standard (second row)
and adaptive algorithm (third row) results obtained on
four patients. In Fig. 5C1 and C2 display the absolute
difference image between the ground truth projection
and the projections obtained through the standard and
adaptive algorithms respectively. A color image coding
is adopted in order to visually enhance the differences
observed. They are major in 5C1 while, according to
the blue color dominance in 5C2, they are close to zero.
The aortic arch is displayed without LCCA and LSA
overlapping both in the simulated projection based
on expert setting and on the angle estimated by our
approach.
Discussion
As an option for patients with type B aortic dissection,
TEVAR has been proved a sound technique to replace
open surgery [19, 20]. However, its efficacy depends on
whether the proximal entry tear is completely covered
or not. Therefore appropriate stent selection and deployment
techniques are required. In addition, undesirable
results such as occlusion or endoleak could result from
a suboptimal stent deployment caused by an unreliable
viewing angle [21, 22]. During the stent placement, the
optimal viewing angle is subjectively selected by adjusting
the rotation angle of the X-ray gantry. This “trial-anderror”
approach increases the dose of contrast agent and
radiation exposure to the doctors and patients. Besides,
due to the patient-specific aortic patterns, there is no
guarantee that the angle chosen by the less experienced
doctor could visualize the aorta optimally during the
stent deployment [23, 24]. Therefore, computer-assisted
selection of the optimal viewing angle is of great significance
to support junior doctors during TEVAR, especially
with the increasing complexity of interventional
treatment for aortic dissection.
In some cases, the identification of optimal viewing
angles based on 2D angiographic projections is extremely
challenging. Since the reconstruction of the whole aorta
in angiographic acquisitions is highly time-consuming
and needs a high quality angiographic image system [7],
it appears difficult to apply this approach in routine clinical
practice. In order to propose an effective and practical
solution, we only need to reconstruct the thoracic aorta
using the CTA data acquired before the intervention.
Once the 3D reconstruction has been completed, the
information can be used to plan the intervention-related
image acquisition, which will benefit the patients who
need repeated radiation exposure.
The projection overlapping rate and projection foreshortening
rate are two keys factors in the optimum
angle determination. The former represents the overlap
of the branches on the aortic arch, which is clinically
used to avoid any stent covering the branches and
to guide the stent placement in the endovascular procedure.
As a functional estimation, the latter indicates
whether the aortic arch displays the anatomical information
clearly at this viewing angle. The proposed method
utilizes both the PFR and POR. Instead of considering a
joint minimization with the PFR and POR terms, we have
shown how we can first deal with branch overlaps and
then look among the solutions the optimal view minimizing
any possible foreshortening. No significant difference
is observed between our results and the C-arm angle setting
given by the experts during TEVAR.
The determination of C-arm angle is necessary for
patients who require endovascular surgery. The clinically
used “trial-and-error” approach, although efficient,
increases the contrast agent dose and radiation exposure
to the doctors and patients. The guiding principle of radiation
safety (i.e. ALARA for “as low as reasonably achievable”)
recommends reducing in any way the radiation
even if the gain is small. Compared with the “trial-anderror”
approach, our algorithm only makes use the CTA
data acquired before TEVAR to get the optimal viewing
angle. The results are very close to the angle chosen by
the experts and no statistically significant difference is
observed. Therefore, the C-arm angle can directly use the
result obtained by our algorithm before the intervention.
After the contrast injection, if the angle is suitable, the
stent can be directly implanted. Even if the angle needs
to be fine-tuned, the slight error will reduce the radiation
time compared to the previous angle adjustment from
zero. Our future work will focus on the overall benefit of
our approach in terms of radiation amount and contrast
usage by either experts or junior physicians.
Conclusion
In this paper, an adaptive optimization algorithm based
on CTA data acquired before TEVAR is proposed to
determine the clinically best C-arm angle to use during
the intervention. The optimal viewing angle estimated
using this method does not show a significant difference
with expert settings. Hence, this automatic method has
the potential to assist junior doctors while providing
shorter procedure time, less radiation exposure and contrast
injection.
