Background
Diffusion kurtosis imaging (DKI), first proposed by
Jensen et al. [1], has been widely used to evaluate the
degree of liver fibrosis, tumour characteristics, and
treatment responses [2–4]. This imaging method
requires ultrahigh b-values (1500–2000 s/mm2) to
facilitate the successful capture of non-Gaussian behaviour
[5, 6]. However, ultrahigh b-value DWI results in
a decrease in the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and an
increase in anatomic distortions. To obtain good image
quality, increasing the average time for ultrahigh b-values
is essential and leads to relatively long scan times.
Therefore, the technique of reducing the scan time is
very important for promoting the routine application of
DKI sequences for the liver.
Recently, simultaneous multislice DWI (SMS-DWI)
has been used to reduce the image acquisition time
[7–10]; SMS-DWI is based on the excitation of multiple
slices simultaneously and subsequent antialiasing to
reconstruct the magnitude images. Slices are separated
using information about coil sensitivities from phased
array coils, gradients, or radiofrequency encoding. The
SMS technique shortens the scan time by increasing
the number of acceleration factors (AFs), and it was
initially used in the brain [11]. In recent years, several
studies have reported that the SMS technique shortens
the scan time of DWI in the liver, pancreas, prostate,
rectum, breast, and kidney [12–16]. A limited number
of studies have focused on intravoxel incoherent
motion (IVIM) analysis based on SMS-DWI sequences
and found a significant scan time reduction [13, 17]. Phi
Van et al. reported slight systematic deviations in the
IVIM parameters with increased AFs [17]. However,
no studies have examined the impact of DKI parameter
calculations based on SMS techniques in the liver.
Therefore, the purpose of our study was to investigate
the feasibility of DKI based on the SMS technique
in the liver and the influence of this method compared
with conventional DWI sequences on image quality and
DKI-derived quantitative parameters.
Methods
Subjects
A total of 40 volunteers (23 females and 17 males; age
range 24–53 years, mean 37 years) without a known
history of alcohol or drug abuse, viral hepatitis, or prior
liver surgery were enrolled.
DWI protocols
All DWI data were acquired on a 3.0T whole-body MRI
scanner (MAGNETOM Prisma, Siemens Healthcare,
Erlangen, Germany). An 18-channel phased-arrayed
body coil in combination with 12 elements of a
32-channel spine coil was used.
In all the participants, SMS-DWI sequences with
acceleration factors of 2 and 3 (SMS2-DWI and SMS3-
DWI, respectively) and conventional DWI (C-DWI)
were scanned. DWI was acquired in axial slice orientation
with a slice thickness of 6 mm in free breathing
without respiratory compensation techniques such as
respiratory triggering and navigator triggering. Diffusion
gradients were applied in four-scan traces with
b-values of 50, 800 and 2000 s/mm2. Fat suppression
with a spectral attenuated inversion recovery (SPAIR)
technique was used. Table 1 provides detailed sequence
parameters, including scan time.
Image assessment
Qualitative analysis of image quality
All the images were transferred to a workstation (Syngo.
via, VB10; Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany).
The quality of the images with b-values of 800 s/mm2
and 2000 s/mm2 was independently evaluated by two
radiologists with 5 and 12 years of experience in liver
MRI. The two radiologists were blinded to the sequence
information.
A five-point Likert scale was used to rate the image
quality with respect to the following aspects (sharpness
of the right lobe edge, conspicuity of the left lobe,
visibility of intrahepatic vessels, absence of artefacts
and overall image quality), with higher scores indicating
better image quality (5 = excellent, 4 = good,
3 = moderate, 2 = poor, 1 = not diagnostic). Regarding
the occurrence of artefacts, 5 = no artefacts, 4 = mild
artefacts, 3 = moderate artefacts, 2 = severe artefacts,
and 1 = severe artefacts representing no diagnosis. The
image quality scores of conventional DWI, SMS2-DWI
and SMS3-DWI sequences assigned by the two radiologists
were recorded for each participant.
Quantitative analysis of signal‑to‑noise
The signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio was calculated as the
ratio between the average signal intensity of the liver
parenchyma and the standard deviation of the signal
intensity of the air for images with b-values of 800 and
2000 s/mm2 by the following formula:
where SIliver
is the mean signal of the liver parenchyma
and SDbackground
is the standard deviation of the background
noise on the outside sides of the body in the
phase-encoding directions.
Quantitative analysis of DKI parameters and ADC values
All the images were postprocessed using prototypic
software (Body Diffusion Toolbox; Siemens Healthcare,
Erlangen, Germany) to extract DKI parameter and ADC
maps.
The apparent mean kurtosis (MK) maps and apparent
mean diffusivity (MD) maps were calculated using all 3
b-values according to the following equation:
where MK is the mean kurtosis coefficient (a unitless
parameter that represents the deviation of water motion
from the Gaussian distribution) and MD is a corrected
mean ADC without a Gaussian bias.
The ADC maps were calculated using all 3 b-values
with the following equation:
Regions of interest (ROIs) were placed by a radiologist
with 12 years of experience in abdominal MRI. ROIs with
a diameter between 2 and 4 cm were manually placed in
liver parenchyma segment V at the portal hilum level on
the b 50 s/mm2 images of C-DWI and then copied to the
corresponding MK, MD and ADC maps of the C-DWI,
SMS2-DWI and SMS3-DWI sequences at the same
level and position, making sure to avoid large vessels
and severe artefacts. The radiologist performed the first
measurement within 2 days after the completion of the
S(b)/S(0) = exp(−b × MD + b2 × MD2 × MK/6).
S(b)/S(0) = exp(−b × ADC).
DWI examination and then performed a second measurement
3 weeks later. Eventually, the average of all the
measurements was adopted for analysis.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version
26.0 software (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY USA) and Med-
Calc Software version 18.2.1 (MedCalc Software bvba,
Mariakerke, Belgium). P values of less than 0.05 were
considered statistically significant.
Image quality parameters among the three DWI
sequences (C-DWI, SMS2-DWI, and SMS3-DWI) were
compared using the Friedman test. If the Friedman test
showed statistical significance, the Dunn-Bonferroni post
hoc test was performed to analyse all pairwise comparisons.
The interobserver agreement on image quality was
analysed by calculating linear weighted Cohen’s kappa,
with kappa values of 0.01–0.20 representing slight agreement,
0.21–0.40 fair, 0.41–0.60 moderate, 0.61–0.80
good, and 0.81–1.00 almost perfect agreement.
The differences in the SNR, DKI-derived quantitative
parameters and ADC values between the three sequences
were compared using one-way ANOVA, and pairwise
Bonferroni post hoc tests were performed if the ANOVA
showed a significant difference. The distribution and concordance
of DKI parameters and ADC values between the
three sequences are shown in a Bland–Altman plot. The
mean difference and 95% limits of agreement were reported.
Results
All the sequences were successfully scanned, and the specific
absorption rate (SAR) remained below individual
limits in all sequences without the need for switching to
the first-level mode.
Scan time
The acquisition times of C-DWI, SMS2-DWI, and
SMS3-DWI were 4 min 11 s, 2 min 2 s, and 1 min 34 s,
respectively.
Compared with C-DWI, SMS2-DWI significantly
reduced the scan time by 51%, and compared with
C-DWI, SMS3-DWI significantly reduced the scan time
by 63%. Three b-value images of C-DWI, SMS2-DWI,
and SMS3-DWI are shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
Qualitative analysis of image quality
The interobserver agreement of the two readers was good
for image quality assessment, with к values of 0.714 (95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.634–0.795) for C-DWI, 0.639
(95% CI 0.554–0.725) for SMS2-DWI, and 0.653 (95% CI
0.579–0.726) for SMS3-DWI. The average image quality
scores of the three sequences are shown in Table 2.
For all image quality parameters, there were no significant
differences observed between C-DWI and SMS2-
DWI in all b-value images (all p > 0.05) (Table 2). As
shown in Figs. 1 and 2, compared with C-DWI, SMS2-
DWI exhibited equivalent image quality and no artefacts.
There were no significant differences between SMS2-
DWI and SMS3-DWI in the sharpness of the right lobe
edge (p = 0.144), conspicuity of the left lobe (p = 0.370) or
visibility of intrahepatic vessels (p = 0.109). SMS2-DWI
exhibited better scores than SMS3-DWI for artefacts and
overall image quality (all p < 0.01) in the images with a
b-value of 800 s/mm2. For the images with a b-value of
2000 s/mm2, SMS2-DWI exhibited better scores than
SMS3-DWI for all image quality parameters (all p < 0.01).
There were no significant differences between C-DWI
and SMS3-DWI in the sharpness of the right lobe edge
(p = 0.066) or conspicuity of the left lobe (p = 0.131).
C-DWI exhibited better scores than SMS3-DWI for the
visibility of intrahepatic vessels, artefacts, and overall
image quality (all p < 0.01) in the images with a b-value of
800 s/mm2. For the images with a b-value of 2000 s/mm2,
SMS2-DWI exhibited better scores than SMS3-DWI for
all image quality parameters (all p < 0.05).
Artefacts of the liver could be observed in the high
b-value (800 and 2000 s/mm2) SMS3-DWI images, and
the artefacts became more obvious with increasing b-values
(Figs. 1, 2).
Quantitative analysis of signal‑to‑noise
The SNR values measured in the three DWI sequences
are shown in Table 3. There were no statistically significant
differences in the SNR between the three sequences
in images with a b-value of 2000 s/mm2 (p = 0.110). For
the images with a b-value of 800 s/mm2, there were no
statistically significant differences between SMS2-DWI
and C-DWI (p = 1.000) and no statistically significant
differences between SMS2-DWI and SMS3-DWI
(p = 0.059), whereas SMS3-DWI had a significantly lower
SNR than C-DWI (p = 0.024).
Quantitative analysis of DKI parameters and ADC values
The MK values of C-DWI, SMS2-DWI and SMS3-DWI
were 0.67 ± 0.15, 0.68 ± 0.11, and 0.70 ± 0.18, respectively.
The MD values of C-DWI, SMS2-DWI and SMS3-
DWI were 1.19 ± 0.15 × 10−
3 mm2/
s, 1.17 ± 0.21 × 10−
3
mm2/
s, and 1.17 ± 0.18 × 10−
3 mm2/
s, respectively.
The ADC values of C-DWI, SMS2-DWI and SMS3-
DWI were 0.85 ± 1.12 × 10−
3 mm2/
s, 0.81 ± 1.24 × 10−
3
mm2/
s and 0.80 ± 1.56 × 10−
3 mm2/
s, respectively. There
were no statistically significant differences between the
three sequences (MK, p = 0.606; MD, p = 0.831; ADC,
p = 0.264) (Fig. 3). Although there were no statistically
significant differences in the DKI parameters between
SMS2-DWI and C-DWI in this study, increased MK
values and decreased MD values were observed with
increased AFs in the liver. With an increase in the acceleration
factor, the ADC values of the liver parenchyma
showed a decreasing trend. The results from Bland–Altman
plots are demonstrated in Fig. 4.
Discussion
In the present study, SMS-DWI with an acceleration
factor of 2 obviously decreased the scan time without
a negative impact on the image quality and maintained
comparable DKI parameters and ADC values compared
with those of C-DWI. Although the scan time was significantly
shortened for SMS3-DWI sequences, it had a
negative impact on the image quality, especially at a high
b-value of 2000 s/mm2.
The DKI model potentially reflects the non-Gaussian
diffusion behaviour of water diffusivity in tissues using
ultrahigh b-values above 1000 s/mm2 (1500–2000 s/mm2
in body imaging) [5, 6, 18]; thus, DKI could provide further
information on tissue characteristics and has additional
value in the prediction of microvascular invasion
(MVI) of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and in the
assessment of post-therapeutic response in hypervascular
HCC [3–5]. Obtaining ultrahigh b-value DWI images
will induce a decreased SNR, increased distortion, susceptibility
artefacts, and increased scan time [19].
In conventional diffusion acquisition, a single slice is
excited, whereas in SMS-DWI, multiple slices are excited
simultaneously, and the corresponding read-out contains
these multiple slices. This permits the TR to be
decreased, thus shortening the acquisition time, or allows
more slices with thinner slice thicknesses to be scanned
under the same TR [7, 9, 10]. Notably, the maximum
number of simultaneous acquisition slices depends on
the number of coil channels [7]. In theory, image acquisition
in SMS-DWI can be accelerated to a large extent by
increasing the applied acceleration factors. However, an
arbitrary increase in the acceleration factors is expected
to be associated with a decrease in image quality.
Our research indicates that SMS can shorten the scan
time without reducing the image quality even in images
with ultrahigh b-values of 2000 s/mm2 if an acceleration
factor of 2 is used. Although there were no statistically
significant differences in the DKI parameters between
SMS-DWI and C-DWI in this study, SMS3-DWI should
not be chosen in future studies due to the obviously
decreased image quality and pronounced artefacts, especially
in images with high b-values of 2000 s/mm2.
The MK values (unitless) of the DKI parameters reflect
complex tissue microenvironments, such as tumour cells,
necrosis, and inflammation. The MD values are the diffusion
coefficients (unit: 10−
3 mm2/
s) related to Gaussian
behaviour and similar to the ADC values that decrease
with restricted diffusion. MK is determined by the SI
decay curvature away from the plot that would be predicted
by a monoexponential fit, whereas MD is determined
by the slope of the SI decay plot as b approaches
0. Decreases in MD values and increases in MK values
indicate abnormal diffusion behaviour in the organs.
Although there were no statistically significant differences
between the three sequences, with an increase in
the acceleration factors, MK values showed an increasing
trend and MD and ADC values showed a decreasing
trend in the liver. This result could be due to a decrease
in image quality that potentially affects the signal accuracies
and influences the DKI parameter calculations in the
SMS-DWI sequences.
Several studies have indicated that ADC values
decrease when using SMS-DWI compared with C-DWI
in the liver, pancreas and kidney [12, 15, 20]. One possible
reason for the lower ADC values with higher acceleration
factors is the shorter repetition time (TR) of the
SMS sequence. In the present study, the TR was 5200,
2400, and 1800 ms for C-DWI, SMS2-DWI, and SMS3-
DWI, respectively. The lower TR may lead to a reduced
signal due to T1 saturation effects, particularly with the
high b-value images that had higher AFs, resulting in
decreased ADC values.
Obele et al., who investigated the SMS technique with an
acceleration factor of 2 in free breathing, noted that there
were slightly lower ADC values compared with those of a
conventional DWI sequence without statistical significance
in the liver [12]. Another reason may be that we scanned the
3 b-values together, which induced an increase in TE and led
to a lower SNR in the 2000 s/mm2 b-value images, which also
influenced the ADC values to some degree. When the ADC
value was used for diagnosis in the liver, there were possibly
lower ADC values in SMS sequences. Considering scan time,
image quality and ADC values, an acceleration factor of 2
would be the best option for a clinical workflow in the liver.
There are several limitations of the study. First, the
SMS-DWI and C-DWI sequences were scanned during
free breathing and without respiratory-triggered techniques
in our study. Respiratory motion and hepatic local
motion may impact the image quality and challenge the
reliability of the computation of DKI parameters to some
degree. Several studies have indicated that compared
with conventional DWI, SMS-DWI combined with respiratory
triggering could improve image quality in the
liver and kidney [21–23]. SMS-DWI sequences with
respiratory compensation techniques should be implemented
in the future.
Second, a comparison and assessment of DKI parameters
using SMS-DWI were performed in relatively
young and healthy participants. The diffusion coefficients
can differ in normal tissues, diseased tissues, and focal
lesions. Thus, the DKI parameters based on SMS-DWI
for evaluating diffusive diseases, such as liver fibrosis, cirrhosis,
and focal lesions, need to be further studied.
Conclusion
In conclusion, compared with conventional DWI
sequences, SMS-DWI using an acceleration factor of
2 could reduce the scan time significantly and without
negative effects on image quality and comparable DKI
parameters and ADC values. Based on the present study
results, SMS-DWI can promote DKI sequences in clinical
settings. Further studies are needed to investigate the
clinical diagnostic performance of DKI based on the SMS
technique for evaluating diffuse diseases and focal lesions
of the liver.