Background
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most important causes of
death in cancer patients [1], and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) is the most common pathological
type of pancreatic cancer. Due to high-grade malignancy,
even if the tumour is detected early and curative resection
is performed, as many as 60% of patients experience
recurrence and metastasis within a short period of time
after the operation [2, 3]. Multiple diagnostic and treatment
guidelines suggest that all stages of PDAC patients
need to undergo postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy
[4–6].
The regimens commonly suggested for adjuvant chemotherapy
in the guidelines for PDAC include gemcitabine,
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)/leucovorin, S-1, etc. [4–6].
S-1 is a newly developed oral antitumour agent consisting
of tegafur (a prodrug of 5-FU), gimeracil [a potent
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) inhibitor], and
oteracil (an inhibitor of the phosphorylation of 5-FU in
the gastrointestinal tract). Tegafur is transformed into
5-FU in the liver after oral administration [7]. It has
been reported that monotherapy with S-1 demonstrates
noninferiority to commonly used gemcitabine in overall
survival for locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic
cancer [8]. For postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy,
S-1 significantly extended both the overall and relapsefree
survival of patients with resected pancreatic cancer
compared with gemcitabine and might contribute to
the improvement of patients’ quality of life with fewer
adverse reactions [9].
How can a suitable postoperative regimen be personalized
from a variety of chemotherapy regimens listed
in the PDAC guidelines? Because adverse reactions are
common and the proportion of patients benefiting from
chemotherapy is not high [10, 11], it is urgent to determine
how to identify patients who are more likely to
benefit from certain adjuvant chemotherapy regimens
and how to maintain their quality of life while pursuing
better clinical outcomes. However, the guidelines have
not provided answers to these questions or solutions to
these problems. Currently, there is no definite standard
for the selection of drugs in the adjuvant chemotherapy
of PDAC [4], and predictors of chemotherapy response
are needed for personalized precision medicine.
The same questions and problems exist in the clinical
application of S-1, especially which population can
benefit from postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with
S-1. Radiomics technology, which has emerged in recent
years, offers important advantages for the assessment of
tumour biology. Radiomics analysis can aid in evidencebased
clinical decision making in oncologic management
and help achieve individualized precision medical care
[12–14]. In PDAC, most prior radiomics studies represented
by texture analysis were based on CT imaging,
which have been associated with survival in patients who
underwent surgeries [15–17], but none of these studies
mentioned or analysed the effects of treatments on survival
after the surgeries. Only a few radiomics analysis
studies on MRI have been performed in PDAC. Whether
MRI and radiomics features could be used for the prediction
of therapy response to adjuvant chemotherapy
in postoperative pancreatic cancer patients has not been
reported in previous literature.
This pilot study aimed to find potential predictors of
the efficacy of S-1 by analysing the associations among
the clinical data, MRI findings, and whole-tumour radiomics
features of PDAC patients with distinct responses
to S-1 in postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy and
to provide initial evidence as basis of further studies to
assist personalized precision treatment in postoperative
patients with PDAC.
Methods
Patients
General clinical data
Our institutional ethics review board approved this retrospective
study (No. B2018-266), and the requirement
for written informed consent was conditionally waived.
From January 2012 to September 2017, the diagnosis of
PDAC was confirmed in 91 patients by surgery and pathological
examination at our institute among the patients
who underwent an abdominal contrast-enhanced MRI
examination with the same scanner (Magnetom Aera,
Siemens Healthcare, Germany, 1.5 T). After curative
resection, 31 of them who subsequently received adjuvant
chemotherapy with S-1 were included in this study
as the primary cohort. The follow-up period was from
the time of surgery to November 2018. The inclusion and
exclusion criteria of our study were as follows. Within the
same study and follow-up period, a total of 15 patients
were enrolled using the same criteria that used for the
primary cohort besides that the MRI examinations were
performed on Magnetom Avanto (Siemens Healthcare,
Germany, 1.5 T) as the independent validation cohort.
Inclusion criteria:
(1) Patients received abdominal contrast-enhanced
MRI examination with Magnetom Aera (Siemens
Healthcare, Germany, 1.5 T) at our institute and
were suspected of having pancreatic cancer; the
image quality was satisfactory for the study;
(2) Patients underwent curative resection of the
tumour at our institute, and the diagnosis of PDAC
was confirmed by pathological examination;
(3) The pre-operative laboratory tests and operation
were within 1 month from the date of the MRI
examination;
(4) Patients received postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy
with S-1 and follow-up;
(5) Clinical information including demographic characteristics,
laboratory tests, surgery, chemotherapy
regimen, pathological findings, and follow-up were
collected.
Exclusion criteria:
(1) Poor image quality that was not acceptable;
(2) Patients underwent percutaneous transhepatic
cholangiodrainage (PTCD), biliary stent placement
or antitumour treatments before the MRI examination;
(3) PDAC failed to be resected;
(4) The pre-operative laboratory test or operation was
over 1 month from the date of the MRI examination;
(5) Clinical information was incomplete;
(6) Adjuvant chemotherapy other than S-1, follow-up
only, or unknown treatments;
(7) Other reasons that patients should be excluded.
S‑1 regimen
Chemotherapy with S-1 started within 8 weeks after the
operation. The dosage was determined based on the body
surface at 40–60 mg per dose with 2 doses per day. S-1
was orally administered after breakfast and dinner for
28 days, followed by 14 days of rest. This administration
of S-1 was repeated every 6 weeks for up to four
cycles until the disease progressed or until patients were
intolerant.
Factor to evaluate the efficacy of S‑1 for adjuvant
chemotherapy of PDAC: disease‑free survival (DFS) time
DFS was defined as the time from the date of surgery to
that of the first recurrence of the disease, the date last
known to have no evidence of disease, or the date of the
most recent follow-up with no disease. Follow-up information
was garnered from the medical and follow-up
records in the electronic medical records (EMR) system
and radiological information system (RIS) of our institute.
Patients who had no recurrence at the last followup
(November 2018) or who were lost to follow-up were
treated as censored in the analyses.
Kaplan–Meier analysis was used to calculate the
median DFS of the patients in our study. The efficacy
of S-1 for adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC was evaluated
by the median DFS. The patients were divided into
the non-response group and the response group by the
median DFS.
MRI protocol
All patients in the primary cohort underwent the abdominal
contrast-enhanced MR examination on the same
scanner (Magnetom Aera, Siemens Healthcare, Germany,
1.5 T). T1-
weighted images with spoiled gradient-echo
using volumetric interpolated breath-hold examination
(VIBE) sequence, T2-
weighted turbo spin-echo (TSE)
sequence and DWI (b = 0, 500 s/mm2) using single-shot
spin-echo echo-planar imaging were obtained before
contrast was administrated. Dynamic contrast-enhanced
MR images with T1-
weighted images using VIBE
sequences were obtained at the arterial phase (AP, 10 s
after the trigger threshold reached), portal venous phase
(PVP, 30 s after AP), and delayed phase (DP, 80–120 s
after PVP) after injection of 0.1 mmol/kg Gadopentetate
dimeglumine at a rate of 1–2 mL/s. Automatic tracking
trigger scanning was applied for contrast enhancement,
with the trigger points located in the abdominal
aorta and the threshold set at a signal of 90. T1-
weighted
images using VIBE sequence performed on Magnetom
Avanto (Siemens Healthcare, Germany, 1.5 T) was used
for the validation. Detailed parameters of each sequence
are shown in Table 1.
Extraction of whole‑tumour radiomics features
Whole‑tumour segmentation
Whole-tumour segmentation was performed semiautomatically
by a radiologist (with 11 years of experience
in abdominal imaging), then checked and corrected
by another radiologist (with 13 years of experience in
abdominal imaging). A prototype software (Radiomics,
Siemens Healthineers, Germany, not for commercial
use) using a generic automatic segmentation algorithm
based on a 3D domain in the workflow [18] was used for
the segmentation. If the contour was not properly drawn,
editing of the contour would be performed. A typical
example of whole-tumour segmentation is presented in
Fig. 1.
Extraction of radiomics features
All the segmentation data were subjected to radiomics
feature extraction using the same prototype software
interfacing with the Pyradiomics library [19]. A total
of 110 radiomics features comprising 7 feature groups
of whole-tumour were extracted from each studied
sequence completely automatically: 19 first order statistics
features, 16 contour-based features, 24 Grey Level
Cooccurence Matrix (GLCM) features, 16 Grey Level
Run Length Matrix (GLRLM) features, 16 Grey Level
Size Zone Matrix (GLSZM) features, 5 Neighbouring
Grey Tone Difference Matrix (NGTDM) features, 14
Grey Level Dependence Matrix (GLDM) features.
Image analysis
The pre-operative PDAC imaging were evaluated subjectively
and quantitatively. Signal of tumour, morphology of
tumour, tumour margins, peripheral or central delayed
enhancement of tumour, necrosis of tumour, peripancreatic
infiltration, peripancreatic blood vessel invasion
(arterial and venous), pancreatic duct dilatation, atrophy
of the upstream pancreas and the presence of retention
cyst [20] were evaluated by 2 radiologists (with 11 years
and 13 years of experience in abdominal imaging) who
were blinded to the clinical information on the picture
archiving communication system (PACS). Consensus
was achieved through discussion to resolve the controversy.
Whole-tumour quantitative evaluation including
the tumour size, ADC value of the whole tumour,
enhancement rates of the whole tumour on AP, PVP and
DP, as well as enhancement rate differences of the whole
tumour between different dynamic contrast-enhanced
phases [20] was performed by using data obtained from
radiomics analysis.
Statistical analysis
We performed the statistical analysis with SPSS statistical
software (version 19.0.0, IBM, USA).
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the
non-response group and the response group in the primary
cohort were compared using Fisher’s exact test
(for categorical variables) or the Mann–Whitney U test
(for continuous variables) to determine any relationship
between the characteristics and the efficacy of S-1
for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC.
The median DFS was calculated with the Kaplan–Meier
method and compared by the Log Rank test. Univariable
analysis with Fisher’s exact test (for the subjective
evaluation of pre-operative PDAC imaging, all of which
were categorical variables) or the Mann–Whitney U test
(for the whole-tumour quantitative evaluation of preoperative
PDAC imaging, all of which were continuous
variables) was used for comparisons between the nonresponse
group and the response group of the primary
cohort to determine any association between pre-operative
PDAC imaging findings and the efficacy of S-1 for
postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC.
Radiomics features selection: Univariable analysis with
the Mann–Whitney U test method was adopted to select
potentially valuable features to predict the efficacy of S-1
for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC. Features
were selected from the whole-tumour radiomics
features of T1WI
(VIBE), T2WI,
AP, PVP, and DP images
from the primary cohort. The p value threshold was set at
0.05 for appropriate selection.
After univariable analysis and radiomics features
selection, a multivariable Cox regression model (Cox
proportional hazards model) of survival analysis was subsequently
used to select statistically significant factors
associated with postoperative DFS. Potentially significant
variables with p value < 0. 05 in univariable analysis
and selected radiomics features were enrolled in the
analysis. A forward stepwise regression method based
on maximum likelihood estimation (Forward: LR) was
used for multivariable Cox regression analysis. Then, the
patients were grouped by the factors selected through
multivariable Cox regression analysis. Continuous variables
were grouped by the cut-off value as the threshold,
which was identified using receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curve analysis. Postoperative DFS between
the subgroups was analysed using the Kaplan–Meier
method and compared with the Log Rank test and survival
curves to confirm the prediction performance of the
selected factors. Predictive capacities of the selected factors
were also tested on the validation cohort by using the
Kaplan–Meier method and survival curves that evaluated
by the Log Rank test.
p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant
and 0.05 ≤ p values < 0.1 were considered marginally significant
in the study. In this pilot study we did not perform
a correction for multiplicity given the small patient
cohorts and exploratory nature of this study.
Results
Patient characteristics
The demographic information and clinical characteristics
of the patients in the study are shown in Table 2. There
were no differences found between the primary and validation
cohorts, which enabled their use as primary and
validation cohorts. The median DFS of the patients was
10.7 months in the primary cohort and 11.0 months in
the validation cohort (p = 0.772). The patients in the primary
cohort were divided into the non-response to S-1
group (DFS ≤ 10. 7 m, n = 16) and the response group
(DFS > 10.7 m, n = 15) by the median DFS. The pre-operative
CEA and CA19-9 levels in the non-response group
were higher than those in the response group (p = 0.028
and 0.022). Tumour location was also different between
the two groups (p = 0.032), i.e., the non-response group
had a much higher proportion of tumours located on the
head of the pancreas.
Subjective evaluation of pre‑operative MRI in the primary
cohort
The findings of the subjective evaluation of pre-operative
PDAC imaging are presented in Table 3. Two subjective
factors of pre-operative MRI, irregular tumour morphology
(43.8% vs. 6.7%) and peripancreatic tissue involvement
(75.0% vs. 26.7%), were higher in the non-response
group than in the response group of the primary cohort;
the difference was statistically significant (p = 0.037 and
0.012). There seemed to be no differences in the other
subjective evaluation variables of pre-operative MRI
between the two groups in the primary cohort.
Whole‑tumour quantitative evaluation of pre‑operative
MRI in the primary cohort
The results of the whole-tumour quantitative evaluation
of pre-operative PDAC imaging are presented in Table 4.
Univariable analysis showed that two factors of wholetumour
quantitative evaluation, the enhancement rate
of DP, the enhancement rate difference between DP and
AP, were significantly different between the non-response
group and the response group in the primary cohort
(p = 0.013 and 0.036), both of which were lower in the
non-response group. There seemed to be no differences
in the other variables of the whole-tumour quantitative
evaluation of pre-operative MRI between the two groups
in the primary cohort.
Whole‑tumour radiomics features selection
from the primary cohort
A total of 110 radiomics features of the whole tumour
were extracted from each studied sequence of pre-operative
MRI, and a total of 550 features were analysed for
each PDAC lesion of the primary cohort. The results of
whole-tumour radiomics features selection are shown in
Table 5. Two features, including Complexity of NGTDM
from T1WI
(
T1WI_NGTDM_Complexity) and Strength
of NGTDM from T1WI
(
T1WI_NGTDM_Strength),
were selected as potentially valuable features to predict
the efficacy of S-1 for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy
of PDAC (p = 0.044 and 0.030). The mathematical
formulas of the selected features are listed in the
“Appendix”.
Survival analysis: factors relevant to therapy efficacy of S‑1
After univariable analysis and radiomics features selection,
CEA, CA19-9, tumour location, morphology of
tumour, peripancreatic infiltration, enhancement rate
of DP, enhancement rate difference between DP and
AP, and the whole-tumour radiomics features of T1WI_
NGTDM_Complexity and T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength
were enrolled into the multivariable Cox regression
analysis. According to the results of the analyses, wholetumour
radiomics feature of T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength
and tumour location were significantly associated with
postoperative DFS (p = 0.005 and 0.013), with hazard
ratios (HRs) of 0.289 and 0.293, respectively (Table 6).
Thus, these two factors may potentially predict the efficacy
of S-1 for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy of
PDAC.
Further survival analysis with the Kaplan–Meier
method and the Log Rank test showed that grouping
by T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength or tumour location
prompted significantly different postoperative DFS
between the respective subgroups in the primary cohort
(p = 0.006 and 0.016). The optimum cut-off value of
T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength generated by ROC curve analysis
was 0.021 (p = 0.030, 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.551–0.907). Using this threshold value, the patients
were classified into a low-T1WI_NGTDM_Strength
group (value of T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength < 0.021)
and a high-T1WI_NGTDM_Strength group (value of
T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength ≥ 0.021).
In the primary cohort, patients in the low-
T1WI_NGTDM_Strength group had shorter DFS
(median = 5.1 m) than those in the high-T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength group (median = 13.0 m) (Table 7,
Fig. 2a). Patients with PDAC on the pancreatic head
exhibited shorter DFS (median = 7.0 m) than patients
with PDAC in other tumour locations (median = 20.0 m)
(Table 7, Fig. 2b). Whole-tumour radiomics feature
of T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength and tumour location
showed significant value for predicting the efficacy of
S-1 for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC
independently.
Validation of the factors relevant to therapy efficacy of S‑1
In the validation cohort, different subgroups of T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength or tumour locations also prompted
different postoperative DFS, with marginally significant
(p = 0.073 and 0.050), respectively. Patients in
the low-T1WI_NGTDM_Strength group had shorter
DFS (median = 5.4 m) than those in the high-T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength group (median = 28.0 m) (Table 8,
Fig. 3a). Patients with PDAC on the pancreatic head
exhibited shorter DFS (median = 7.0 m) than patients
with PDAC in other tumour locations (median = 28.0 m)
(Table 8, Fig. 3b).
Discussion
Multiple diagnostic and treatment guidelines suggest that
all stages of PDAC patients need to undergo postoperative
adjuvant chemotherapy [4–6]. As mentioned above,
two important clinical studies in Asian populations confirmed
the efficacy of S-1 for PDAC [8, 9], especially the
superiority of S-1 to gemcitabine as postoperative adjuvant
chemotherapy for PDAC in terms of overall survival.
Additionally, compared to gemcitabine, S-1 has
the convenience of oral administration, no complications
of intravenous chemotherapy, good tolerability with
fewer adverse reactions and might contribute to improving
patients’ quality of life [9]. Currently, S-1 is recommended
as a first-line adjuvant chemotherapy drug in the
diagnostic and treatment guidelines for PDAC [5, 6].
However, the guidelines do not clearly indicate how
to select the optimal chemotherapy regimen for PDAC
patients suitably and individualizedly, and which population
can benefit from S-1 is still unknown; proper
evidence-based guidance is still lacking. Some studies
proposed that the intratumoural expression levels of
DPD and thymidylate synthase (TS) might be related to
therapeutic outcomes in PDAC patients receiving S-1
chemotherapy [21–23], but the conclusion remains controversial;
some studies even had contradictory results
[24, 25].
In our study, the non-response to S-1 group had a
much higher proportion of PDAC located on the pancreatic
head than the response group in the primary
cohort. In the validation cohort, patients with PDAC on
the pancreatic head also exhibited shorter DFS. Previous
studies also indicated that pancreatic head cancers
and pancreatic body/tail cancers had different overall
survival rates and tumour-free survival [26, 27]. Their
biological characteristics, such as the concentration
of cell-of-origin and microRNA expression, were also
different [27]. These differences may be related to the
embryonic development of the pancreas. The pancreas
develops from the formation of a ventral bud and a dorsal
bud, each with its own duct originating from the
primitive intestine, that finally fuse as the pancreas.
Thus, the blood supply, lymphatic backflow, and innervations
between the head and body/tail of the pancreas
are significantly different [28]. This may be the
reason why the biological behaviours and the treatment
responses of PDAC in different locations also differ.
To date, there are limited data on the effect of
tumour location on the benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy,
as most studies have not yet analysed the different
responses to chemotherapy of tumours
in different locations [28, 29]. Our study has partially
filled that research gap, even though the sample size was
relatively small. In our study, S-1 used for postoperative
adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC was much more effective
for patients with tumours located in areas other than
the pancreatic head, suggesting that the selection of S-1
for PDAC located on the pancreatic head should be made
more cautiously. Interestingly, another study found that
gemcitabine improved overall survival in a subgroup of
postoperative patients with pancreatic head tumours
compared to 5-FU [30, 31].
Because of the strict requirements for the consistency
of treatment regimen and follow-ups in the enrolment
criteria, the number of patients included in this
pilot study was relatively small. Consequently, we only
performed radiomics features screening and selection;
multi-factor fusion model construction, which could be
carried out in radiomics analysis, was not performed
in our study. However, the identified radiomics feature-
T1WI_NGTDM_Strength-was confirmed by a multivariable
Cox proportional hazards model and Kaplan–Meier
analysis to be a potential predictor for the efficacy of
S-1 for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC.
NGTDM_Strength is one of the radiomics features
from the group of Neighbouring Grey Tone Difference
Matrix (NGTDM). As high-order statistical parameters,
NGTDM examines the signal intensity and spatial interrelationship
between neighbouring voxels between adjacent
image planes, which describe the dynamic range of
intensities at a local level and better quantify the heterogeneity
within the tumour [32]. Strength is a measure
of the primitives in the image. Radiomics features
can uncover tumour characteristics that may fail to be
appreciated by the naked eye [33]. From the results of our
study, NGTDM_Strength from T1WI
was independently
related to the therapy response of PDAC, supporting that
radiomics features could potentially reflect the biological
information of tumours, including the intratumoural
heterogeneity associated with the response to treatment
and survival [14, 34, 35]. In another diffusion-weighted-
MRI-derived radiomics study, 13 radiomics features were
found to be important for predicting the gemcitabinebased
chemotherapy response of PDAC [36]. NGTDM_
Strength was not included, demonstrating the possible
specificity of NGTDM_Strength for predicting the efficacy
of S-1, but the relationship between the radiomics
features and therapy response to S-1 still needs to be further
analysed in larger cohorts.
A few studies have assessed the potential of imaging
data, including radiomics features, for the prediction of
survival in PDAC with different examination techniques.
One study showed that not only for resectable PDAC but
also for locally advanced and/or metastatic PDAC, specific
CT radiomics feature was a significant prognostic
factor [37]. Another study that first evaluated the prognostic
value of FDG-PET radiomics in pancreatic cancer
found that feature of GLZLM GLNU was the most relevant
factor for predicting 1-year survival [38]. However,
these studies did not analyse the treatment response of
specific regimens. Compared with most previous texture
analysis studies in PDAC that were based on CT imaging
[15–17, 39, 40], we performed radiomics analysis based
on MRI, which has a higher resolution in soft tissue than
CT. Although based on different examination techniques,
the selected features are mostly related to intratumoural
heterogeneity [32, 37, 38]. However, performances have
not yet been compared among CT, MRI, and PET/CT
[41, 42]. It is difficult to determine which examination
technique is better for radiomics analysis from previous
studies. MRI-based radiomics analysis may likely be
more predictive of tumour heterogeneity but might be
more susceptible to variations in imaging parameters
compared to CT [41]. We performed all the MRI examinations
of the same cohort with the same scanner in our
study to avoid the influences of equipment and parameter
differences.
Additionally, the univariable analysis demonstrated
that the non-response to S-1 group had more cases of
irregular tumour morphology and peripancreatic tissue
involvement on pre-operative MRI, which reflected the
higher invasiveness of PDAC in this group than in the
response group. Although the multivariable Cox proportional
hazards model did not show an association of
these imaging signs and postoperative DFS with adjuvant
chemotherapy of S-1, if these signs are present in preoperative
image assessment, the selection of S-1 warrants
great caution, and a more intensive adjuvant chemotherapy
regimen may be more appropriate. The above recommendation
still needs to be further validated by studying
larger cohorts.
The region of interest (ROI) of the whole tumour was
conducted during the analysis in this study. Compared
with the largest cross-sectional area analysis that was
performed in several previous studies [17, 39], wholetumour
analysis is more representative of intratumoural
biological characteristics and could avoid selection bias.
The results are also relatively more reliable [43]. Therefore,
whole-tumour imaging analysis including radiomics
features may obtain additional predictive factors about
the outcomes of treatments noninvasively and no extra
examinations and medical expenses will be added. To the
best of our knowledge, there are no similar studies about
the imaging evaluation of PDAC in the literature. The
results of our study could be the feasible basis of evidence
and further studies for personalized precision medicine
to select the right treatment for the right patient at the
right time, thereby reducing the adverse reactions of ineffective
treatments and improving the quality of life as
well as prognosis of PDAC patients.
Our study has several limitations. Due to the strict
requirements for the consistency of treatment regimen
and follow-ups, the number of enrolled patients was
relatively small and our study was a pilot study. In addition,
the follow-up period was relatively short. Despite
these limitations, this pilot study found that wholetumour
radiomics feature of T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength
and tumour location had significant value in predicting
the efficacy of S-1 for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy
of PDAC independently in the primary cohort.
However, the differences of DFS between different subgroups
in the validation cohort were marginally significant
with the same survival trends as the primary cohort.
The reason for this might be that the sample size was not
large enough to make the selected factors achieve steady
performance. Another cause could be the different MRI
scanners used in image acquisition in two cohorts, since
radiomics features are known to vary with scanner type.
Prospective research with a large sample size and different
institutes is needed to further verify the reliability and
repeatability of the predictors. Further studies to identify
predictors for the selection of S-1 as chemotherapy regimen
for locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic cancer
are also needed.
Conclusions
Our study has demonstrated that whole-tumour evaluation
with MRI and radiomics features could be used
for predicting the efficacy of S-1, along with that the
whole-tumour radiomics feature of T1WI_
NGTDM_
Strength and tumour location were potential predictors
of the efficacy of S-1 and for the precision selection of
S-1 as adjuvant chemotherapy regimen of PDAC.