Background
A carotid web is considered a rare fibromuscular dysplasia.
It has received increasing attention for being a rare
risk factor for ischemic stroke. It is a rare disease of the
carotid artery, and its incidence is about 0.62% [1–3].
Because of the unclear or missed diagnosis of imaging
diagnosis, clinical treatment is often not timely, so that
patients can not get correct and timely treatment, thus
aggravating the condition and affecting the quality of life.
So its clinical and imaging definite diagnosis need further
exploration.
Case presentation
Standard care is performed, so ethical approval is not
applicable in this study. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient.
A 65-year-old male patient was admitted to Tianjin
Huanhu Hospital on October 20, 2018, due to left limb
weakness accompanied by a headache and dizziness for
4 h. The computed tomography (CT) examination of
the head indicated infarction of the right basal ganglia.
He had a history of hypertension for 4 years, poor blood
pressure control under ordinary circumstances, and a
history of hyperlipidemia for more than 20 years. The
physical examination revealed the following: blood pressure
177/110 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa), clear mind,
unclear speech, a shallow nasolabial groove on the left
side, left tongue extension, muscle strength of the left
upper limb level 3, muscle strength of the left lower limb
level 4, muscle strength of the right limb level 5, positive
Babinski sign on the left side, incomplete finger nose test
on the left side, and negative Kernig’s sign.
Carotid CTA was performed on a 256-multidetector
row CT scanner with 1-mm thick sections and was
acquired from the aortic arch through the circle of Willis.
Scanning parameters included the following: gantry
rotation time, 0.5 s; pitch, 1; voltage, 120 kV; and 360
mAs CT scanner. GE 3.0 T MR scanner (General Electric
Healthcare,) was used to acquire images using both
conventional and research sequences. Thin-section axial
CTA showed a membrane-like structure in the posterior
wall of the right common carotid artery (Fig. 1a).
The sagittal reconstruction image showed a membranelike
protrusion in the posterior wall of the right common
carotid artery under the right carotid sinus (Fig. 1b). The
MR axial T2 image showed a membrane-like high-signal
protrusion into the carotid artery lumen (Fig. 2), which
was diagnosed as a right carotid web. The patient was
treated with aspirin 350 mg daily, clopidogrel 75 mg daily,
enoxaparin sodium.
(Lovenox) 0.40 mL (40 mg) subcutaneously twice daily,
and atorvastatin 40 mg daily. with reduction to single
antiplatelet aspirin 350 mg daily after 2 months. At
8-month follow-up, the patient had residual speech difficulty
and left-sided weakness.
Discussion and conclusions
Currently, the etiology of a carotid web is unclear. It may
be related to heredity, chronic vascular injury, hormone
level, and trophoblastic vascular abnormality. In young
women, it may be related to the use of oral contraceptives
[4] because oral contraceptives can cause arterial intimal
hyperplasia and the formation of a carotid web.
A carotid web is a special type of myofibrous dysplasia,
with an angiogram different from the typical
angiogram of myofibrous dysplasia [5]. Most of the
angiograms show "bead-like" or focal "strip-like" stenosis,
while a carotid web shows a membrane-like tissue
protruding into the vascular cavity. Sajedi [6] et al. performed
endarterectomy on two patients with a carotid
web. The pathological results showed extensive hyperplasia
of intimal muscle fibers with fibrosis and myxoid
change. A review and retrospective analysis of the
pathological results of 21 patients with a carotid web
showed the abnormal variation of the intimal layer [7].
Imaging examination of a carotid web and its
characteristics
A carotid web can be found and diagnosed by magnetic
resonance angiography (MRA), CTA, and digital subtraction
angiography (DSA).
DSA DSA is the first examination method applied to
the diagnosis of a carotid web. It is manifested as a linear
filling defect in the vascular lumen and the retention
of the contrast agent at the far end of the carotid web,
leading to blood stasis, which is conducive to thrombosis.
Although DSA is a safe and an invasive diagnostic
method, the present case was not diagnosed by DSA
because of dual antiplatelet therapy after CTA diagnosis.
CTA This technique can obtain detailed vascular morphological
information and reconstruct in a short time.
It has high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis
of a carotid web. The CTA of the head and neck is often
the first choice in clinical practice. It shows more specific
manifestations of a carotid web: (1) a membrane-like
structure in the artery lumen is seen in the axial position;
(2) the posterior wall of the carotid sinus or the starting
section of the internal carotid artery protrudes into the
shelf-like filling defect in the lumen in the sagittal position;
(3) in a few cases, thrombus can be seen on a carotid
web. CTA can help distinguish other diseases, such as
dissection, aneurysm, atherosclerosis, and so on. However,
CTA also has some shortcomings, such as the inability
to provide hemodynamic information. In addition,
CTA is also associated with radiation-induced damage,
which may cause renal damage, allergy, and so forth.
MR MR can provide varied information for the evaluation
of a carotid web using different sequences and patterns.
MR T2 shows a thin-film-like slightly high signal
into the common carotid artery. Morphologically, the
MRA and CTA of a carotid web are basically the same.
However, MRA seems to be less sensitive and specific
compared with CTA in the diagnosis of a carotid web. In
one study, only intimal thickening was found on MRA in
a case of carotid web confirmed by CTA [8]. The advantage
of MRA is that it can provide more information
about lesions and arterial wall and help differentiate and
diagnose atherosclerosis and other diseases. Few studies
explored the correlation between MRA and carotid web.
Hence, the difference in the detection rate between different
sequences still needs to be explored.
Differential diagnosis of a carotid web
A focal atherosclerotic plaque (ASP) is characterized
by an endometrial flap on axial CTA [9], and therefore
it is easily misdiagnosed as an ASP [10]. The typical
pathological features of an ASP are a lipid-rich necrotic
core covered with a fibrous cap, multiple filling defects,
and niches seen on the MIP map of CTA. The nonatherosclerotic
and noninflammatory histopathological
features of a carotid web are significantly different
from those of an ASP; a membrane-like septal shadow
is seen on a CTA image. Most patients with a carotid
web have no vascular risk factors, differentiating it from
atherosclerosis.
The direct imaging signs of carotid dissection are
a double-lumen sign and an intimal flap. Trauma or
spontaneity leads to the dissection of the carotid artery.
Traumatic dissection is a serious complication of blunt
trauma in the head and neck, which can lead to tearing
of the intima of the vessel wall, formation of a hematoma,
stenosis, and thrombosis in the lumen. Mild stressful
actions (such as coughing, vomiting, exercise, or neck
manipulation) do not directly cause spontaneous dissection,
but they trigger spontaneous dissection in patients
with the underlying arterial disease [11]. Spontaneous
dissection is also the reason why cerebrovascular events
are increasingly recognized in young and middle-aged
patients. Further, 19.7% of patients with FMD have
artery dissection [12], mostly involving the carotid artery.
Therefore, it is necessary to identify such patients carefully
in clinical practice.
Treatment of a carotid web
Related studies have found that the recurrence rate of
stroke in patients with a carotid web and ischemic stroke
after antiplatelet therapy is about 30% [10, 13]. Therefore,
monoclonal or dual antiplatelet therapy is not the
best secondary prevention method. Anticoagulant therapy
may be considered because the possible mechanism
of thrombus formation is similar to that in the left atrial
appendage.
In clinical treatment, the most commonly used carotid
endarterectomy is the first operation method to prevent
recurrent stroke in patients with a carotid web. The principle
of preventing stroke by removing a carotid web is
also obvious. A study on carotid endarterectomy in
patients with a carotid web reported no recurrence of
stroke [10]. The operation can effectively reduce the risk
of stroke recurrence in such patients. Also, pathological
tissues obtained in operation provides the conditions
necessary for further studying the pathology and pathogenesis
of a carotid web. However, carotid endarterectomy
has many limitations, including high requirements
of surgical technology, high risk of surgery, relatively high
incidence of surgical complications, intolerance to surgery
among some high-risk patients (old age, poor general
condition, and so on), and so forth.
Some clinicians choose carotid stent placement for
treating patients with ischemic stroke. In the study by
Haussen [13], 16 patients were treated with carotid
artery placement. The number of patients in a similar
study was the largest, the average follow-up time was
4 months, and no recurrence of stroke was found. Further,
the short-term prognosis was good [14]. Carotid
artery stenting is a safe and effective method for treating
a carotid web, with low perioperative complications and
good short-term results. The time of carotid artery stent
placement is shorter than that of carotid endarterectomy
[15]. The present study had a small sample size. Also, no
randomized controlled study involving the use of drug
therapy or carotid endarterectomy is available at present.
However, carotid artery stent therapy may have a great
prospect with the development of neurointerventional
technology and materials.
Conclusion
Although carotid web is a rare disease, careful comparison
of axial thin-layer CTA and MR axial T2 images,
combined with CTA sagittal reconstruction, can greatly
improve the diagnostic rate of carotid web, thus providing
useful imaging information for clinical.