Background
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) originates from the renal
tubular epithelium and is one of the most lethal
urological malignancies [1, 2]. Its incidence has been increasing
year by year, and runs up to 3% of malignant
tumors in human beings [3]. Renal angiomyolipoma
(AML), comprising 2.0–6.4% of all renal tumors, is the
most common benign mesenchymal neoplasm of the
renal [4, 5]. Imaging is the main differentiating method
for the both above. Up to now, the commonly used
imaging diagnostic methods include conventional ultrasound
(CUS), computed-tomography (CT), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and so on. However, both CT
and MRI have disadvantages of high cost, ionizing radiation,
and adverse reactions induced by iodine contrast
agents or gadolinium contrast agents [6]. Though CUS
is non-ionizing, non-invasive, readily available and
inexpensive, it is limited in attempting to differentiate
RCC from AML [7].
Therefore, a safe and accurate imaging method is
needed for differential diagnosing RCC from AML, and
microbubble-based contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS)
has garnered increasing attention in this field. CEUS has
unique advantages with non-ionizing, real-time imaging,
and rare and mild adverse reactions induced by contrast
agents [8]. The previous studies [9, 10] have reported that
CEUS might have a good ability to assess renal masses,
but the CEUS characteristics of RCC are still controversial.
Xu et al. [11] found that heterogeneous enhancement
was a major CEUS characteristic regardless of the subtype
of RCC. However, the results of Jiang et al. [12] and Xue
et al. [13] showed that for tumors≤3 cm, homogeneous
enhancement was more frequently seen on CEUS, regardless
of the subtype enhancement.
Thus, the present study aimed at analyzing the diagnostic
performance of CEUS in differentiating between
RCC and AML proved pathologically, and identifying
the independent indicators of CEUS for predicting RCC.
Methods
Patients
This was a single-institution retrospective study. This
study was approved by the Review Board of Huadong
Hospital, and written informed consent was obtained
from all patients. Between August 2012 and January
2019, 165 patients with 172 renal masses were recruited
for the study, included 145 patients (117 males and 33
females, age range 25–86 years, mean age 61.2 ± 12.4
years) with 150 RCCs and 20 patients (5 males and 17
females, age range 22–75 years, mean age 55.7 ± 16.0
years) with 22 AMLs. Inclusion criteria were as follows:
1) patients underwent CUS and CEUS before radical or
partial nephrectomy; 2) renal tumor pathologically confirmed
as RCC or AML; 3) sufficient normal renal tissue
around mass; and 4) patient had not undergone any invasive
treatments before CUS and CEUS. Exclusion criteria
were 1) pure cystic mass; 2) the video clips of
CEUS were incomplete; and 3) a history of cardiac failure
or respiratory disorders.
CUS and CEUS examination
Both CUS and CEUS were performed by a single radiologist
(C.L.) with 17 years of experience in abdominal US
and 13 years in CEUS at our institution. The examinations
were performed using an ultrasound scanner (4C1 probe,
3–5MHz, mechanical index < 0.10, Aplio500, Toshiba
Medical Systems, Otawara, Japan). Initial CUS was conducted
to obtain the position, shape, echogenicity, size,
margins, homogeneity, and orientation of the tumor. Then
color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) was used to assess the
blood flow of the tumor. Subsequently, optimal section
containing both renal lesion and normal adjacent parenchyma
was selected, and the ultrasound scanner was
switched to CEUS mode. The US contrast agent of
SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy), a sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)
microbubble stabilized by phospholipids, was used in this
study. The freeze-dried powder of SonoVue was shaken
with 5.0ml of normal saline into suspension. According to
the weight, height, and age of the patients, a dose of 1.6–
2.4ml of this suspension was individually administered
into the antecubital vein in a bolus fashion, followed by a
flush of 5.0 ml saline. At the time of contrast agent injection,
the keys of the timer and video recorder were
pressed simultaneously. Maintain slow shallow breath was
required for all patients, and each dynamic contrast image
was observed at least 3min. If a tumor was incompletely
assessed, a second injection was repeated 15min after the
first injection. The single images and video clips of CUS
and CEUS were stored in the local hard disk for subsequent
analysis.
Imaging interpretation and data evaluation
The images and video clips saved on the local hard disk
were independently reviewed in random by two radiologists
(D.X.H. and Z.J.), both blinded to the pathological
results. Both radiologists had more than 10 years of
experience in urinary US and 8 years in reading CEUS
images. The CUS characteristics included the mass position,
shape, echogenicity, size, margins, homogeneity,
orientation, and color flow signals. Referring to the normal
renal cortex adjacent to renal mass, the enhancement
characteristics of renal mass were analyzed. The
CEUS features included the enhancement intensity at
peak time, the homogeneity of enhancement, the perilesional
rim-like enhancement and the “wash in” and
“wash out” mode. The enhancement intensity at peak
time was described into hyper-, iso-, and hypoenhancement.
The homogeneity at peak enhancement
was classified into homogeneous and heterogeneous.
The homogeneous was defined as a renal mass with uniform
enhancement, and the heterogeneous was defined
as a renal mass with inconsistent enhancement. The
perilesional rim-like enhancement, more distinct in the
late phase of enhancement, was classified as present or
absent. Both the “wash in” and “wash out” of renal
masses contrast enhancement were classified as fast,
synchronous, or slow. The value of these features was
calculated and analyzed to differentiate the diagnosis between
RCC and AML. If conclusions of the two radiologists
were different, they consulted with a third reviewer
to reach a final conclusion by discussions.
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were expressed as mean ± standard
deviation (SD), and discrete variables as numbers and
percentages. The Shapiro-Wilk W test was used to determine
whether data was normally distributed, and the
F test determine whether the variables had homogeneity
of variance. Differences between RCC and AML were
analyzed using Independent-Sample t test and Mann-
Whitney U test for continuous variables, and Pearson’s
chi-square test and Fisher’s exact tests for discrete variables.
The variables that showed strong performance in
basic statistics were subjected to the multivariate logistic
regression analysis for predicting RCC. We calculated
odds ratio (OR), 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and P
value. Those variables with significant and independent
influence were isolated and used to fit the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve determining the area
under the ROC curve (AUC). We determined the optimal
cut-off values for the represented indices that
showed the highest AUC. The corresponding sensitivity,
specificity, and AUC were calculated with 95% CIs. Statistical
analysis was performed by using IBM SPSS Statistics
version 22.0 for Windows (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY,
USA) and MedCalc Statistics version 15.2. A P value <
0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Characteristics of the enrolled patients
A pathologic diagnosis was obtained for all masses via a
laparoscopic or open radical or partial nephrectomy.
One single mass was detected in 142 patients with RCCs
and 16 patients with AMLs, and two masses were detected
in the remaining 7 patients. Of the patients with
two nodules, 2 had AML in each kidney, 2 had RCC in
each kidney, 1had RCC in the left kidney, 1had RCC and
AML in the left kidney, and 1had AML in the left kidney
and RCC in the right kidney. Thus, a total of 165 patients
with172 renal masses were recruited, 150 (87.2%)
were RCCs and 22 (12.8%) were AMLs. The RCCs were
clear cell carcinoma (129, 86.0%), papillary carcinoma
(11, 7.3%), chromophobe carcinoma (10, 6.7%), respectively.
Though age distribution, tumor location, and surgical
method were not significantly different between
RCCs and AMLs, more percentage of patients with RCC
were male than that with AML (P = 0.000) (Table 1).
CUS characteristics of renal masses
The diameter of RCCs (mean, 40.4 ± 22.1 mm; range, 7-
130 mm) and AMLs (mean, 34.7 ± 22.2 cm; range, 9-80
mm) made no significant difference (P = 0.258) (Table 2).
There were also no significant differences in terms of
shape, margin, orientation, and homogeneity between
RCCs and AMLs. Significant differences existed in echogenicity
and CDFI pattern.
CEUS characteristics of renal masses
CEUS characteristics of renal masses are listed in
Table 3. All the indices (peak intensity, homogeneity,
wash in, wash out, and perilesional rim-like enhancement)
are significantly different between RCCs and
AMLs (P < 0.05 for all).
The independent indicators correlated with RCCs
Multivariate analysis was used to identify the potential
indicators of RCCs. The results showed that perilesional
rim-like enhancement and fast wash out were independent
indicators correlated with RCCs (Table 4). Figure 1
shows the ROC curves of perilesional rim-like enhancement
and fast wash out correlated with RCCs. The AUC
of perilesional rim-like enhancement was 0.838 (95% CI:
0.774–0.890) with 76.7% sensitivity and 90.9% specificity,
while the AUC of fast wash out was 0.833 (95% CI:
0.768–0.885) with 74.7% sensitivity and 81.8% specificity
(Table 5).
Discussions
RCC, the most common renal malignancy, is characterized
by numerous thin-walled blood vessels with rich
blood flow, and common findings include intra-tumoral
necrosis, hemorrhage, and calcification [14]. AML, the
most common renal benign neoplasm, contains varying
proportion of thick-walled blood vessels, smooth muscle,
and fat tissue [4]. Most AMLs need only active surveillance
rather than invasive treatment, but for RCC,
especially for clear cell RCC, surgical resection is the
preferred therapy [15, 16]. Therefore, it is important to
differentiate them for the prognostic evaluation and clinical
treatment decision.
Compared to CT and MRI, CUS is usually the preferred
choice for detecting renal lesions because it is
readily available, inexpensive, noninvasive, non-ionizing,
and provides images in real time [17]. However, it has
limited use when attempting to differentiate between
RCC and AML because of its lower accuracy in the
characterization of some renal masses [7]. To the extent
known, hypoechoic renal masses are mostly considered
to be malignant while hyperechoic and iso-echoic renal
masses are often referred to as benign. The current
study showed that, among all the characteristics on
CUS, there was significantly different in term of echogenicity
between RCC and AML (P = 0.000). However,
hyperechoic RCCs were noted in 23 masses (15.3%) and
iso-echoic RCCs were noted in 28 masses (18.7%). Four
AMLs (18.2%) were hypoechoic and one (4.5%) was isoechoic
on CUS in this study. Therefore, CUS had limited
ability to distinguish between RCC and AML. As for
CDFI, RCC differed from AML with respect to blood
flow signals (p = 0.000). However, there were 16(72.7%)
AMLs and 49(32.7%) RCCs without blood flow signals
in the study. Due to overlap in imaging features between
some cases of AML and RCC, additional imaging to further
characterize renal lesions is recommended.
The previous studies have reported that CEUS imaging
technology, without severe risk or discomfort, has a
good ability to assess renal lesions [18–20], but the
CEUS characteristics of RCC are still controversial.
Thus, the present study aimed at analyzing the diagnostic
performance of CEUS in differentiating between RCC
and AML proved pathologically. And our study showed
that perilesional rim-like enhancement and fast wash out
were independent indicators correlated with RCC.
The perilesional rim-like enhancement around the
tumor was considered to represent the presence of a
pseudocapsule (Fig. 2). It results from tumor growth
producing compression, ischemia, and necrosis of adjacent
normal parenchyma, with subsequent deposition of
fibrous tissue [16, 21]. In our study, a pseudocapsule was
observed on the histologic examination. And in this
study, CEUS showed that more percentage of perilesional
rim-like enhancement was observed in RCC than
in AML (p = 0.000). The perilesional rim-like enhancement
was observed in 76.7% (115/150) of RCCs, which
was similar to the figures reported by Xu et al. [11] and
Van et al. [22]. The presence of perilesional rim-like enhancement
was regarded as an important predictor of
RCC. Additionlly, the current study found that 2(9.1%)
AMLs presented with incomplete rim-like enhancement.
This might be related to the distribution of blood vessels
in AML.
The wash out would be possible in arteriovenous fistulas
or in normal physiological reflux through the renal
vein [23]. Compared with the normal renal parenchyma,
RCCs often exhibit fast wash out, while AMLs more
often show slow wash out [24]. Xue et al. [13] assessed
the difference of enhancement patterns among the three
RCC subtypes with CEUS, their results demonstrated
that most RCCs were fast wash out with the percentage
of 47.5(95/200), 89.7(52/58), 76.5(39/51) for clear cell
RCCs, papillary RCCs, chromophobe RCCs, respectively.
Our results showed that 56.0% (84/150) RCCs exhibited
fast wash out. This may be related to the proportion of
RCC subtypes included in this study. Sun et al. [25] reported
that 26%(5/19) of AMLs exhibited fast wash out,
while, 74% lesions were confirmed by two enhanced imaging
examinations including CEUS and CT/MRI. In
our study, all the lesions were diagnosed via surgical
pathology and only 4.5% (1/22) of AMLs exhibited fast
wash out.
Heterogeneous enhancement on CEUS correlated with
the existence of hemorrhage, necrosis and cystic change
[26]. Though, RCCs were manifested mostly as heterogeneous
enhancement as a result of the rapid growth of
the tumor and proneness to ischemic necrosis, heterogeneous
enhancement was not the independent indicators
for predicting RCCs in our study. This may be related to
the size of the tumors included in this study. Moreover,
Jiang et al. [12], Xue et al. [13] and Xu et al. [27] analyzed
the CEUS characteristics of RCC in relation to
tumor size. Their studies showed that heterogeneous enhancement
was mainly seen in tumors> 3 cm (72.9–
91%), compared to 28.2–55% in tumors≤3 cm. This
might because that the small tumors grow slowly and
rarely have necrosis change. Though most AMLs are
discovered incidentally, some AMLs can present with
spontaneous hemorrhage, particularly in masses larger
than 4 cm [28]. Moreover, Lu et al. [29] reported that
17.6% (6/34) AMLs showed heterogeneous enhancement.
In this study, 22.7% (5/22) AMLs showed heterogeneous
enhancement (Fig. 3), and all the masses were
larger than 4 cm.
The main limitation of our study is the relatively small
number of AMLs (n = 22) cases, so the possibility of selection
bias should be considered. Prospective studies
with larger numbers of AMLs patients are required to
validate our results. An additional limitation is that we
restricted our analysis to RCCs and AMLs, without considering
its subtypes, other benign tumors, or other malignant
tumors. Further studies should be performed for
the differentiation of all the above. A further limitation
is that pathologic findings proven by surgical resection
as an inclusive criterion exclude already characterized
nonsurgical masses, such as small typical AMLs.
Conclusion
Our findings suggest that CEUS imaging features including
wash out and perilesional rim-like enhancement may
be important indicators for predicting RCCs. These imaging
features may help differentiate RCCs for the prognostic
evaluation and clinical treatment decision.