Background
Solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs) are uncommon mesenchymal
neoplasms that occur most frequently in the pleura
and occasionally in the orbit [1]. SFTs are generally considered
benign; however, recurrent and malignant variation
have been reported. Several studies have reported
the highly vascular features of SFTs, which is especially
prevalent in recurrent SFTs. Preoperative imaging,
including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
computed tomography angiography (CTA), are complex
assessment tools that may predict hypervascularity [2,
3]. Traditional resection via orbitotomy or craniectomy
would carry a risk of uncontrolled bleeding and residual
tumors. Embolization is an alternative approach to minimize
intraoperative hemorrhage and improve the gross
total removal (GTR) rate. There are few reports of transarterial
embolization of orbital SFTs; only 4 have been
published in English [1, 4–6]. In this study, we successfully
resected a large, recurrent orbital SFT with multiple
feeder vessels after transarterial embolization. This
is the first Chinese case of a successful embolization of 2
main feeder vessels, which also demonstrated a different
operative approach to achieve GTR in an orbital SFTs
without performing an osteotomy.
Case presentation
A 53-year-old Chinese woman presented to the hospital
with an 8-year history of progressive proptosis of
the right orbit. It is associated with progressive reduced
of vision, visual field deficits and excessive tearing. She
denied diplopia, eye pain or headaches. Nine years prior
to this presentation, she had undergone surgical resection
of a right orbital tumor via anterior orbitotomy,
and histopathology confirmed that it was an SFT. Nine
months post operative, patient began to develop symptoms
that reflected a slow increase of tumor size. Because
the tumor was closely adherent to the optic nerve, it was
thought that resection might injure the nerve, potentially
damaging the patient’s sight. Considering her normal
best corrected visual acuity, patient was advised to attend
regular follow-ups. However 2 years later the patient was
no longer heard from until 2018.
On examination, there was a large non-pulsetile, noncompressible
mass in the right orbit cause the proptosed
eye displaced infero-temporal. Exopthamometer
measurement showed 23 mm proptosis in the right eye
and 15 mm in the left eye. The best corrected visual acuity
in the right eye was 2/20 with restricted visual field.
The cornea is clear, conjunctiva was injected and extra
ocular movement was restricted in elevation and adduction.
Fundus examination showed significant optic nerve
edema. Examination in the left eye and general physical
examination were normal.
Upon reviewing of the MRI in 2009 before the initial
resection, an ill-defined, well-encapsulated, mixedintensity
circular lesion measuring 2.4 cm × 2.1 cm with
3 septate cystic spaces was observed posterior to the
right orbit between the optic nerve and the medial rectus,
iso- or hypo-intense on T1, slightly hyper-intense
on T2 (Fig. 1a), and significantly enhanced on contrast
image. Unfortunately, 9 months after the initial operation,
the lesion proximal to the medial orbital wall reappeared
with the same signals (Fig. 1b). Twenty-one
months later, the lesion had increased in size to approximately
1.8 cm × 1.5 cm (Fig. 1c). The patient had not followed-
up for 7 years since then and came back the clinic
in 2018. The MRI was ordered, and the result showed
a large, heterogeneous, multi-cystic, 3.4 cm × 3.2 cm
intraconal mass occupying almost the entire posterior
orbit and causing expansion of the orbital cavity. The
signal was mostly iso-intense on T1 images (Fig. 1d),
and was slightly hyper- to significantly hyper-intense on
T2 images (Fig. 1e). Diffusely heterogeneous enhancement
was observed after intravenous gadolinium
administration (Fig. 1f), which might represent fast-flow
vessels within the tumor. The optic nerve was wrapped
and displaced laterally, and the extraocular muscles were
not identifiable.
The recurrent SFT was possibly predicted. Color Doppler
sonography of the posterior eyeball vessels further
indicated an arterial blood flow spectrum with a resistive
index of 0.58. CTA further confirmed the marked
vascularity and indicated that a high-blood-flow enlarged
ophthalmic artery was one of the potential main feeder
vessels.
En bloc tumor debulking utilizing existing techniques
presented significant difficulties. The tumor was large,
occupying vast majority of the retrobulbar orbital cavity,
and was firmly adherent to the right optic nerve
with marked vascularity. It was determined that it would
be difficult to completely resect the tumor using conventional
orbitotomy or craniectomy and preserve the
patient’s existing vision at the same time. There was
also concern that traditional orbitotomy surgery would
cause massive blood loss, which might result in incomplete
resection of the tumor, with the possibility of future
recurrence or even malignant metastasis [4, 7]. In addition,
we were faced with the dilemma of whether to enucleate
the eyeball. Considering the patient’s poor vision in
that eye and her intention not to undergo an osteotomy,
we obtained the patient’s written consent to perform an
ophthalmectomy to optimize exposure of the lesion in
order to resect it as completely as possible, after first performing
preoperative embolization of the blood supply to
the tumor to control intraoperative hemorrhage. Angiography
demonstrated that the majority of the vessels
feeding the tumor arose from the right ophthalmic artery
(Fig. 2a) and the distal branch of the right internal maxillary
artery (IMA) (Fig. 2b). The right frontal branch of
superficial temporal artery (Fig. 2c) and the perforation of
the right internal carotid artery (ICA) (Fig. 2d) also contributed
to the tumor’s blood supply. Because the entry
points of the feeder vessels were too thin for the microcatheter
(ASAHI Inc., Aichi-ken, Japan) to pass through,
the only alternative path was via the right ophthalmic
artery. To devascularize the vessels originating from the
right ophthalmic artery, ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer
(Onyx) liquid embolic agent was injected into the feeder
branches and the central retinal artery (Fig. 2e). Other
main feeder vessels arising from the right internal maxillary
artery were also embolized using 2 coils (Fig. 2f).
Vascular flow was markedly reduced immediately following
the embolization procedure.
Approximately 1 h after embolization, the patient
experienced 4 significant phenomena: (1) extreme pain
in the right eye; (2) immediate loss of light perception;
(3) significant swelling of conjunctiva; and (4) a
decrease in heart rate of 45–50 bpm compared with the
previous heart rate of 65–80 bpm. Of the 4 phenomena
observed after embolization, the drastic drop in heart
rate was especially alarming. ‘Oculo-cardiac reflex’ was
diagnosed, so 1 mg intravenous atropine was administered
preoperatively, which stabilized the patient’s
heart rate at 60–92 bpm, and surgical tumor resection
was completed as scheduled.
The eyeball was extracted firstly. The giant mass
appeared slightly reddish internally, with a wide
engorged vein on the central surface. It filled the orbit
and displaced the retro-bulbar segment of the right
optic nerve, shifting it infero-temporally. Atrophy of
the orbit tissues was also noticed. The tumor capsule
was found to adhere to the periosteum of the medial
orbital wall. As a result, debulking was performed to
isolate the neoplasm, followed by en bloc tumor resection.
The total volume of blood loss was less than
50 mL, and there was no abnormal bleeding. After the
tumor was resected, the patient’s heart rate stabilized
at 60–80 bpm. An ocular prosthesis was made for aesthetic
purposes. One week postoperatively, an MRI
demonstrated that the orbit was filled with gelatin
sponge that was slightly hyper-intense on T1 (Fig. 1g)
and T2 (Fig. 1h) without enhancement in the postcontrast
image (Fig. 1i). Further radiotherapy and formal
orbital prostheticrehabilitation for the patient was
planned.
Pathological review of the tumor following the initial
surgery in 2009 showed that the tumor was composed
of diffused spindle cells, with oval to fusiform nuclei
and a pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. ‘Antler’-like vessels
were noted in the background (Fig. 3a). The immunohistological
study showed that it was positive for cell
differentiation 34 (CD34) and negative for cytokeratin
(CK), smooth muscle actin (SMA), epithelial
membrane antigen (EMA), and S-100 protein. These
findings are consistent with the diagnosis of SFT. Histopathological
examination of the tumor following the
second operation revealed haphazardly arranged spindle
cells with more heterotypical changes than were
found in the previous sample. The background stroma
was variably collagenous and rich, with the presence
of staghorn-shaped vessels (Fig. 3b). Frequent mitoses
were found > 4/10 high-power fields (HPF) (Fig. 3c). In
addition, a low-power view of the tumor showed the
Onyx embolization material appearing as small, granular,
black pigment (tantalum powder) in the feeder vessels
(Fig. 3d). Immunohistologically, the tumor cells
exhibited diffuse immunoreactivity for CD34 (Fig. 3e),
and CD99 and was approximately 15% positive for
Ki-67 (Fig. 3f).
Discussion
SFTs are rare spindle cell tumors first described in 1931
in pleural tissue [8]. Since then, researchers have found
these tumors in extrapleural locations such as the lungs,
liver, kidneys, thyroid gland, parotid gland, pericardium,
peritoneum, mediastinum, nasal cavities, and orbit [9].
Clinically confirmed orbital SFTs are very rare, with
approximately only 90 cases reported up to date [4].
These tumors are generally considered benign but recurrent
and malignant variations have recently been noted.
Since recurrent or malignant SFTs can be highly vascular
with multiple large feeder vessels, the attempts to
biopsy and resection them might fail because of massive
hemorrhage without taking preoperative measures [4, 7].
Preoperative embolization is recommended to reduce the
risk of hemorrhage. Matthew et al. first performed percutaneous
embolization under fluoroscopic radiographic
guidance in 2012 [10]. However, this technique can only
be achieved when the lesions are visible. The endovascular
approach is more effective for tumors in the orbit.
Compared with previous reposts [1, 4–6], we demonstrated
a large intraconal mass with multiple feeder vessels
arising from 4 points of origin (Table 1), including
main feeder vessels with numerous tangled branches
arising from the ophthalmic artery and the IMA. Because
the points of entry of the vessels from ophthalmic artery
were too thin for the microcatheter to pass through, liquid
Onyx was an effective means of embolizing these
tangled feeder vessels due to its slow precipitation properties
[1]. In particular, 2 embolic coils were sufficient
to block off the 2 main feeder trunks arising from IMA.
The combined use of the Onyx liquid and the embolic
coils significantly devascularized the tumor’s blood supply,
resulting in minimal total blood loss during the subsequent
surgery. Other highly vascular orbital tumors
can be treated in the same manner, no matter where the
tumor is located within the orbit. It has proved to be an
effective method of preoperatively devascularizing and
embolizing feeder vessels.
Previous reports have used orbitotomy or craniectomy
to expose the mass [1, 5, 6]. In these cases, the
tumors were mainly located extraconally and on the
superior or medial wall of the orbit. As a result, it was
possible to preserve the patients’ visual acuity because
the optic nerve was seldom involved. Orbitotomy
or craniectomy performed by experienced surgeons
would not injure the optic nerve and might be suitable
for removing medium-sized tumors in the previously
mentioned locations. In the current case, the
neoplasm was large, retrobulbar, and intraconal. The
patient’s previous history and clinical clues enabled us
to preoperatively predict that this SFT had the possibility
of malignant transformation. Admitting that preoperative
embolization successfully minimized the blood
loss, surgical exposure using orbitotomy or craniectomy
combined with osteotomy to receive GTR would
have the potential to cause more complications and
aesthetic deficits [11]. Moreover, recent reports indicate
that endoscopic endonasal intraorbital surgery
(EEIS) can be an effective surgical approach for excising
orbital tumors [4, 12]. The EEIS technique was applicable
in this case because the mass was localized adjacent
to the medial wall. However, recurrent SFTs might be
malignant and invasive, and resecting them under limited
visualization and in a piecemeal manner may cause
uncontrolled bleeding and leave residual tumor tissue.
Considering the patient’s poor vision and her willingness,
we obtained the patient’s written consent to perform
an ophthalmectomy to optimize exposure of the
lesion with few complications.
In this case, embolizing the tumor’s main blood supply
caused an immediate cascade of reactions, including
intense eye pain, loss of vision, conjunctival edema, and
a decrease in heart rate. The eye pain may have been the
result of acute ischemia or vasospasm of the tumor, or
the cytotoxicity of dimethyl sulfoxide adjuvant used in
Onyx. Conjunctival edema secondary to circulatory disturbance
and inflammatory reaction likely raised intraorbital
pressure in the eyeball, which further aggravated the
pain [13]. However, the associations between these phenomena
remain to be investigated. Loss of light perception
could possibly have been the result of embolization
of the neoplasm’s main blood supply and arteria ophthalmica.
The decrease in the patient’s heart rate and its
immediate return to normal levels after resection may be
an example of the ‘oculo-cardiac reflex’. Heart rate variability
before, during, and after the resection requires further
investigation.
In conclusion, orbital SFTs can be hypervascular, especially
in recurrent and invasive cases. Preoperative CTA
can be performed to assess the blood supply to the lesion.
Embolism can be an effective technique to minimize
intraoperative hemorrhage. The size and location of the
tumor, patient visual function, as well as patients’ intention
should be considered when deciding the surgical
approach. The surgical techniques described in this study
could be a feasible approach for complete resection of
orbital SFTs.