Inappropriate test selection can lead to misdiagnosis,
suboptimal treatment and unnecessary costs [1]. Patients
with a genetic disease often require special considerations
for test selection to screen and manage prevalent
chronic diseases [2]. Sickle cell disease (SCD) is one of
the most common severe monogenic hematological
disorders worldwide [3]. SCD is a multi-system disease
caused by mutations in the hemoglobin beta chain gene
[4, 5]. In the US, SCD affects approximately 100,000 people,
or one out of every 365 African-American births and
one out of every 16,300 Hispanic-American births [6].
It has been estimated that 2.3% of the world’s population
have sickle cell disorders [7]. In 2017, over 30 million
people in the US (9.4%) and globally over 425 million
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus [8, 9]. The standardized
prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus among
patients with SCD in the US showed a modest increase
from 15.7% to 16.5% from 2009 to 2014 [10].
The glycated hemoglobin A1c test is the most commonly
used laboratory test to assist in diagnosing and
managing diabetes [11]. The A1c test measures glucose
bound to the β-chain of the hemoglobin molecule [11].
In the presence of excess plasma glucose, the hemoglobin
beta-chain becomes increasingly glycosylated, making
A1c a useful index to monitor long term glycemic
control in patients with diabetes mellitus [12]. The test
measures the three-month average plasma glucose concentration,
reflecting the average normal lifespan of red
blood cells. A1c tests are not recommended for persons
with SCD or other hemoglobinopathies and anemias in
which the lifespan of red blood cells is shorter than the
usual 110–120 days [13–15]. Three alternative tests provide
accurate results when the red blood cell lifespan is
shortened: fructosamine, glycated albumin, and 1,5 anhydroglucitol
[16]. Of these, fructosamine has received considerable
attention in the published literature [17–19].
The total concentration of fructosamine is predominantly
a measure of glycated albumin and a minor contribution
of other circulatory proteins such as glycated lipoproteins
and glycated globulins [20]. The American Diabetes
Association (ADA) advocates the use of alternative tests
for patients with hemoglobinopathies because A1c testing
can be unreliable [21]. This was also emphasized in
guidance provided through a national information campaign
of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases in 2014 [22] and by the National
Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program [23].
Adoption of the guidance to use an alternative test in
lieu of A1c testing in SCD patients is poorly understood.
Data derived from EHRs loaded into multi-institutional
data warehouses provide a powerful resource for investigating
these issues. These data warehouses provide a
comprehensive and longitudinal collection of patient
health care data and an emerging resource for health
services analysis. Several studies have demonstrated
that EHR systems can promote cost-effective and sustainable
solutions for improving quality in medical care
[24]. Multi-institutional data warehouses aggregating
EHR data from multiple sites allow national level assessment,
comparison of practices and analysis of outcomes
across independent, non-affiliated, organizations to guide
quality improvement initiatives and identify gaps [25].
One such data resource, Cerner Health Facts™ (HF), has
been demonstrated to have frequency of diagnosis codes
consistent with the HCUP National Inpatient Survey,
indicating that multi-site EHR data warehouses can be
representative of national trends [26].
We explore the trends in A1c testing among the SCD
patient population in HF and evaluate whether facility
characteristics affect these trends. The analysis
also serves to establish a baseline that is important for
assessing the effect of potential interventions to mitigate
any quality gap.
Methods
Data source
This study used the de-identified HF data warehouse
(Cerner Corporation, Kansas City, MO), which contains
longitudinal patient data systematically extracted
from the EHR at participating institutions and includes
encounter data (emergency, outpatient, and inpatient),
patient demographics (age, sex, and race), diagnoses and
procedures, laboratory data, and facility characteristics.
The HF release used for this work (2016) consisted
of 386 million encounters, 4.3 billion lab results from 64
million patients, and other data from 863 US healthcare
facilities. All admissions, inpatient medication orders
and dispensing, laboratory orders, and specimens are
date and time stamped, providing a temporal relationship
between treatment patterns and clinical information.
Consistent with HF policies, all data were de-identified
in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) before being provided to the
investigators. The facilities contributing data were each
assigned a unique identification code. Longitudinal relationships
between patient encounters within the same
health system are preserved.
Study cohort
We conducted a retrospective analysis of patients with
a diagnostic code for SCD, including its variations, such
as sickle cell thalassemia, using the International Classification
of Diseases, Ninth Revision and Tenth Revision,
Clinical Modification codes (ICD-9-CM and
ICD-10-CM). We excluded patients with a diagnostic
code for sickle cell trait (ICD-9-CM: 282.5, ICD-10-CM:
D57.3). The codes were selected based on clinical judgement
and the Phenotype Knowledgebase (PheKB) [27].
PheKB standardizes machine-readable definitions of
common diseases and provided a published algorithm
to identify sickle cell disease cohort within EHRs using
ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes. We accepted patients with a
single encounter though other analyses have required two
or more encounters with a SCD code [28]. The resulting
definition groups (from ICD-9-CM codes) were combined
with the appropriate ICD-10-CM codes to identify
the sickle cell disease patient cohort (Table 1).
HF data extraction from patients diagnosed with SCD
This sickle cell-patient cohort was analyzed for A1c
and fructosamine encounters based on the criteria that
included patients, each of whom had at least one A1c
test order (identified by LOINC codes: 55454-3, 41995-
2, 4548-4, 17855-8, 4549-2, 17856-6), fructosamine test
53550-0), glycated albumin (identified by LOINC code:
13873-5, 1758-2) and/or 1,5 anhydroglucitol (identified
by LOINC code: 53835-5) after the first use of a diagnosis
code for sickle cell disease. We did not attempt to
identify the purpose for the order (i.e., screening, diagnosis,
or management) because any use of A1c testing is
contraindicated for the sickle cell cohort. A1c and fructosamine
encounters before 2010 were excluded from the
analysis because the HF data architecture was updated in
2008–2009.
Definitions and analysis of cohorts
An A1c encounter refers to a clinician interaction in
which an A1c test is ordered. Testing trends are initially
investigated by assessing the facility characteristics in
the overall HF cohort and among three facility groups
defined below to scan for facility level patterns that
might corrrelate with test utilization. Patient characteristics
within each facility cohort are assessed. If the date
and time stamp of the A1c test were the same as that of
the fructosamine test ordered for the specific patient,
that A1c test was considered to be co-ordered with
fructosamine.
We identified three facility groups (adherent, minor
non-adherent and major non-adherent) from the study
cohort based on the prevalence of the SCD patients having
had A1c testing ordered. An adherent facility has
documented evidence that they have patients with an
SCD diagnosis code but not an associated A1c test code
but also has data confirming that these facilities provide
A1c testing to other patients. A non-adherent facility
has at least one patient encounter with an SCD diagnosis
code and at least one A1c test order for any SCD patient.
We classified non-adherent institutions according to the
percentage of SCD patients who received inappropriate
A1c testing. We stratified the non-adherant institutions
by quartile and focused our investigation on the first
quartile (< 25th percent adherant) (NA-1) and the fourth
quartile (> 75th percent non-adherant) (NA-4). We compared
the three facility sub-cohorts (adherent, NA-1 and
NA-4) to evaluate patterns related to test utilization at
the facility and patient level.
Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the facilities
and patients characteristics as mean (SD) or proportions.
We used the R statistical software package (version
3.3.1) to perform Chi-square or Fisher’s exact test (sample
size < 5) with the categorical data. Continuous data
was evaluated using Student’s t-test (normally distributed)
or the Mann–Whitney test.
Results
Study population
The overall study cohort included 393 facilities (with
37,151 SCD patients) out of the 863 facilities that contributed
data to HF (Fig. 1). Of the 393 facilities, 151 facilities
(5039 patients) had no A1c test orders for patients classified
as having SCD while the remaining 242 facilities
(32,112 patients) had at least one A1c test order for an
SCD patient. From the 151 facilities with no A1c encounters
for SCD patients, 77 facilities (2518 patients) were
excluded from the analysis because there was no record
of an A1c encounter for any patient regardless of SCD
diagnosis. The 77 facilities may not perform A1c tests in
house or another factor may have limited the inclusion
of that data in HF. The remaining 74 facilities (2521 SCD
patients) which had no A1c encounters for SCD patients,
but performed A1c testing for non-SCD patients, were
categorized as “adherent” facilities. Facilities with one or
more A1c tests for SCD patients (242 facilities; 32,112
SCD patients) were grouped into quartiles based on the
proportion of SCD patients with A1c tests as described in
the methods. The first quartile, termed minor non-adherent
or NA-1, comprised 61 facilities (15,470 patients).
The second and third quartiles comprised 121 facilities
(15,866 patients) and are excluded from our analysis. The
last quartile, NA-4, comprised 60 facilities (776 patients).
Overall HF cohort
We did not find encounters in HF for glycated albumin
and 1,5 anhydroglucitol tests (LOINC Codes: 13873-
5, 1758-2, CPT code: 82985) for SCD patients and
focused on fructosamine as the primary alternative
test to A1c in this study. Analyzing the HF SCD cohort
for A1c and fructosamine orders indicated that 3927
patients (11% of the study cohort) had at least one A1c
(Fig. 1). There were only 28 facilities from the cohort
with fructosamine encounters. One health system with
two facilities contributed 76% of the total fructosamine
test orders in the HF cohort. Out of 37,151 SCD
patients in the cohort, 89 patients had both an A1c
and fructosamine test while 3838 patients had only an
A1c test and no fructosamine test, 45 patients had at
least one fructosamine test and no A1c test and 33,179
patients had no A1c test ordered and no fructosamine
test ordered (Fig. 1). Of the 89 patients who had both
an A1c and fructosamine test, 12% of A1c tests (63 of
533 A1c tests) from 42 patients were ordered with the
fructosamine test during the same encounter.
Facility characteristics
Facility level characteristics such as the average number
of SCD patients in a facility, census region, size of
the facility, teaching status, urban and acute care facilities
were compared among the HF cohort and the three
cohorts (adherent, NA-1 and NA-4) (Table 2). In the HF
cohort, there were 134 facilities with a bed size of less
than 5 (likely ambulatory), 105 facilities with a bed size
between 5 and 100, 133 facilities with a bed size between
100 and 500, and 21 facilities with more than 500 beds.
The NA-4 subcohort had more facilities with bed size less
than 5 (27 facilities; 44%) compared to NA-1 subcohort
(14 facilities; 23%). NA-1 facilities when compared to
NA-4 facilities had a higher percentage of teaching facilities
(28 facilities; 46% vs 13 facilities; 21%) and acute care
facilities (51 facilities; 84% vs 41 facilities; 67%).
Adherent, NA‑1 and NA‑4 facility cohorts
Patient level characteristics such as percentage of A1c
utilization, age, sex, race, and sickle cell diagnosis groups
were compared among the baseline HF cohort and the
three sub-cohorts (Adherent, NA-1 and NA-4) (Table 3).
We observed that patients tended to be younger in the
NA-1 than in NA-4 group (Mean age, 24.5 years vs 51.2
years).
Only 5% of the SCD patients at the NA-1 facilities
(841/15470 patients) received at least one A1c test, while
58% of the SCD patients in the NA-4 facilities (446/776
patients) had at least one A1c test (Fig. 2a). Evaluating
the annual frequency of A1c encounters shows that the
SCD patients with A1c tests at the NA-4 was consistently
Several possibilities exist for the overall low utilization
of fructosamine. Because the majority of fructosamine
tests identified were within a single health system,
it is possible that HF did not receive fructosamine utilization
data from all contributors, for example if they
were sendout orders. Another explanation is that other
tests may have been used, such as glucose screening and
monitoring, in making diagnostic and treatment management
decisions. This may be preferred because standardized
cut-offs have not been established for fructosamine
testing and must be determined and validated by each
laboratory offering the test. The limitation of glucose
screening is that it provides the status of glucose levels at
the time of the test and not over a period of time. Additional
studies are needed to review the use of glucose
testing within a sickle cell populationWe noted co-ordering
of A1c and fructosamine testing for sixty-three SCD
patients, potentially suggesting an effort to gain greater
familiarity with the fructosamine test or compliance with
local guidelines. A follow up study to better understand
why A1c is ordered may provide insights to changing clinician
ordering behavior. Collectively this analysis shows
that inappropriate A1c orders and underutilization of
fructosamine test orders for SCD patients are quality
gaps. From a public health perspective, this may translate
to increased number of patients not receiving optimal
care and requiring additional health resources. This
suggests the need for a follow up study that examines the
cost and burden of inappropriate A1c testing within the
underserved SCD population.
Several interventions may be considered to address this
quality gap. Potential interventions may include clinician
education about the appropriate utilization of A1c and
fructosamine testing, facilitated using professional guidance
from National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases and the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention [6, 22]. It is worth exploring the usefulness
of integrating clinical decision support within EHRs
to intercept A1c tests ordered for sickle cell patients and
recommend more appropriate testing modalities. Other
communication and education approaches (e.g., grand
rounds, CME course offerings, communication campaign)
targeted to reducing mis-utilization of A1c testing
are also warranted.
Limitations
This study has limitations. First, analyzing de-identified
EHR data is challenging because there is no way to
verify the accurate use of diagnostic codes (ICD-9-CM,
ICD-10-CM) in HF [32, 33]. Variations exist in the coding
and accuracy of both sickle cell disease overall and
the specific sickle cell genotypes (e.g., HbSS, HbSC,
sickle cell thalassemia) [34]. All variants were treated
consistently in this analysis; the accuracy of the sickle
cell genotype is unlikely to affect our analyses as any
variant of sickle cell genotypes may influence the reliability
of A1c analysis [35–38]. Previous assessment of
the accuracy of SCD classifications based on diagnostic
codes indicates that despite high sensitivity and predictive
value positive, specificity might be lower when
classification of SCD is based on a the ocurrence of at
least one (as opposed to two or more) ICD codes for
a patient [39]. We cannot rule out the possibility that
some of our SCD cases were false-positive classifications
but do not expect false-positives to alter our
finding regarding mis-utilization of A1c testing in the
sickle cell population. Additionally, as our analysis was
focused on potential associations to the least and most
adherent subcohort, we did not include the second and
third quartile facilities (NA-1 nor NA-4) despite a significant
number of patients. Another possible limitation
is that some A1c tests may not be included in HF
due to the absence of the Cerner laboratory module at
some sites or the use of point-of-care A1c testing that
does not populate the pathology database tables [40].
Also, the same concerns may apply to our observation
of limited ordering of fructosamine and the absence of
other alternative tests.
Conclusion
Analysis of data abstracted from HF provided evidence
for mis-utilization of A1c and under-utilization of alternate
testing in a sickle cell population across facilities.
Quality improvement initiatives to improve compliance
with professional guidance to promote the use of alternate
tests, such as fructosamine, in a sickle cell population
can support the accurate and timely the diagnosis
and management of diabetes in the sickle cell population.
This work serves as an important example of the value
of aggregate EHR data in research that can inform care
for underserved populations. The informatics strategy
described can be applied to many other large scale questions
related to laboratory test utilization.