Background
Adult strabismus is a complex, multi-dimensional disease,
which has a serious impact on sightseeing, selfperception,
self-esteem, and the social interactions of
the patient [1]. Due to the esthetical disturbance of the
disease to adolescents and adults, especially when considering
people with longstanding, childhood-onset strabismus,
the relating prejudice to eye deviation extends
beyond social interactions. The complexity of decisions
in these patients involves all aspects of strabismus management:
evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment. In this
context, the collaborative or shared decision is seen as a
model for clinical practice [2] and was defined by Weston
in 2001 as being one of the key components to patientcentered
care [3]. Several treatment options, including
optical correction, prism prescription, various surgical
approaches, and botox injections are significant, each
with the own advantages and disadvantages [4]. Therefore,
the choice of therapy requires a careful examination,
where the available scientific data, the experience of the
clinician as well as the characteristics and preferences
of the individual patient are weighed together upon the
taken decision [5]. These factors may add stress to the
patient, family, and the clinicians involved in the strabismus
care. However, all surgical treatment options,
including the option not to operate, would always have
their possible positive and negative outcomes to make
space for the patient’s preferences. This patient-physician
alliance results in empowering patients to develop their
autonomy [6, 7] and in finding better healthcare choices.
The World Health Organization and UNICEF have
highlighted the need to involve teenagers in their treatment
decisions [8, 9]. Furthermore, earlier research performed
by Wisdom et al. [10] outlined that teens are
eager to exchange information with clinicians and they
want to express their opinion and to have the autonomy
to choose between treatment options whenever possible.
A young person’s ability to consent depends more upon
his understanding of the nature of the proposed treatment
and its possible consequences [11]. Shaw [12] mentioned
that there is no simple criterion or measure of the
competence; the doctors’ skill lies in assessing the young
patient’s competence in a particular context for a specific
decision.
Gärtner et al. [13] in a literature search identified
16 existing patient profiles related to SDM. A general
nine-point decision-making questionnaire is one of the
most used tools to assess the extent to which doctors
involve patients in the decision-making process. It consists
of versions of the patient (SDM-Q-9) and the doctor
(SDM-Q-Doc), which can be used to evaluate the
patient’s involvement in the decision-making process
from two points of view [14, 15]. It is often used in various
clinical situations, including primary [16] and specialized
care as oncology [17], otorhinolaryngoglogy [18],
mental health practice [19], vascular surgery [20], dialysis
[21] multiple sclerosis [22] and even among patients’
family members [23]. It has been translated into many
languages since 2009, including Romanian [14, 24].
Several available publications in the ophthalmological
field directed towards managing patients with cataract,
diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma, age-related macular
degeneration, and exotropia in providing a qualitative
analysis by using standard interviews with healthcare
workers and/or patients [25–29] and support the need
for more patient involvement in shared making decision
process. So far, none of these studies aimed to estimate
the outcome of the SDM on the patients’ satisfaction
with the final/post-op result.
Although, SDM has become a priority of health policy
in many European countries in the past two decades
[30] there are no studies on the involvement of patients
in taking medical decisions in Western Europe and the
Republic of Moldova. Mainly, the promotion of shared
decision-making in strabismus treatment is a field that
has not been researched yet. Finding an association
between the SDM process and the patients’ satisfaction
with the outcome would help us work towards optimizing
the SDM process and facilitate it towards a better
comprehension for the patient- that way acquiring an
optimized patient-centered care process.
We aimed to evaluate the impact of the shared decision-
making process in adult strabismus on the patient’s
postoperative satisfaction from the patients’ perspective.
As the main tool, we have used the SDM-Q-9 questionnaire
and confronted the score with a Face-Q scale: to
compare the postoperative satisfaction and the decisionmaking
score. The outcome had to help us improve the
quality of the surgical consultations in the process of
SDM and help both sides move towards taking an optimal
decision. We wanted to clarify whether in the process
of SDM the patients were satisfied with the amount and clarity of the options and outcomes and it led to a
higher satisfaction rate vs. having the physician offer the
best option based on.
Methods
Study design and context
We conducted a prospective observational pilot study
among teens (15–17 years old) and adults over 18 years
old undergoing strabismus surgery. This study was implemented
in the Republic of Moldova at the Republican
Clinical Hospital “Timofei Mosneaga” and Children Hospital
“Emilian Cotaga” from January 2017 to December
2019, was carried out following the principles of the Helsinki
Declaration and approved by The Ethics Committee
of the State University of Medicine and Pharmacy” Nicolae
Testemitanu”.
Participant recruitment and eligibility
Among the participants were 93 adult patients with manifest
strabismus who needed a surgical correction and in
whom more than one technique was advised (eye muscle
recession or resection by symmetric surgery, asymmetric
surgery, or adjustable sutures). The patients were
enrolled in this study if they met the following criteria:
(1) 15 years and older at the time of surgery, (2) a confirmed
diagnosis of manifest concomitant strabismus
through orthoptic examination, (3) candidates for surgical
correction of strabismus, and (4) Romanian communicative
skills and written agreement of patients aged 18
and up, and from the teenagers’ parents (for the teenagers
between 15–17). Therefore the written informed
consent was obtained from all participants prior to their
enrollment in the study. The exclusion criteria were as
follows: (1) severe cognitive impairment and (2) study
involvement disapproval. The patients were informed
about the study by their healthcare provider. They were
thoroughly informed and assured that refusing to participate
would not affect their treatment in any way.
Procedure
Before the study, basic demographic data on age, gender,
and type of strabismus were collected. All patients
underwent a detailed ocular examination and an orthoptic
evaluation before undergoing strabismus surgery.
After the final consultation, the patients completed
the translated Romanian version of a validated patientreported
measure of shared decision making (the 9-item
Shared Decision Making Questionnaire, SDM-Q-9)
questionnaire. In this previously approved questionnaire,
the SDM level was assessed subjectively by evaluating
the nine phases of the decision-making process from the
patient’s perspective on a 6-point Likert scale ranging
from 0 (not at all) to 5 (fully applicable) [13] (see Additional
file 1: Appendix SDM-Q-9 questionnaire). Romanian
version had good internal consistency with a 0.96
Cronbach α coefficient [31].
10–12 weeks after the surgery the patients were asked
to rate their satisfaction with the surgical outcome (POS)
as excellent, good, fair, and poor using the Face-Q scale (a
4-point scale) [32] Fig. 1.
An excellent rating meant that the patients did not
notice any eye deviation after the surgery interval. A
good rating meant they have noticed slight strabismus
occasionally. A fair (satisfactory) rating represented a
slight degree of eye deviation present all the time. Finally,
a poor rating represented their dissatisfaction with the
residual amount of deviation.
Statistical analyses
The SDM-Q-9 scores ranged between 0 and 45 (0 = no
SDM behavior; 45 = ideal SDM behavior) [16]. A detailed
analysis using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences,
Version 26 (IBM SPSS Inc.) was applied. For continuous
data, descriptive statistics were expressed as average
/95% CI for median and interquartile range (IQR). For
categorical data, descriptive statistics were expressed as
absolute frequencies, percentages, and 95% CI. Potential
relationships were visualized by a bubble plot diagram.
Tests for data normality, transformation, and multiple
linear regression analysis were conducted to evaluate the
relationship among variables. Therefore, the statistical
significance for all tests was defined as p < 0.05 level.
Results
Study population and baseline characteristics
Ninety-three patients aged 15 to 88 years old took part
in the study with average age—24 years. Female represented
52.7% (49 patients), male—47.3% (44 patients). 42
(45.2%) patients were diagnosed with esotropia and 51
(54.8%) with exotropia.
Age distribution in accordance to Strabismus Type and
gender is presented in Table 1.
Patients’ views on involvement in strabismus treatment
decision‑making
The average SDM-Q-9 score among all patients was 32
(IQR = 3) and they fluctuated between 25 and 36. The
mean SDM-Q-9 score assigned by esotropic female
patients was 32 (IQR = 2) and a score of 33 (IQR = 2) was
given by males. The exotropia patients conferred a similar
median SDM-Q-9 score of 31 (IQR = 4), either females or
males. Table 2.
The lowest rated was item 2 (patients’ involvement)
with a score of 3 given by 48 responders (51.6%) (95%
CI 41.5–61.6), item 5 (patients’ information) was graded
with score 2 by 32 responders (34.4%), (95% CI 25.3–
44.4), item 6 (patients’ preference), graded with score 3
by 77 patients (82.8%) (95% CI 74.2–89.4), 65 patients
(69.9%) rated item 7 (weighing options) a score of 3 (95%
CI 60.1–78.5) and 50 (53.8%) patients with same score
rated item 8 (shared decision) (95% CI 43.6- 63.7) Table 3.
Correlation between the SDM score and postoperative
patient satisfaction
The postoperative patient satisfaction was ranked as
excellent by 16 (17.2%) patients, good by 38 (40.9%), fair
by 32 (34.4%), and poor by 7 patients (7.5%). The POS
score in accordance with strabismus type and gender is
presented in Table 4.
The interrelation between SDM-Q-9 score and patients’
satisfaction, following to bubble plot, had to be adjusted
to other potential covariates like age, gender, and strabismus
types.
The bubble plot analysis of the relationship between
the parameters included in the research such as patients’
age, strabismus type, SDM -Q-9 score, and patients’ postsurgical
satisfaction was performed.
Figure 2 shows uncovered gender- and age-based differences
such that men under 35 were the undermost satisfied
group with SDM. Patients with exotropia, especially
men, reported lower SDM and POS scores compared to
esotropic patients. Furthermore, there is a positive relationship
between the SDM score and the patient satisfaction
level with surgery outcome (Fig. 2).
The multivariate analysis (linear regression) was chosen
to comprehend the relationship between the SDM-Q-9
score and the Patient Satisfaction with surgery outcome
level. Taking into account the abnormal distribution
for both continuos variables Age (Skewness = 1.216,
error standard = 0.250; Kurtosis = 1.107, error standard
= 0.495; Shapiro–Wilk test = 0.888, df = 93, p < 0.001)
and SDM -Q-9 score (Skewness = − 0.279, error standard
= 0.250; Kurtosis = − 0.198, error standard = 0.495;
Shapiro–Wilk test = 0.971, df = 93, p = 0.038) after histogram
analysis (Fig. 3) the data restoring procedure was
performed.
There were 2 new variables as results – Agenorm
(Agenorm = 1/Age) and SumSDMnorm (SumSDMnorm
= SumSDM^2), Shapiro–Wilk test being estimated
as 0.978 df = 93 p = 0.109 for Agenorm and Shapiro–Wilk
test = 0.974, df = 93, p = 0.062 for SumSDMnorm. Thus,
continuous covariates normal distribution was respected.
The patients’ satisfaction score was considered as a
dependent variable, Agenorm, SumSDMnorm, Gender,
and Diagnosis as variables for the potential model.
The final model had the following characteristics: the
model showed the abilities to predict the satisfaction
value (F = 103.004, p < 0.001); the correlation between
predicted and real results was estimated as 0.834, determination
coefficient being 0.689 (68.9%); about 70% of
satisfaction dispersion was determined by the variables
from the equation. The sum SDM norm determination
effect was the important one having a value of 0.679,
Agenorm represented only 0.01.
The model included a constant (B = − 1.175, 95% CI
− 2.417, − 1.013) and two transformed continuous variables,
Agenorm (B = − 8028, 95% CI − 15.952, − 0.105)
and SumSDMnorm (B = 0.005, 95% CI 0.004, 0.005),
the SumSDMnorm effect estimated after coefficient
standardization being higher in comparison with Agenorm
(0.84 versus − 0.118). Collinearity testing showed
no interaction between covariates (Tolerance = 0.985,
VIF = 1.015) (Table 5). Type of strabismus and gender
did not show any relevance. Residuals were normally
distributed (Fig. 4), Shapiro–Wilk test = 0.993, df = 93,
p = 0.906.
According to the coefficients, the Age norm had a
negative effect with large confidence intervals; the sum
SDM norm had a positive effect with narrow confidence
intervals.
Discussion
Shared decision making (SDM) comprises three main
elements: the exchange of information (personal and
medical) between the patient and the doctor, the discussion
of the diagnosis and the treatment options, and
the building of consensus [33, 34].
Patients’ views on involvement in strabismus
decision‑making treatment
In this study we wanted to outline the patients’ perception
on the treatment decisions about strabismus
shared by both the doctors and the patients.
We have identified five key concerns among our
patients on the SDM process. This research pointed
relatively low scores to SDM-Q-9 items 2 (patients’
involvement), 5 (patients’ information), 6 (patients’
preference), 7 (weighing options), and 8 (shared decision).
This means that the physician has not always
rated adequately or met the patients’ informational
needs and did not actively invite patients to share their
goals, expectations, and concerns.
Compared to patients from the other healthcare
institutions who had an active role in strabismus decision-
making treatment our patients rated a 71% score
on involvement, compared to higher results observed
in breast cancer patients (78–83%) [35, 36], 93.3% in
patients with multiple sclerosis [22] and 95% in primary
and secondary care [33], while Nakashima et al. (2012)
reported a similar score with our 70% [37].
One of the main components of SDM is to determine
patient’s values and preferences on different treatment
options [38, 39]. This study exhibited that identifying
and considering patients’ preferences is not a common
practice yet according to item 6 score. The concept of
SDM implies both clinicians and patients work together
in order to select the best option using scientific evidence
by applying providers’ clinical experience and
patients’ preferences [40]. Therefore, patients’ preferences
are totally different from the doctor’s options.
Consequently, not all the doctors are ready to discuss
patients’ values and needs; otherwise, some feel
like their clinical experience will be compromised if
the patient disagrees with their recommendations. If
patients disagree with the treatment recommendations,
this may be due to a mismatch between their preferences
and the perception of these preferences by doctors.
Benbassat et al. [41] (1998) revealed that doctors’
conclusions about patients’ values and preferences are
often inaccurate, even for the doctors with more clinical
experience and a longer doctor-patient relationship.
It is not astonishing, that Tamirisa et al. [42] concluded
that many patients got serious problems during SDM
[30]. A study performed by Sharma et al. [43] on a sample
of 60 patients revealed that only 30% of the patients
were aware of the strabismus pathology and the treatment
alternatives. This may also be the reason why the
patients in our study have rated the items 7 (weighing
options) so poorly—there was no clear balance towards
one of the existing treatment methods. The obtained
results indicated that some patients believe that their
doctors had not provided the amount of information that
they wanted to receive. This raises a question about the
possible lack of perception of the way a shared decisionmaking
procedure should be conducted.
Another concern revealed in this study was related
to the fact that some patients felt excluded from the
treatment decision making process. Similar to the
data reported by Lecouturier et al. [25], our patients
expressed the desire to be involved in medical decisions
that concern them. This preference seems to be stronger
than their doctors’ willingness to share decisions with
them according to the rated score of item 8. Our study
results clearly show that the information providing about
existing treatment options is clearly explained, and
patients need this information to be able to participate in
SDM.
On contrary, a quite high score was given to item 9
meaning that finally an agreement about further treatment
procedures was achieved. This led us to the conclusion
that probably some patients are still more
confident in their doctor knowledge, recommendation
and experience. Otherwise, some are not eager to share
the responsibility for decisions and leave it to surgeons.
SDM is a time-consuming process and this fact has also
been mentioned by other authors [25, 38]. Some patients
need more time to assimilate and become aware of the
information received from the doctor, especially adolescent
patients. Recent researches suggest that minors up
to 12 years old are capable of being involved in decision
making [44, 45]. Studies on the role of teenagers and
their involvement in the decision-making process usually
report parents’ points of view instead of teenagers
[25]. Even if most studies revealed that adolescents desire
active involvement in their treatment decisions, disagreement
remains over their capacity to do so from the perspective
of parents, providers, and the healthcare system.
Instead of, our study revealed teens seemed relatively satisfied
with the SDM process, showing a score nearly similar
to that reported by the young adults. They are eager
to discuss their problem, to have an interactive process
rather than co-operating just to “hear” a quick diagnosis
and follow the doctor’s recommendations.
Patient satisfaction with surgery outcomes and the relation
with SDM score
Improving the lives of patients with longstanding strabismus
requires a bivalent collaboration: patients should
understand their choices and the possible outcomes
of those choices, and providers should understand the
needs and expectations of their patients—good communication
between them is the key to achieving the best
result. In this study the participants reported an overall
positive experience with their care: 58.1% were satisfied
or very satisfied with the results of their surgery, and 7.5%
were unsatisfied. Having been compared to other publications,
a higher result of overall 90% of parents’ satisfaction
with strabismus treatment rated as "good" or "very
good" was reported by Mruthyunjaya et al. [46] and
Kaszli et al. [47].
We have to point out the existence of disease-specific
and non–disease-specific factors that may influence
patients’ feedback [48] – these captures big attention
from researchers lately. In this study was obvious that
the level of effective decision-making influenced the level
of satisfaction with treatment outcome. Communication
that provides the evidence-based, weighted level of
assistance to patients in their decision making appears to
be an important non-desease- specific factor that influence
the SDM process and the patients’satisfation with
received healthcare.
Furthermore, in our study, no significant difference
was observed in reported satisfaction levels among males
and females and among esotropic and exotropic patients.
Similar results were obtained by Kaszli et al. [47] in a
study on patients undergoing strabismus surgery no significant
difference in patient satisfaction was found. On
the other hand, Burke et al. [49] found that people with
an esotropic strabismus recorded significantly greater
appreciation of the effects of surgery than those with
an exotropic strabismus. However, comparing both surgeons’
and patients’ opinions, Burgos-Blasco et al. [50]
studied the surgeons’ point of view and concluded that
endotrophic is the most satisfactory surgery for the
patient, followed by exotropia, vertical strabismus, and
traumatic paralysis of the 4th cranial nerve.
Our results suggest that the higher the SDM score,
which means higher patient involvement in their healthcare
process, the higher is their satisfaction with the provided
care. In our research the interrelation between the
SDM process and the patient satisfaction with surgery
outcome, adjusted for age, has been established, the predictive
value having a powerful association with the real
value. SDM offers a process that can help both the physician
and the patient move beyond passive informed consent
to a more collaborative, patient-centered experience.
This study identifies the communication gaps from
the patients’ perspective, helps us improve discussions
in strabismus management, and illustrates the value of
understanding how treatment decisions about strabismus
are currently made upon the final patients’ satisfaction.
Strengths and limitations of this study
This study was an attempt to qualitatively assess the
patients’ experience of treatment decision making for
strabismus in the Republic of Moldova. The study evaluated
the correlation between the patients’ involvement
in the collaborative decision process and the satisfaction
with management outcome.
This study has some limits. First, the small number of
participants limits a wide generalization to all population
with strabismus. A more representative sample of
patients may bring out different results than the ones
we received. The described model needs correction by
efficient variables enrolment because of reduced determination
coefficient (about 70%), another 30% of variance
being unexplained. The potential determinants for
patients’ satisfaction, besides the age and SDM, could be
the education level, sociodemographic and clinical status,
etc. [51, 52]. Also, the elaborated model for satisfaction
prediction needs validation using an independent sample.
The data transformation (age) to meet conditions for
linear regression represents another limitation.
However, it has just theoretical application and can be
corrected in large studies when all continuous variables
will have a normal distribution. Secondly, one of the parents
were always present during consultations and shared
decision making evaluation process, which may influence
the adolescents’ answers – so they should probably be
assessed in a separate study or as a separate group.
Implications
Taking into account the results and listed limitations
we plan to extend our research. The number of patients
will be increased by performing a multicentral study.
Other potential factors (education level, socioeconomic
situation, strabismus type, surgery technique, etc.) that
could affect the relationship between the SDM process
and patient satisfaction also will be taken into account.
We expect the net effect estimation of SDM adjusted for
these predictors, explained variance for satisfaction will
be optimized (more than 80%). Finally, the results will be
validated using an independent sample. The final goal is
to estimate the SDM benefits in multivariate/multifactorial
“space” and to implement this procedure in routine
practice.
Conclusion
Assessing patient satisfaction after choosing a treatment
for strabismus method helped us evaluate the gaps in
constructive dialogue that would lead to a positive outcome
for both patient and clinician. The correlation
between the SDM process and the patients’ satisfaction
with surgery outcome, adjusted by age, has been established.
These findings can serve as a springboard to further
communicative improvements related to the SDM
process and between patients and physicians, thereby
consequently leading to patients’ satisfaction raise in
strabismus care. The study underlines the importance of
further analysis and validation of on-ground interactions
among the adolescent and adult patients and the clinicians
across the strabismus management trajectory. A
multicentral study and its validation will follow.
