Background
Simultaneous pancreas kidney transplantation (SPKT)
represents the “state of the art” treatment modality for
patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus type 1
(IDDM1) and end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) [1].
In recent years, increasing evidence has indicated
that peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a major healthcare burden and is highly prevalent among patients with
IDDM and ESKD, as compared with the general population [2, 3]. Although several risk factors contribute to
PAD, IDDM1 and ESKD represent the two major ones.
Te presence of PAD in patients with diabetes and ESKDrelated conditions is furthermore an indicator of poor
long-term outcomes, if not treated accordingly [4–6].
In fact, patients with PAD have a three- to fvefold
increased risk of adverse outcomes of cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular morbidity and mortality, including myocardial infarction (MI), stroke and mortality associated
with coronary artery disease (CAD) [7, 8].
Additionally, patients with PAD have greater functional
impairment and faster rates of functional decline than
those without PAD [9, 10].
In clinical settings, the measurement of the anklebrachial index (ABI), a non-invasive, reproducible and
efcient diagnostic tool, is a widely accepted method to
diagnose and predict the severity of PAD. In this context,
it has been shown that ABI data are also an independent risk predictor of subsequent atheroembolic events
elsewhere in the entire vascular system [11–13]. Indeed,
abnormal ABI has been found to be an independent risk
marker for major cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
events in individuals without known pre-existing clinical
cardiovascular disease (CVD) and those with established
CVD [13, 14].
In this context, prospective studies have shown that
ABI correlates well with overall survival [15], 16. Population-based prospective studies have furthermore shown
that a low ABI was linked to an increased risk of CAD,
cerebrovascular accidents (CVAs), transient ischemic
attack (TIA) and peripheral vascular complications
including limb ischemia/ulceration, even when age, sex
and other risk factors were not taken in account [7, 13,
15–18]. However, other previous studies have found an
association between high ABI and cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular morbidity and mortality [8, 15, 19–21].
Coronary and cerebrovascular diseases remain the predominant causes of death in patients with diabetes before
and after transplantation [22, 23].
Te presence of chronic kidney disease further
increases the CVD risk [24].
Assessment of perioperative cardiovascular risk and
thereby the decrease in perioperative complications
(e.g., cardiovascular mortality and subsequent graft failure) remains highly important in perioperative medicine; however, accurate and detailed identifcation of
high-risk patients remains challenging. Terefore, the
integration of ABI in preoperative routine testing might
help improve the risk stratifcation and identifcation of
patients who might beneft from special perioperative
attention and, if possible, the modifcation of perioperative risk factors [22, 24].
Previous studies have suggested higher rates of PAD
among patients awaiting kidney transplantation and have
shown a reduction in risk mortality after renal transplantation [2, 25, 26]. However, little is known about the
prevalence of PAD as well as the feasibility and impact of
preoperative ABI testing on long-term graft and patient
outcomes in SPKT transplant recipients.
Tis study aimed to determine whether preoperative
PAD through accurate peripheral vascular evaluation
by ABI testing might provide information on the risk of
postoperative graft failure, death and cerebro- and cardiovascular events (independently of other CVD risk factors) and improve risk prediction for SPKT recipients.
Methods
Study design and study population
Te study protocol was approved by the local ethics
committee of the University of Leipzig [AZ: Nr: 111-16-
14032016]. All methods in the study were carried out in
accordance with the Helsinki guidelines and declaration
or any other relevant guidelines.
From a prospectively collected electronic database,
we retrospectively analyzed medical data on all patients
undergoing SPKT at the University Hospital of Leipzig
between 2000 and 2016. We focused on the identifcation
of patients with PAD who had undergone non-invasive
vascular diagnostics, specifcally ABI testing, in the pretransplantation evaluation examination. Patients younger
than 18  years, those receiving kidney transplantation
alone and those receiving pancreatic re-transplantation
were excluded.
Outcome analysis
Standard demographic and clinicopathological characteristics were collected and analyzed before, at the time
of and after transplantation (in the follow-up period) for
each patient: the pre-transplantation data included recipient and donor characteristics such as age, sex, body mass
index (BMI) and additional data including the duration
of diabetes mellitus, smoking habits, time on the wait
list, the duration of pre-transplantation dialysis, metabolic endocrine and lipid metabolism, information on the
cardiovascular system such as the presence of coronary
heart disease (coronary artery bypass grafts or stents),
CVA, the type and level of PAD (ischemia, ulceration/
gangrene, amputation and revascularization procedures
such as bypass or angioplasty), blood pressure parameters and the number of antihypertensive agents.
Assessment of the cardiovascular and peripheral vascular
system
All patients with IDDM1 who were potential transplantation candidates underwent structured cardiovascular
examinations including echocardiography and coronary
angiography as a routine part of the cardiac work-up at
our center before enrollment on the wait list.
For the detection of PAD, a structured vascular screening protocol including extensive physical examination
(for detection of ulceration/gangrene) and symptomoriented medical history (evaluation of claudication and
chronical limb ischemia), Doppler ultrasonography such
as Doppler-derived ABI testing and carotid artery duplex
imaging were performed. Te vessels of patients with
suspected PAD were further evaluated with computed
tomography/magnetic resonance angiography and/or
conventional angiography, as indicated, to better defne
the location and extent of disease.
PAD diagnostic tools
As a part of the pre-transplantation PAD screening,
physiologic arterial vascular studies including Doppler-derived ABI measurements were performed by a
well-trained vascular nurse in each patient in a quiet
environment after at least 5 min of supine rest.
ABI measurement was performed with a standard
hand-held continuous wave 8 MHz Doppler pencil probe
and a sphygmomanometer with a 12×35 cm blood pressure cuf.
For ABIs, systolic blood pressures were measured and
recorded in the supine position on both arms (if possible; however, not in the fstula arm), on the basis of the
appearance of the pulse sound registered by the Doppler
at the brachial artery as the cuf was defated [11, 12].
Doppler measured ankle pressures were performed at the
dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial artery on both legs.
Te ABI was calculated by division of the systolic pressure measured in each lower limb through the systolic
blood pressure of the arm with the higher pressure [12].
According to previously published consensus guidelines, participants were considered to have PAD in our
analysis if they had an ABI below 0.9 and clinical symptoms (claudication/signs of limb ischemia) [27].
Te ABI measurements were divided into fve subcategories: normal (0.9–1.39), mild disease (0.70–0.89), moderate disease (0.40–0.69), severe disease (0–0.39) and
non-compressible arteries (>1.40) [12].
In accordance with the recent consensus guidelines, in
cases of a high ABI (>1.4) or non-compressible arteries
associated with medial calcifcation, as was evident in fve
of our patients with diabetes, we performed toe−brachial
index (TBI) measurement and/or further noninvasive or
invasive vascular diagnostic procedures for safe detection
of PAD [27–29].
TBI measurement was performed as previously
described in detail and was calculated by dividing the
systolic pressure of the great toe by that of the brachial
artery [30].
Cut-of values<0.7 in TBI testing were defned as the
diagnostic criterion for PAD [29].
Surgical techniques/immunosuppression
Te procurement and transplantation of pancreatic and
kidney allografts were performed according to international standard and guidelines, as previously described
[31–37]. Te standard immunosuppression protocol at
our center consisted of an induction therapy followed by
triple maintenance medicamentous therapy, as described
previously [36, 37].
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables are reported as mean/median values with standard deviation, whereas categorical variables are presented as whole numbers and percentages
(%). For analysis of baseline data, we used the appropriate statistical signifcance tests, including Student’s t-test,
χ2
, analysis of variance, Kruskal–Wallis and Wilcoxon–
Mann–Whitney test.
Te primary end point of this study was graft (pancreas/kidney) failure and/or death after transplantation.
In this context, pancreatic graft failure was defned as
insulin substitution or return to transplant, and kidney graft failure was defned as the need for dialysis or
return to transplant. Te secondary end points included
occurrence of CVA, MI and/or peripheral vascular complications, defned as limb ischemia, gangrene, amputation or revascularization treatments (bypass surgery or
angioplasty).
For the estimation of patient and graft (pancreas/kidney) survival, such as event-free survival for the secondary events after transplantation, the Kaplan–Meier
method and log-rank test were used. Cox proportional
hazard regression models were used to calculate hazard
ratios (HR) for the primary and secondary end points in
relation to PAD.
Te association between PAD and the primary and secondary end points was then assessed after adjustment
for known cardiovascular risk factors including recipient age, sex, recipient BMI, duration of diabetes mellitus,
smoking habits, duration of dialysis, aspirin and statin
use and known cardiovascular comorbidity (heart failure
or CAD, CVA and MI).
If patients who had multiple ABI measurements available, we used the ABI value closest to the date of transplantation for analysis.
All data were analyzed in SPSS software (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, Illinois, USA, version 21.0). A p value<0.05 was
considered statistically signifcant.
Note: Data from our prospectively maintained database
have been previously published [36, 37]. However, these
publications addressed diferent scientifc topics and
comprised diferent subsets of patients.
Results
Baseline characteristics
Between January 2000 and July 2016, a total of 101
patients undergoing SPKT at the University Hospital of
Leipzig received structured evaluation for PAD, specifcally ABI testing before transplantation. One patient
had to be excluded from further analysis due to missing data. Te mean follow-up period of the study was
101±34.4 months.
Demographic and clinico-pathologic baseline characteristics between the patients with and without PAD are
shown in Table 1. Te mean age of the patients at the time
of transplantation was 43±8.9 years. Most patients were
male (56%), and the mean duration of diabetes mellitus
was 26.6±8.6 years. Te duration of pre-transplantation
dialysis and the number of pre-emptive transplantations
were comparable between the groups, without signifcant
diferences.
In the patients in the PAD group, compared with
patients without PAD, the following cardiovascular and
arteriosclerotic risk factors were higher: diastolic blood
pressure (p=0.04) and the presence of known CAD
(p=0.02), such as a history of micro- and macrovascular events (limb ischemia, amputation or ulceration)
(p=0.03).
During the pre-transplantation evaluation, 17 of the
101 patients (17%) were diagnosed with PAD. Among
them, 12 (12%) had a low ABI, and 5 (5%) had a high ABI.
Te low ABI group included mild (n=4 patients; 4%),
moderate (n=5 patients; 5%) and severe (n=3 patients;
3%) categories. A TBI<0.7 and positive fndings in imaging confrmed the diagnosis of PAD in the fve patients
with high ABI in the pre-transplantation evaluation.
Post-transplantation outcomes were measured from
the time of transplantation until January 2019. Until
that time point, 27 patients (27%) had secondary events
including new events of cardiac disease (myocardial
ischemia/ischemic heart failure) in 23 (23%) patients,
events of cerebrovascular disease (TIA/stroke) in 19
(19%) patients, and further 21 patients (21%) developed
peripheral vascular complications (ischemic ulceration/
gangrene, amputation or revascularization). Pancreas
and kidney graft failure was observed in 24 (24%) and 21
(21%) patients, respectively. Eighteen patients (18%) died
after transplantation during the follow-up period.
Outcome analysis
Primary endpoint
Kaplan–Meier plots for patient and pancreatic graft
survival according to the presence of PAD are shown in
Figs. 1 and 2.
Te 5-year patient survival (89% vs. 69%, p<0.01) and
pancreatic graft survival (82% vs. 63%; p=0.014) were
signifcantly lower in patients with PAD.
Tables  2, 3 and 4 show the results of Cox regression
analysis for the primary and secondary endpoints, with
adjustment for the recipients’ confounding variables,
including age, sex, BMI, duration of diabetes mellitus,
smoking habits, duration of dialysis, aspirin and statin
use, and known cardiovascular comorbidity (heart failure
or CAD, CVA, MI, peripheral vascular complications).
We found that PAD, defned by a low ABI, was an independent and signifcant predictor and risk factor of death
(HR, 2.99 (95% CI 1.00–8.87), p=0.049) and pancreatic
allograft failure (HR, 4.3 (95% CI 1.24–14.91), p=0.022).
However, no signifcant diferences were observed for
kidney allograft failure (HR 1.85 (95% CI 0.76–4.50),
p=0.178). A normal ABI was associated with better
patient survival (HR, 0.34 (95% CI 0.11–0.99, p=0.049)
in our patient cohort.
Patients with PAD were at greater risk of pancreatic
graft failure, secondary outcomes and death (Figs.  1, 2
and 3) than those without PAD, as defned by a normal
ABI.
Secondary endpoint
With regard to secondary outcomes, a low ABI was an
independent and signifcant predictor of early MI, stroke,
limb ischemia, gangrene and amputation (HR, 2.90 (95%
CI 1.19–7.04), p=0.019) (Table  4, Fig.  3). In addition,
cardiovascular morbidity (HR 2.69; p=0.028) was an
independent signifcant predictor of secondary events
(Table 4).
Discussion
It’s a scientifc fact that the presence of IDDM1 and
ESKD are strongly related to accelerated development of
atherosclerosis, and further development of PAD [2, 8,
17]. Patients with PAD have a signifcantly higher risk of
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events, resulting in
signifcant decrease of quality of life and functional worsening [15, 38, 39]. However, data are limited regarding
the prevalence and clinical efects of PAD, specifcally on
the basis of pre-transplantation ABI testing, on the longterm outcomes in SPKT recipients.
Te detection of arteriosclerosis at early stages
through adequate and non-invasive preoperative screening and the consequent initiation of optimal preventive medical treatment may help decrease perioperative cardiovascular mortality before transplantation [40].
In this context, the clinical assessment of resting ABI is
an accurate, simple and non-invasive diagnostic test to
assess the arterial vessel system of the lower extremities,
and is additionally a reliable predictor of the presence of
lower extremity PAD [12, 19].
Te ABI is also an indicator of atherosclerosis at other
vascular sites, and it can serve as a prognostic marker of
cardiovascular events and functional impairment even in
the absence of PAD symptoms [7, 9, 13].
However, the conditions and comorbidities associated with media calcifcation and vessel stifness, such
as IDDM, ESKD and advanced age, can lead to falsely
elevated or normal pressures [2, 28, 40]. Under these
circumstances, the measurement of TBI is useful,
because the toe vessels are relatively less susceptible to
vessel stifness, and TBI can help provide a more accurate
determination of vascular disease in this setting than ABI
alone [29].
In our pre-transplantation screening algorithms, the
vascular PAD diagnostic consisted of structured arterial
physiologic testing, including Doppler-derived ABI or
alternatively TBI testing, ultrasonography, patient history
and clinical examination.
TBI testing is performed for diagnostic assurance in
patients with elevated ABIs and expected vessel stifness
due to relevant comorbidities [41].
In cases of functional symptoms, further noninvasive
and invasive physiologic examinations were performed,
including pulse wave, Doppler wave and computed/
magnetic resonance angiography and walking tests on
a treadmill. In this current study, we sought to address
the value of ABI testing in a large population of SPKT
recipients.
In the pre-transplantation evaluation examinations of
SPKT recipients, we found that PAD was identifed by a
structured lower arterial extremity physiologic evaluation
in almost one-ffth of our patients over a study period of
approximately 20  years. Tis fnding is consistent with
the few previous studies that have found an increased
prevalence of PAD in patients with diabetes with ERSD
waiting for kidney and/or pancreas transplantation, as
compared with patients without these risk factors [25, 42,
43].
Furthermore, we observed that PAD defned by a low
ABI was an independent and signifcant predictor of
postoperative patient death, pancreatic graft failure and
postoperative cardio- and cerebrovascular events (MI,
stroke or peripheral vascular complications) in SPKT
recipients. Tis result was independent of other cardiovascular comorbidities and the number of years of
dialysis. Our fndings support the use of ABI or accurate
preoperative PAD testing for predicting mortality and
graft failure in individuals with PAD, independently of
other known cardiovascular risk factors.
Recent reports have demonstrated that a successful
SPKT that leads to euglycemia can slow the progress of
macrovesicular disease, as described in PAD [42–44].
In contrast, according to previous studies from renal
transplant recipients, the presence of PAD is associated
with an increased risk of allograft failure, as was also
seen in our study [6, 26]. However, the pathophysiology
underlying the increased risk of graft failure in patients
with PAD is not well understood, although factors such
as the presence of toxins, arteriosclerotic disease and the
infammatory state of PAD may also play roles [2]. Nevertheless, one explanation may be that the transplantation
itself and the use of immunosuppressive medicaments
exacerbates the pre-existing risk factors that lead to atherosclerosis or the development of new cardiovascular
risk factors [2].
However, despite recent excellent advances in treatment, patients with SPKT, IDDM and ESKD-related
conditions tend to have high rates of cardio- and cerebrovascular complications, and CVD remains the leading
cause of mortality in SPKT recipients with functioning
grafts, as also seen in the current study [23, 24, 45].
Despite of the immanent perioperative cardiovascular
risk, successful SPKT ofers the best known protection
against the progression of CVD and future cardiovascular events [23, 46–48]. Previous studies on kidney–pancreas transplantation have demonstrated the importance
of low-risk but highly sensitive screening strategies for
major adverse cardiovascular events [22, 24, 49]. Despite
these fndings, an optimal strategy for cardiovascular risk
and postoperative graft outcome assessment in these
patients remains lacking. To date, published approaches
vary from evaluating patients with diferent risk scores to
screening all patients being considered for SPKT [49–51].
Nevertheless, coronary angiography, an invasive and
cost-intensive technique, should be applied only in
high-risk patients with a long history of diabetes, severe
peripheral or coronary vascular disease or a history of
acute myocardial infarction [52, 53].
Terefore, the preoperative assessment of all patients
undergoing SPKT by coronary angiography does not
appear to be feasible; however, because transplantation
in cardiovascular high-risk patients is increasing, a noninvasive but sufciently sensitive stratifcation strategy is
needed to assess perioperative cardiovascular risk as well
as transplant outcomes.
However, a consensus is lacking regarding the best
assessment and optimization strategy for cardiovascular
risk and transplant outcomes.
In the current study, we therefore aimed to verify the
value of screening for PAD through pre-transplantation
ABI testing to identify cardiovascular high-risk patients
who were eligible for further invasive assessment, as well
as specifcally modifed preoperative risk factors and
perioperative protective strategies.
We found that ABI testing is an inexpensive and easily
applicable assessment tool during preoperative screening
of patients eligible for SPKT.
Limitations
First, this study was limited by its retrospective nature
and small sample size, particularly in the ABI subcategories (‘low-ABI’ and ‘high-ABI’ patients) in both the pretransplantation and post-transplantation ABI results; the
sample size was too small for further analysis or drawing
conclusions.
Second, in few SPKT recipients (n=6; 5.9%), vascular exams were performed quite some time before the
transplantation (specifcally during pre-transplantation
screening examinations for placement on the wait list),
and these patients were subsequently categorized as normal controls. However, if peripheral vascular disease and
arteriosclerosis might have progressed while the patient
was on the waiting list without additional documentation this might have created a small bias. In other words,
this bias may have led to an underestimation of PAD at
the time of transplant and consecutive outcome analyses.
Ideally, all patients should have their vascular diagnostics
performed within a year after transplantation.
Tird, the results of ABI testing in our patient cohort
with IDDM and ESKD must be interpreted carefully,
because both comorbidities could lead to increased vascular calcifcation, thus resulting in vessel stifness and/
or non-compressible vessels [2, 28]. Te incompressibility of the vessels could lead to elevated ABIs>1.4 or
falsely normal ABIs. In this setting, the use of an additional TBI testing, toe pressure measurement or Doppler
waveform data, which were conducted in our analysis
in these patients, would have helped further characterize the patients with an ABI>1.4, because toe vessels are
relatively less afected by calcifcation [11, 29].
Fourth, the natural history of PAD involves a decrease
in ABI over time. However, why the ABI would increase
in some patients and decrease in others after transplantation is not well understood. Te reason for these fndings
remains unclear, and the principal patterns of causation
should be further evaluated in future prospective studies.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we demonstrated that ABI evaluation
combined with TBI testing in unclear cases is a valuable, inexpensive and feasible assessment tool for accurate examination of perioperative cardiovascular risk in
patients undergoing SPKT. We showed that PAD associated with low and high ABIs predicted higher mortality,
pancreatic graft failure and poorer cardiovascular outcomes. With the information gained from preoperative
ABI testing, patients at high-risk for perioperative cardiovascular complications and simultaneous graft failure
can be identifed so that further invasive examination
and, if possible, reduction of preexisting risk factors can
be initiated.
Further research, ideally in large randomized and controlled multicenter trials, are needed to evaluate the use
of ABI testing in pre-operative PAD screening in highrisk patient populations. Moreover, future research
should focus on the evaluation of functional capacity or
walking distance as a comparative tool for ABI testing,
to establish the role of ABI in further perioperative risk
assessment in high-risk cardiovascular patients and to
identify diferent ABI subcategories for optimized risk
stratifcation.