Background
The United Nations (UN) has recognized universal access
to reproductive healthcare as a priority for global
health, and one of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) is to ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive
health (SRH) services, including family planning,
with a particular focus on the use of modern contraceptive
methods (indicator 3.7.1) [1]. Women’s reproductive
health services in low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs) have not fully met global human rights standards
[2]. Family planning programs in several LMICs
are fragile due to constrained existing policies and dependence
on donor funding. The unmet need for
contraception is the highest among the poorest couples
[3]. Improving access to family planning in such settings
can help women and couples meet their reproductive
goals and improve maternal and child health [3].
For decades, family planning has been a contentious issue
in Pakistan, which has the highest total fertility rate (3.8 children
per woman) in South Asia after Afghanistan. While
knowledge of family planning is nearly universal (98–99%),
the overall contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) is only 34%
in Pakistan [4, 5]. The major obstacles to contraceptive use
are lack of awareness of specific modern methods, perception
of husband’s preferences and attitudes related to family
planning, health concerns associated with contraceptive use,
and perceived access to family planning services [6]. Moreover,
in Pakistani society, having open discussions about sexual
preferences is taboo.
Several issues impede reliable data collection among
marginalized groups [7, 8] including the sensitive nature
of SRH topics and questions, and in some cases,
women’s negative experiences related to intimate or
non-intimate physical or sexual violence [9]. Strict religious
identity affects some women’s willingness to discuss
contraception with others. Likewise, strong
institutionalized religious doctrines in combination with
cultural beliefs in urban communities, and men’s role as
the overall head of household makes women less likely
to share their experiences and practices related to family
planning [10]. Ensuring quality family planning data
therefore remains a challenge in many LMICs [11].
In any research process, data collection is the first
stage of gathering information with respect to respondents’
needs, goals, and attitudes toward the problem
area. In the process of obtaining information from respondents,
researchers may encounter unanticipated
challenges. Enumerators working in LMICs often encounter
respondents who are reluctant to participate in
the interview, which makes it difficult to build rapport
[12]. A number of factors may influence a respondent’s
willingness to participate. For example, the response of
the interviewee depends on the type of clothes worn
(formal or casual) during the field visit. Enumerators
may also face issues persuading a respondent in a joint
family system to participate, and convincing some respondents
to discuss sensitive topics such as sexuality
[13]. The respondent’s literacy and understanding of the
questions consequently affect the process of data collection.
If respondents perceive a risk of breaches in confidentiality,
they may be reluctant to reveal personal
information to the enumerator during the interview [14,
15]. Similarly, social and cultural taboos in some religious
and cultural groups prevent women from discussing
sexual and reproductive health issues with someone
other than close family and friends. A study of women
from constituencies of highly religious groups in urban
Zimbabwe reported women’s refusal to participate in interviews
related to SRH because of their religious beliefs.
In the context of Pakistan, strong societal taboos linked
with moral values, gender roles, and religious opposition,
restrict women from openly discussing SRH services in
religious communities [16, 17]. There are also a cultural
tendency to avoid sharing personal information with
untrusted outsiders [18, 19]. Studies from other LMICs
have shown that lack of trust is a challenge particularly
in settings where previous research provided no direct
benefit or feedback to respondents [20, 21]. Moreover,
respondents’ busy schedules and lengthy questionnaires
may lead to refusal or incomplete surveys. Understanding
local norms and developing culturally appropriate
strategies to build trust within communities significantly
reduces refusals [20, 21]. Additionally, researchers in
South Africa reported that urban settlements do not
have adequate space for interviews, therefore ensuring
privacy was challenging . Furthermore, densely populated
urban settings pose logistical as well as technical
difficulties for researchers such as identifying eligible respondents,
poor transportation and infrastructure, and
lack of political and administrative willingness to support
independent researchers [19].
Evaluation of the willows reproductive health program
The present study was part of an evaluation of the Willows
Reproductive Health Program [22], a large community-based
reproductive health program providing reproductive health
information and education to women of reproductive age in
Karachi, Pakistan. The program included both prospective
and retrospective assessments of separate intervention and
control sites. These sites included communities with adequate
provision of family planning services and typically
house women of low socio-economic status. The initial stage
of the program involved a registration period in which program
field workers enrolled all eligible women living in the
defined intervention area. The field educators then carried
out home visits informing women about the benefits of family
planning, provided information on the range of available
contraceptive methods, and referred women to locally-based
healthcare services, when required, and coordinated with
providers to ensure the delivery of high-quality family planning
services. The program also applied an algorithm that
determined women most in need of family planning counseling,
and field educators prioritized these women to receive
education, information, and referrals. The non-users
with high risk of unintended pregnancy, ineffective users
of traditional methods, and unsatisfied users of modern
methods were given highest priority for home visits. The
retrospective assessment was carried out between 2013
and 2015 and prospective assessment from 2017 to 2020
in urban areas of Karachi, Pakistan. This paper reflects
our research team’s recent experiences carrying out these
assessments for a quasi-experimental evaluation of the
Willows reproductive health program. We aim to describe
the issues encountered and lessons learned from this
process, and recommend some potential solutions for future
SRH surveys in similar urban dwellings.
Methodology
Parent study design
In this paper, we describe lessons learned during the
undertaking of a larger impact evaluation, which consisted
of two components. Component 1 was a baseline
prospective assessment conducted prior to implementation
of a reproductive health program, and component 2
was a cross-sectional retrospective survey in a site where
the program has ended.
Study sites and population
The evaluation included both prospective and retrospective
assessments of four separate intervention and control sites in
urban settlements of Karachi, Pakistan: Jamshed Town, Yousuf
Goth, Korangi Town, and PIB colony and Dalmia/Shanti
communities. The program was implemented from April
2013 through September 2015 in Korangi Town (for retrospective
assessment), and from June 2017 to March 2020 in
Jamshed Town (for prospective assessment). We selected
control sites to match the intervention areas in terms of
socio-demographic characteristics, such as type of area
(urban or peri-urban), population size, ethnic composition,
and dominant language. Women were eligible if they were
aged 16–44 years for prospective assessment and 16–49 years
for retrospective assessment, married, usual members of the
household, and spoke at least one of the four most common
languages (Urdu, Pashto, Sindhi, or English).
Jamshed town is the most populated (0.73 million)
municipality in the East district of Karachi with a majority
Muslim population. The town is populated by diverse
ethnic groups including Muhajirs, Punjabis, Sindhis,
Kashmiris, Seraikis, Pashtuns, Balochis, Memons, Bohras,
and Ismailis, and is also home to minority groups
such as Christians, Parsis, and Hindus. Yousuf Goth,
with nearly 1 million inhabitants, is a peri-urban setting
in the neighborhood of Malir district with a majority
Muslim population of various ethnic groups. Jamshed
town and Yousuf Goth share similar socio-demographic
characteristics and consist of large slum areas as well as
some upper-middle income neighborhoods. Both areas
have dynamic working-class populations and have public/
private schools, malls and shopping plazas. Annual
religious festivals and variability in weather patterns influence
seasonal migration within and between districts
and provinces. For example, families of slum areas often
move to interior Sindh districts to harvest crops from
April to July each year. Some families live temporarily in
rented houses in selected settings and frequently shift
between nearby communities.
On the other hand, Korangi town with a population of
2.4 million is a peri-urban neighborhood in East Karachi
with a multi-ethnic population including Muhajirs,
Sindhi, Balochi, Pashtuns, and Gilgiti. This is an industrial
area and is home to low and middle-income families
from Afghanistan and Bangladesh who migrated for
the purpose of employment in the garment and leather
factories. PIB and Dalmia/Shanti Nagar have majority
Muslim populations of 1 million and 0.1 million, respectively,
and are peri-urban areas located in Gulshan
town. In both areas, school enrollment is low and many
children work as helpers in factories. Some women work
in garment factories, while others work as housekeepers,
and many have low-paying private school teaching jobs.
Sampling strategy and sample size
Both prospective and retrospective surveys followed a
three-stage random sampling design. Initially, Geographical
Information System (GIS) technology was used to
construct the sampling frame with distinct area mapping
and cluster demarcation of the intervention and control
sites. GIS technology was used because Pakistan lacks
reliable and updated statistics related to structure and
household numbers in union councils of urban slums.
Secondly, it is a more cost-effective method than inperson
visits to validate cluster boundaries, and minimizes
time spent searching for reliable statistics and developing
sampling frames in person. Based on the
geographical demarcation by GIS, 283 clusters were
formed in the intervention site and 200 clusters in the
control site for the prospective assessment, and 548 clusters
in the intervention site and 160 in the control sites
for the retrospective assessment. Each cluster was created
on a cadastral scale consisting of 60–100 structures.
The second stage involved random selection of clusters
in the intervention and comparison sites. A total of 105
clusters from the intervention and 100 from control site
for the prospective assessment, and 110 clusters in each
site for the retrospective assessment were randomly selected
for inclusion in the study.
The second stage involved a complete household listing
in selected clusters and random sampling of eligible
women. The data management unit of Aga Khan University
(AKU) developed an android application program
for the household listing activity. All households were
included in the listing, and the questionnaire sought to
determine eligible women who were between the ages of
16–44 years for the prospective component and 16–49
for the retrospective component. Field teams also collected
pertinent details on the household location, including
Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates,
addresses, written directions, and the name of the
household head. The application was tested multiple
times to fix bugs and queries prior to the household listing.
The household listing enrolled 8179 households in
the intervention and 6406 households in the control
sites for the prospective assessment, and 9010 in the
intervention and 8182 in control sites for the retrospective
assessment to generate a sampling frame for selection
of households (secondary sampling units).
The final stage involved random selection of women
from each cluster. A sample size of ~ 2000 women from
each site was required to achieve sufficient statistical
power. The study team used the household listing to identify
2019 eligible women in the intervention area and 2147
eligible women in the control sites for prospective survey;
and 2750 eligible women each from the intervention and
control sites for the retrospective assessments using a
computerized process. The calculated sample size was
powered to detect a 5% (percentage point) difference in
critical value of CPR in intervention sites compared to
control sites at 0.05 significance with 90% probability of
exceeding the critical value on a two-sided test. This
process was carried out in STATA Software for Statistics
and Data Science using a uniform [0, 1] random number
generator with a fixed seed. Women were ranked by the
number drawn. The lowest random draws from eligible
women in the household were selected to participate in
the survey. The randomly selected women were uploaded
to a CommCare survey application for interview by enumerators
assigned to each cluster. If there were more than
one eligible woman in a selected household, the Comm-
Care application randomly selected one.
Survey questionnaires (Additional files 1 & 2)
We finalized the questionnaire for the retrospective and
prospective assessments using country-specific standard
data collection instruments such as the Pakistan demographic
and health survey (PDHS). The survey questionnaire
covered a range of topics on women’s reproductive
health, including marital status, contraceptive knowledge
and use, childbearing, and abortion and access to safe
abortion services. It sought insights on issues related to
uptake, continuation and discontinuation of modern
contraceptive methods. The assessments included a
contraceptive calendar to collect a month-by-month history
of certain key reproductive events (i.e. births, pregnancies,
termination of pregnancies, and family planning
use) for the five-year calendar period preceding the date
of interview. It also captured information on change in
contraceptive methods, and reasons for switching and discontinuation
[5]. The survey questionnaire, originally devised
in English, was translated into Urdu (the national
language) and then backtranslated into English for quality
assurance purposes. We used a digital data collection
process using the CommCare application; this is useful for
on-time data entry and quality checking; however, it requires
many resources and accessories such as a power
bank and internet connectivity for uploading data. We
conducted two pilot-tests prior to data collection and
modified the questionnaire based on enumerator feedback.
In the initial week of data collection, enumerators
were asked to complete only one questionnaire per day,
which was increased to two questionnaires per day in the
second week, and then a minimum of three questionnaires
per day for the rest of the survey period.
Data quality assurance
The study team implemented a number of strategies to
ensure quality fieldwork. These included regular quality
checks in the CommCare desktop application to identify
inconsistencies and outliers in the data. CommCare is a
software platform developed by Dimagi Inc. that allows
non-programmers to design electronic surveys and run
them via mobile applications on android devices. Our application
had built-in quality checks to minimize errors
and ensure proper skip patterns in the survey. The enumerators
were trained to sync completed forms for review
by the team leader immediately following each section of
the interview. This means that completed survey forms
were uploaded to a central server so that the team leader
could access the data on her tablet and address any errors
in real time. Team leaders also visited a randomly selected
5% sample of households to verify collected information;
however, no such discrepancies were found.
We hired all female enumerators and team leaders
based on the local norms in Karachi; typically females
are permitted to enter the household and talk to women,
but males are not. We developed a protocol for revisiting
cases with major errors such as when an enumerator
skipped collecting pregnancy-related information
even though the respondent had a birth in the last
30 months (as identified in the contraceptive calendar
module). The data management unit documented the
data cleaning notes and ran rounds of STATA cleaning
codes to fix case specific errors following discussions
with the field manager, then re-ran the STATA quality
checks to confirm that all issues were resolved. In
addition, enumerator refresher trainings were conducted
weekly to discuss common issues with data and fieldwork,
and to review updated field protocols where appropriate.
In order to minimize loss to follow up
between the household listing and re-visits for the
survey, when a selected woman could not be found
at their household, the enumerator made three
separate attempts to contact her on different days.
After each interview or contact attempt, enumerators
completed an ‘interviewer contacts’ form in
CommCare, which documented the status of each
case (e.g. completed, not eligible, moved away, rescheduled,
etc.). To improve response rates, enumerators
also scheduled interviews on days/times
most convenient for participants (for example, on
weekends or evenings, outside of typical working
hours).
Ethical approval
The Ethical Review Committee of the AKU (4964-Ped-
ERC-17) and the National Bioethics Committee of
Pakistan approved the study. The enumerator read aloud
the consent form before asking survey questions to eligible
women and signed the consent form on their behalf.
The enumerator also provided a hard copy of
consent form to the respondent.
Results
This study documents various issues encountered during
data collection and potential solutions. These are
broadly categorized into four main themes with further
sub-categories (Table 1). The four main themes are: (1)
technical issues related to GIS usage and computer
assisted personal interviews (CAPI); (2) household listing
issues; (3) respondent issues, and (4) field issues.
Technical issues related to GIS and CAPI
We found that using GIS technology to demarcate clusters,
particularly in urban slums, was an efficient approach
to establishing a sampling frame; however, its
use is subject to issues around cluster boundary interpretation
and household identification, particularly for
narrow and congested streets. This approach required
extra time and additional human resources to validate
the boundaries through in-person field visits. We also
worked closely with program staff to ensure that the
boundaries around areas intended for program implementation
were accurately demarcated. This was a timeintensive,
but critical step in the process.
Collecting data using electronic devices had many advantages
but was also prone to challenges such as power
outages, low connectivity in some areas, and slow
uploading speed. We ensured that ample tablets were
available as backup in such circumstances. When data
issues/queries emerged in the field, waiting to receive a
response from the technical support team at AKU (who
had access to the central server) was a time-consuming
procedure. In areas of low connectivity, enumerators
struggled with the intermittent internet to sync the data,
especially when conducting interviews on ground floors
of tower buildings. Nevertheless, the application was
programmed such that the survey itself could be run
without any connectivity, and syncing could occur later
(i.e. each evening upon return to the office). AKU’s dedicated
research staff were also on board to deal such
queries in the field.
Household listing issues
Karachi is a metropolitan city comprised of quickly growing
urban dwellings and settlements. Residential apartments
and multi-story buildings are common. In a
dynamic population like our study sample, having a long
gap between the household listing and the household survey
can lead to high loss-to-follow-up, and recall errors
among enumerators, such as forgetting important sites
and other neighborhood landmarks. A majority of the
housing areas do not have formal addresses, which makes
it difficult to identify and track individual households.
To address this challenge, the team marked a unique
identification number (ID) on the front door of each
household during household listing with the permission
of participants. This was helpful to relocate and confirm
the households randomized for data collection during
the household survey. We trained two separate teams to
conduct the household listing and household survey. Initially,
our plan was to complete the entire household
listing in all selected clusters before beginning the
household survey. However, there was a shift in strategy
mid-course when the study team identified a need to reduce
the time lag between the two activities. In our
revised field protocol, the household listing and survey
teams worked in tandem so that interviews began immediately
after each cluster was listed, rather than listing all
clusters before beginning the household survey; this
modification proved critical in minimizing loss to
follow-up and maintaining an efficient data collection
process.
Respondent issues
The study revealed that respondent issues were the most
important barriers to high quality data collection (Table
1). In Karachi, people’s religious beliefs affect their willingness
to discuss SRH topics. In addition, perceived security
threats and gender-based household dynamics
made some women reluctant to participate in surveys.
These findings are similar to those reported in other studies
[10]. Respondents were initially suspicious of enumerators
and viewed them as strangers due to recent thefts and
child kidnapping incidents in the neighborhood. We
found that discussing sensitive topics such as women’s socioeconomic
status (which raised concerns regarding robbery)
and sexual and contraceptive history made fieldwork
challenging and led to high refusal rates if not approached
with sensitivity. Likewise, certain community sub-groups
(e.g. Muhajirs and Pashtuns) were reluctant to participate
for these reasons. To counter this challenge and to build
strong rapport, male field supervisors coordinated with
male community leaders personally using a gatekeeper
script to initiate the discussion, and we trained an allfemale
team of enumerators on strategies to improve mutual
trust prior to interviews. As a result, refusal rates were
low (Jamshed town 9.8%, Yousuf Goth 2.5%, Korangi town
5%, and PIB & Dalmia/Shanti Nagar 4.3%.).
In some instances, respondents expressed difficulties
understanding Urdu language and had to be assigned to
a new enumerator who could communicate in their native
language. To maximize inclusion in our study sites,
we ensured that our enumerator team included women
who spoke at least one of the four most common languages
in Karachi: English, Urdu, Pushto, or Sindhi.
We found that engaging respondents for more than an
hour conflicted with women’s busy daily schedules,
which created problems for successful data collection.
This also increased participant discomfort and unwillingness
to participate in the data collection process. In
these cases, we rescheduled the remaining portion of the
interviews at a time more convenient for respondents
(e.g. on Sundays, outside of working hours, etc.).
Another issue this study revealed was that some respondents
demanded material benefits, extra healthcare
services or sometimes lodged complaints against the
healthcare system when visited for surveys, thus enumerators
had to be properly trained to deal with such
situations. Enumerators were trained to anticipate such
demands and explain that a research report will be generated
from the study findings and disseminated to concerned
stakeholders. This report might inform policies
that could benefit respondents in the long run. We also
provided a tea mug to all respondents as a token of appreciation
for their time and effort.
Field issues
This study also highlighted the difficulties of conducting
long interviews in a dense, urban environment. Our
protocol was to conduct the interview privately in
women’s homes, but this was sometimes difficult because
other family members were present and did not
want to leave. Selecting an alternative private interview
location was a challenge in some areas since data collection
did not take place in a room, particularly in joint
family systems, but rather in an open space (for example,
at the doorstep where loud background noises and warm
temperatures posed additional challenges). In addition,
ensuring privacy away from other family members and
neighbors was a challenge. We addressed this issue by
scheduling a revisit after confirming another time when
most family members were away from the home.
The data collection period was affected by some seasonal
events such fasting and Eid holidays, and field activities
were postponed for 2 months in retrospective
sites due to political events and general elections in July,
2018. These data collection protocol adaptations have
serious time and budget implications, but we view them
as necessary investments to ensure high quality data.
Discussion
This study demonstrates how conducting surveys in urban
Karachi presents unique challenges that can influence the
data collection process. However, we found that appropriate
mitigation measures to address the environmental and
socio-cultural context enabled successful data collection
in this setting. Lessons learned may be usefully applied in
similar urban settings in other LMICs.
Using GIS technology to demarcate clusters for our
sampling frame is a unique and efficient approach of
present study. However, the process is time-intensive, as
accurate interpretation of cluster boundaries and household
identification, particularly within neighborhoods
with congested and narrow streets, can be challenging.
Working with experienced field teams and program staff
who know the area well is critical to success. This finding
is consistent with other studies conducted in LMICs,
where researchers lacked accurate and detailed spatial
images, and encountered challenges tracing the exact location
of zoning areas [23, 24]. This unique approach
differs from methods used to construct sampling frames
in other surveys, such as the 2017–18 Pakistan Demographic
and Health Survey (PDHS), which used a
complete list of enumeration blocks (EBs) created for
the Pakistan Population and Housing Census 2017. The
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS) has formulated EBs
into three categories of income groups i.e. low, middle
and high, keeping in view the living standard of the majority
of the people.
We demonstrate that using electronic data collection
methods in LMICs has many advantages; however, a robust
technical support protocol must be in place to ensure
efficient response from technicians who have access
to the central server. This finding is supported by available
studies from other LMICs [25, 26], which reported
that implementation is challenging both administratively
and technically. Such challenges can be reduced by
building the technical capacity of enumerators using the
training of trainer (ToT) model, where team leaders are
trained first, and can oversee data collection and help
with troubleshooting to reduce errors during fieldwork.
Our study revealed a number of respondent-related issues
during the data collection process. Like other LMICs,
we also found considerable seasonal migration among residents,
and faced difficulties identifying listed respondents
in selected clusters. A study conducted in Bolivia, Kenya,
and South Africa showed similar challenges with attrition
rates between survey rounds; the interviewers tracked,
followed and re-interviewed 84% of women who moved
[27]. In our study, coordinating two teams to work in tandem
and begin interviews immediately after each cluster’s
household listing was completed helped to minimize attrition
between data collection activities.
Some respondents were reluctant to participate in our
study because discussing family planning, especially use
of contraceptive methods and abortion services is highly
stigmatized among some Muslim religious groups. However,
we also found that highly religious Christian families
had similar reservations about discussing such
topics. In line with our findings, previous studies report
that sexual and reproductive issues are sensitive subjects,
rarely discussed in certain communities, and both religious
traditions strongly influence the uptake of family
planning [28, 29]. This points to the important role of
religious leaders as potential agents of change in conservative
societies and suggests the need to engage them in
efforts to promote sexual and reproductive health.
Respondents’ perceptions around personal security
made them reluctant to share personal information in
this setting. To reassure respondents and clarify misunderstandings
regarding data collection and use, researchers
should collaborate with influential gatekeepers
in the community and district administration. This finding
is consistent with a study in South Africa where respondents
perceived enumerators with suspicion, denied
access to houses, and viewed study participation as a security
risk [30]. Some even complained to local police
authorities despite receiving official letters authorizing
the research. These issues were exacerbated when enumerators
discussed sensitive topics such as family planning
and their reproductive histories with respondents
of particular religious groups. Another study also reported
that both Muslim and Christian groups frequently
oppose family planning [31]. To help mitigate
these challenges, we recruited female enumerators who
were familiar with local social and cultural norms, and
provided focused training on strategies to build rapport
and trust so that participants felt comfortable sharing
sensitive information.
In our study some respondents experienced difficulty
understanding Urdu language. We recruited skilled enumerators
fluent in multiple native languages. This strategy
is endorsed by other research teams who
encountered language barriers while collecting data and
used bilingual enumerators fluent in local languages [19,
30, 32]. This highlights the importance of recruiting and
training a diverse team of enumerators to ensure that all
potential respondents have the same ability to communicate
with the research team. Misinterpretation of risks
and biases could be reduced through training and mock
exercises with enumerators.
We adopted a strategy where the training did not stop
after the initial two-week session; rather, the team adapted to
learnings from the field throughout the data collection
process, and jointly developed strategies to address them as
they emerged. We held weekly meetings to discuss the progress
of every enumerator and reviewed data errors as a
team. The field manager identified discrepancies through
daily data quality checks and discussed strategies to resolve
these queries throughout the data collection period.
The usefulness of household surveys to capture accurate
information depends heavily on the survey’s content
and length [33]. For example, participants may rush
through the data collection process and provide incomplete
or inaccurate information. In our study, we
rescheduled interviews to avoid this scenario. Furthermore,
lengthy questionnaires can lead to enumerator fatigue,
but we did not encounter this difficulty in our
study. This might be because we did not overburden our
enumerators with difficult daily targets [13].
An important learning from our fieldwork was that
some respondents expect monetary benefits or other direct
benefits such as improved healthcare access. However,
the enumerators explained that participants would
receive no direct benefits, in keeping with our approved
ethical protocol. This finding likely reflects the fact that
people receive assistance from many local and international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) involved
in charity programs in urban settings. Studies in
Pakistan and other LMICs [7, 34, 35] reported similar
findings, where both rural and urban communities had
strong expectations of unconditional benefit packages
when enumerators visit homes. Researchers can show
their appreciation by providing a small non-monetary
gift (e.g. tea mug) at the end of the interview.
The interview environment is a crucial aspect of the
data collection process [2]. Our study found that in
some instances, interviews had to be rescheduled to ensure
privacy, especially in households with joint families
living in crowded spaces. Some respondents understandably
felt nervous when discussing sensitive information
such their sexual activity and contraceptive use. In this
environment, securing a private interview room was a
challenge. Previous literature reported that getting access
to participants, managing privacy, and obtaining accurate
responses to sensitive topics can be difficult [7, 35,
36]. This suggests that in some settings, interviews must
be conducted at a neutral, private venue that is suitable
and secure for both the respondent and enumerator [2].
To our knowledge, this is the first study to lay out
fieldwork issues at different stages of the data collection
process in urban environments of Karachi, Pakistan. Our
study also had some limitations. First, due to competing
household tasks and busy schedules, it is possible that
some respondents rushed through the survey. Secondly,
we had no way to track respondents who could not be
reached after three visits, and were thus unable to capture
information on this potentially important subgroup.
Finally, we implemented our study by following
strict standard protocols to ensure high quality data; this
substantially increased the time and cost of data collection.
This underlines the need to prioritize high quality
data over cost and time complications by planning and
budgeting accordingly from the outset substantially increase
the time and cost of data.
Conclusion
Several important lessons can inform future implementation
of household surveys in urban populations. First,
the use of GIS technology to develop sampling frames is
an innovative and cost-effective method in resourceconstrained
settings like urban Karachi. Second, having
a dedicated data management team to monitor electronic
data collection in real time facilitates efficient detection
of errors and inconsistences, and greatly
enhances data quality. Third, the strategy of interviewing
women immediately after listing households in each
cluster makes it easier to re-locate selected respondents
and reduces loss-to-follow up. Fourth, understanding
local norms and developing culturally appropriate strategies
to engage participants is essential to build trust
with communities and may significantly reduce refusals.
Training female enumerators preferably from the same
locality is ideal since they are can easily build rapport
and approach reproductive health topics with sensitivity
and respect. Lastly, ensuring privacy in joint family
households may be achieved by rescheduling interviews
for another time when most family members are not at
home. Findings of this study will help to improve the
quality and efficiency of future household surveys in
urban settings.