Background
Physical activity may benefit health and reduce risk of
chronic complications in normal people and people
with diabetes mellitus (DM) and peripheral vascular
diseases [1]. The American Diabetes Association (ADA)
recommends that people with DM should perform
moderate-intensity aerobic exercise for 150 min/week or
vigorous aerobic exercise for 75 min/week [2]. Moderateand
vigorous intensity exercise has been demonstrated to
improve peripheral circulation, but light intensity exercise
cannot [1]. Walking is the most common exercise
in normal people and people with DM [3, 4]. However,
walking is a weight-bearing exercise and fast walking
such as brisk walking may cause high plantar pressure
for increasing risk of plantar tissue injury and stress fracture
of metatarsals [1, 3, 5–7]. Previous studies have confirmed
that prolonged physical pressure over the skin is
a major contributing factor for developing plantar tissue
injury [5, 6].
Research studies have shown that muscle fatigue after
intensive walking exercise reduces the body’s ability to
absorb impact forces during walking [7, 8]. The reduced
shock absorption often causes muscular and joint pain
of the lower extremity and fall injury [7, 8]. Researchers
usually focus on the postural adjustment and balance
after leg muscle fatigue because of severe impact of fall
injury [9]. In these studies, changes of plantar pressure,
plantar tissue injury and metatarsal stress fracture are not
well investigated [9]. In the literature, there are only few
studies investigating changes of plantar pressures after
various physical activities [7, 10, 11]. Ferris et al. found
that plantar pressure values were affected by activities
of lower extremity muscles [10]. Bisiaux and Moretto
demonstrated that muscle fatigue of the lower extremity
caused increased plantar pressure under the forefoot
[11]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there
is no study comparing changes of plantar pressure after
various walking intensities and relationship between leg
muscle fatigue and plantar pressure patterns. Although
moderate intensity exercise, such as brisk walking is recommended
for the normal people and people with DM,
it is unclear whether these moderate and vigorous exercise
are associated with increased leg muscle fatigue and
increased plantar pressures as well as risk for plantar
tissue injury. Because various healthcare clinicians have
been strongly advocating physical activity in people with
DM and peripheral vascular diseases, there is an increasing
need to understand the relationship between muscle
fatigue and plantar pressure changes.
The objectives of this study were to investigate the
effects of different walking intensities on leg muscle
fatigue and plantar pressure as well as to investigate the
relationship between leg muscle fatigue and plantar pressure.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
to compare leg muscle fatigue and plantar pressure patterns
after various walking speeds and durations. The
results from this study in healthy participants can provide
a foundation for understanding the effect of walking
intensities on leg muscle fatigue and plantar pressure
in people with DM and peripheral vascular diseases. We
hypothesized that different walking speeds (ranging from
slow walking, brisk walking to slow running) and durations
cause different degrees of leg muscle fatigue and
plantar pressure patterns.
Methods
A 3 × 2 factorial design, including three speeds (1.8, 3.6,
and 5.4 mph) and two durations (10 and 20 min), was
used in the current study. This study was part of a larger
project investigating the effect of walking intensities on
plantar skin blood flow responses [3, 4]. The EMG data
has not been reported elsewhere. These three walking
speeds represent slow and normal walking at 1.8 mph,
brisk walking at 3.6 mph, and slow running at 5.4 mph.
We also intended to examine the differences between two
common walking durations of 10 and 20 min [3, 4]. The
specific walking tasks were as follows.
• Walking at 1.8 mph for 10 min in the first week
• Walking at 1.8 mph for 20 min in the first week
• Walking at 3.6 mph for 10 min in the second week
• Walking at 3.6 mph for 20 min in the second week
• Walking at 5.4 mph for 10 min in the third week
• Walking at 5.4 mph for 20 min in the third week
Participants
Healthy participants between 20 and 45 years of age were
recruited from the university and nearby community.
Exclusion criteria were active foot ulcers, diabetes, vascular
diseases, hypertension, the inability to walk for 20-min
independently, the inability to walk at the speed of 5.4
mph independently, or the use of vasoactive medications
[3, 4]. The examinations were performed at the Rehabilitation
Engineering Laboratory, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign with room temperature at 24 ± 2 °C.
The study was approved by the Institutional Review
Board, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (IRB
#19,225). Each participant signed the informed consent
for this study.
Experimental procedures
The research participant took off the socks and shoes and
was in the supine position for 30 min before the walking
protocol to avoid the influence of previous weight-bearing
activities on muscle fatigue and plantar pressure. All
participants were asked to walk with an appropriate size
of standard shoes (1-inch heel, Altrex, Teaneck, NJ, USA)
at a speed of 1.8 mph on a treadmill in the first visit. Electromyographic
(EMG) electrodes (Model EL507 (Bipolar
Ag/AgCl electrodes) and EMG100C, Biopac Systems,
Inc., Goleta, CA, USA) were taped on the tibialis anterior
(TA) and gastrocnemius medialis (GM) of the dominant
leg according to SENIAM locations [12]. The sampling
rate of EMG signals was 1,000 Hz. The skin sites for placing
the electrodes were cleaned using alcohol wipes and
shaved. The plantar pressure insole measure system was
used to measure plantar pressures (Tekscan, South Boston,
MA, USA). The participant wore the insole sensors
inside the shoe for 3-min walking before the calibration.
The insole sensor was then calibrated according to the
manufacturer’s guidelines [13, 14]. Plantar pressure data
were collected at 300 Hz. Participants were randomly
assigned into the 10- or 20-min walking duration first
and the other duration later, with a balanced crossover
design. The random order of 10- and 20-min duration
minimized the order effect of duration factor on EMG
and plantar pressure responses. For avoiding carryover
effects on muscle fatigue and plantar pressure, participants
were allowed to rest for at least 20 min between
10- and 20-min walking trials. All participants returned
to the laboratory for performing 3.6 mph in the second
visit and 5.4 mph walking in the third visit. Each visit was
separated between 7 ± 2 days.
EMG and plantar pressure analyses
The EMG data were analyzed using the median frequency
and multiscale entropy (MSE) methods to characterize
muscle fatigue at different walking intensities.
The EMG signals were filtered using a zero-lag band
pass filter (Butterworth filter, 6th
order, 5–400 Hz) [15].
The power spectrum median frequency of the EMG
was determined by short-time Fourier transforms. Each
of the short-time segments was multiplied by the Hamming
window. The window size was 512 ms. The sampling
interval in the time domain was 75% of the window
length. The average value of median frequency in each
short-time segment was used as a fatigue index of muscles
in each walking condition. EMG data were processed
using Matlab 2020b (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA)
(Fig. 1). The median frequency of EMG signals was used
to detect muscle fatigue. When muscle becomes fatigue,
the median frequency of EMG spectrum shifts to a lower
value. Muscle fatigue is related to insufficient blood perfusion
of muscle fibers, depletion of energy sources, and
metabolites’ build-up. The build-up of excess hydrogen
ions slows down the waveform of the action potential in
muscle contraction, resulting in two electrophysiological
events. The build-up of excess hydrogen ions slows down
the waveform of an action potential in a muscle contraction,
resulting in two electrophysiological events: Synchronization
of the motor unit pool leads to an increase
in amplitude and an increase in the duration of the activation
of the EMG signal [16]. This could be used to
explain the shift to a lower median frequency after muscle
fatigue.
Multiscale entropy (MSE) was used to assess the
complexity change of muscle fatigue. Recent studies
have demonstrated that both linear methods (median
frequency) and nonlinear methods (eg. entropy and
fractal) should be used to characterize changes of EMG
signals. The use of only one approach (either linear or
nonlinear) will not be able to fully characterize neuromuscular
changes of fatigued muscle [17]. MSE is one
of the methods developed by Costa et al. [18–20]. MSE
uses the “Sample Entropy” algorithm to estimate the
regularity in different time scale based on the approximate
entropy to assess the complexity degree. MSE
has been used to investigate pathological changes of
neuromuscular regulations in patients with neurological
impairments and is able to detect a decreasing pattern
of EMG complexity [17, 21]. Although the exact
physiopathological meanings of EMG complexity are
still largely unknown, these studies speculated that
the EMG complexity reflects the complex motor unit
recruitment and synchronization issues of neuromuscular
system that cannot be detected by traditional
time and frequency domain analyses [21, 22].
First, a one-dimensional discrete time series [× 1, × 2,
…. xn] is reconstructed by the scale factor “τ” to be
coarse-grained time series with a different time scale.
Each element of y()
j is according to Eq. (1)
By the coarse-grained procedure, Sample Entropy
(SE) could be estimated by the scale factor “τ.” SE is
defined by Eq. (2)
Where “m” is the template vector of length,
“A” is the number of template vector pairs having
d[xm+1(i), xm+1(j)] < 
“B” is the number of template vector pairs having
d[xm(i), xm(j)] < 
Complexity index (CI) could be estimated from SE by
Eq. (3), which is the summation of SE from scale factor
1 to maximum.
Plantar pressures were se averaged to determine the
four plantar regions at high risk of diabetic foot ulcers
[23]. The four plantar foot regions were the 1st toe
(T1), 1st metatarsal head (M1), 2nd metatarsal head
(M2), and heel (HL). Data from the three intermediate
steps of the last-minute (i.e., 9th
min and 19th
min) of
y (1) ( )
j =
1

j
i=(j−1)+1
xi, 1  j 
N

SE(m, , ) = −log (2)
A
B
CI = (3) 
i=1
SE(i)
the treadmill walking were processed to calculate the
average peak plantar pressure (PPP) across the three
steps [13, 14].
Statistical analysis
The median frequency and MSE values of EMG of TA
and GM and PPP of each participant at 6 walking protocols
(ie. three speeds (slow at 1.8 mph, moderate
at 3.6 mph, and fast at 5.4 mph) and two durations (10
and 20 min)) were presented as mean ± standard error.
The 3 × 2 two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
repeated measures was used to compare the muscle
fatigue changes between the three speeds (1.8, 3.6, and
5.4 mph) and two durations (10 and 20 min) and the
interaction between walking speeds and durations on
muscle fatigue. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD) post hoc
tests were used to compare pairwise median frequency
differentials between 1.8 mph, 3.6 mph, and 5.4 mph for
the two walking durations. The correlations between the
median frequency and MSE of TA and GM and PPP of
four plantar regions were determined using a Pearson
product-moment correlation analysis. All statistical tests
were performed using SPSS 25 (IBM, NY, USA) at the
significance level of 0.05.
Results
Twelve healthy participants (5 men, 7 women) were
recruited in this study. The demographic data were
(mean ± standard deviation): age, 27.1 ± 5.8 years; height,
170.3 ± 10.0 cm; and weight, 63.5 ± 13.5 kg. The dominating
leg of all subjects is the right side.
Median frequency of muscle fatigue
The 3 × 2 two-way ANOVA (3 speeds and 2 durations)
showed that the speed factor caused a significant main
effect of the median frequency of muscle fatigue of TA
(P < 0.001) and the duration factor did not significantly
change the median frequency. There was no interaction
between the speed and duration factors on median frequency
of TA and GM (Fig. 2 and Table 1).
For the EMG median frequency of TA, the one-way
ANOVA showed that there were four significant pairwise
differences, including the between walking speed of 1.8
and 3.6 mph (185.7 ± 6.1 vs. 164.9 ± 3.0 Hz, P = 0.006)
and 1.8 and 5.4 mph (185.7 ± 6.1 vs. 164.5 ± 5.5 Hz,
P = 0.006) for the 10-min duration; and between walking
speed of 1.8 and 3.6 mph (180.0 ± 5.9 vs. 163.1 ± 4.4 Hz,
P = 0.024) and 1.8 and 5.4 mph (180.0 ± 5.9 vs.
162.8 ± 4.9 Hz, P = 0.023) for the 20-min duration (Fig. 2
and Table 1).
Complexity index of muscle fatigue
The 3 × 2 two-way ANOVA (3 speeds and 2 durations)
showed that the speed factor caused a significant main
effect of the complexity index of TA (P = 0.017) and GM
(P = 0.023) and the duration factor did not. There was no
interaction between the speed and duration factors on
the complexity of TA and GM (Fig. 3 and Table 1).
The one-way ANOVA showed three significant pairwise
differences in the effect of walking speeds on the
EMG complexity index. TA showed that between the
walking speed of 3.6 and 5.4 mph (0.840 ± 0.039 vs.
0.989 ± 0.045, P = 0.010) during the 20-min duration.
GM showed that between the walking speed of 1.8 and
3.6 mph (0.758 ± 0.045 vs. 0.642 ± 0.036, P = 0.037) in the
20-min duration (Fig. 3 and Table 1).
Correlations between the median frequency
and complexity of EMG and PPP
In the correlation between the EMG median frequency
and PPP, the median frequency of TA has a significant
negative correlation with PPP on T1 ( r = -0.954,
P = 0.003), M1 ( r = -0.896, P = 0.016), and HL (r = -0.812,
P = 0.050). The median frequency of GM has a significant
negative correlation with PPP on T1 (r = -0.939,
P = 0.006) and M1 ( r = -0.925, P = 0.008) (Fig. 4 and
Table 2).
In the correlation between the EMG complexity index
and PPP, GM has a significant negative correlation with
PPP on M1 ( r = -0.842, P = 0.036) (Fig. 4 and Table 2).
Discussion
The results of this study demonstrated that the walking
speed (1.8, 3.6, and 5.4 mph) is a significant factor
on inducing leg muscle fatigue and the walking duration
(10 and 20 min) is not. Specifically, the median frequency
of TA EMG significantly decreased after brisk
walking (3.6 mph) and slow running (5.4 mph) compared
to slow walking (1.8 mph). Although the median
frequency of GM EMG showed a similar trend to TA
EMG, the median frequency of GM EMG did not significantly
change. The multiscale entropy based complexity
of TA EMG showed a similar trend to the median frequency.
Another significant finding is that muscle fatigue
assessed by the median frequency and complexity were
significantly correlated to the plantar pressure changes
after walking at various intensities.
Our results showed that under 6 walking intensities,
TA was significantly fatigued, but GM was not. This
is consistent with the literature that TA may become
fatigued earlier compared to GM [7, 24]. Blair et al. proposed
that compared to GM muscle, TA muscle activity
increased significantly during raising the walking speed
[24]. During the early swing, the TA actively shortens
for ankle dorsiflexion and for clearing the toes from the
ground. However, the majority of the shortening of TA
occurs through tendinous tissue recoil at the fast walking
speed, highlighting its role in accelerating ankle dorsiflexion
[25]. Our results imply that walking speed at 3.6 mph
(brisk walking speed) and 5.4 mph (slow running) may
easily cause TA fatigue. Thus, people with DM should be
reminded that when they pursing moderate-to-vigorous
physical activity, muscle fatigue of lower extremity may
occur and result in higher plantar pressure that may
increase risk for DFUs [13, 14]. Our finding also suggests
that slow walking speed (1.8 mph) may be a good strategy
for preventing muscle fatigue; therefore, preventing
high plantar pressure during weight-bearing physical
activities. We also found that the GM may not become
fatigued easily compared to TA. This implies that in order
to prevent muscle-fatigue related increases in plantar
pressure, TA should be the main muscle for rehabilitation
and exercise training in people at risk for foot injury.
In this study, we observed that muscle fatigue is related
to a higher plantar pressure. The reason is that muscle
fatigue may decrease the muscle contraction force and
induce the biomechanical changes for increasing plantar
pressure. Garrett et al. found that the energy absorption
was higher for the contracted muscles than the uncontracted
muscles in an experimental animal model [26].
When muscle is fatigue, muscle may become stiffer and
may not effectively respond to neuromuscular control
to shorten during muscle contractions [27]. A decrease
in muscle force production during fatigue may reduce
impact force absorption and increase plantar pressure
[28]. Our study confirms that the increased plantar pressure
was correlated with muscle fatigue after various
walking intensities. EMG signals are typically not directly
proportional to the muscle contraction force due to the
other component effects. However, EMG has been shown
to effectively characterize muscle fatigue process [29].
However, the relationship between muscle fatigue and
increased plantar pressure observed in this study requires
experimental studies to validate.
Previous investigations of the unfatigued state showed
that initial heel contact causes a plantarflexion moment.
The heel is slightly supinated throughout touchdown,
pronates during the stance phase of walking, and returns
to supination at push-off of the walking stage [30]. In the
fatigued state locomotion, people use a change in the
landing technique as a compensatory strategy, which may
cause an external dorsiflexion moment [31]. This adaptation
change in forefoot loading has been suggested as a
potential mechanism for increased plantar pressure [32].
According to the present findings, the forefoot loading
point toward a potentially detrimental plantar pressure
mechanism in fatigued walking decreases calf muscle
activity. This may reflect that the 2nd
metatarsal head has
a higher plantar pressure.
EMG usually could be analyzed by the linear and nonlinear
approaches. However, some information and message
were hidden by those approaches. MSE analysis is a
practical nonlinear approach to provide more information
insight about the results due to its pre-processing
of various time scales in the algorithm. Different walking
intensities induce variability of muscle activation [33].
Our results indicated that the EMG analysis by MSE in
the moderate walking speed, the GM muscle revealed a
higher complexity index, and the TA muscle revealed a
lower complexity index. Although the lower complexity
index in TA muscle activation may induce another variability
pattern for GM muscle activation, GM and TA
muscle may exhibit compensation by their different functional
performance during walking in the moderate walking
speed. Furthermore, the duration of exercise would
induce differences in complexity indexes in muscle activations.
Our findings indicate that the EMG complexity
index might reveal differences in TA with 10-min walking
duration and GM muscle with 20-min walking duration.
It supports the previous report that a more significant
proportion of the variability in performance on time variability
for walking tests [34].
Our finding showing that muscle fatigue may be
related to a higher plantar pressure has significant
clinical implications on managing risk of plantar tissue
injury and metatarsal stress fracture. When a person
with peripheral vascular diseases or diabetes pursues
an intensive exercise, muscle fatigue of lower extremity
may be expected. These fatigued muscles may result
in a higher plantar pressure that increases the risk for
plantar tissue injury [13, 14]. In the clinical guidelines,
moderate-intensity exercise such as slow running (5.4
mph) is recommended for people with peripheral vascular
disease. These people should pay attention to their
plantar foot after exercise, especially after brisk walking
and slow running activities. Clinicians and sports
coaches should be aware that moderate and vigorous
intensity exercise may provide more benefit to improve
cardiopulmonary functions, but at the same time, these
intensive exercise may increase risk for plantar tissue
injury and metatarsal stress fracture, especially in people
with DM and peripheral vascular diseases.
There are limitations in this study. First, we only
assessed muscle fatigue of TA and GM through the
median frequency and complexity of EMG and peak
plantar pressures after walking at various intensities.
However, various biomechanical characteristics of
human walking, such as joint kinematics, kinetics, and
muscle activities [24, 35, 36], were not assessed. Future
research may need to assess these biomechanical
parameters to better understand how various walking
intensities affect muscle fatigue and plantar pressures.
Second, the walking duration tested in this study (10
and 20 min) was relatively short compared to activities
of daily living. Future studies may need to assess
a longer walking duration, such as 60 min. Third, the
washout period between 20 and 30 min was allowed
between the two walking durations of the same speed
of a day to minimize the influence of muscle fatigue.
Although the participants felt comfortable before participating
in the second walking protocol of a day, the
influence of muscle fatigue from the first walking protocol
may affect the second walking protocol of a day.
Last, we assessed EMG and plantar pressure responses
in 6 walking trials in three consecutive weeks. The temporal
variations of median frequencies of EMG signals
and plantar pressure may affect our findings. Researchers
may use established fatigue protocols to examine
the effect of leg muscle fatigue on plantar pressure.
Conclusions
The results of this study demonstrate that the walking
speed (1.8, 3.6, and 5.4 mph) is a significant factor on
inducing leg muscle fatigue and the walking duration
(10 and 20 min) is not. The median frequency of tibialis
anterior significantly decreased after brisk walking (3.6
mph) and slow running (5.4 mph) speed compared to
slow walking (1.8 mph) speed. The multiscale entropy
based complexity of TA EMG showed a similar trend
to the median frequency. Another significant finding
is that muscle fatigue assessed by the median frequency
and complexity were significantly correlated to
the plantar pressure changes after walking at various
intensities.