Background
In aging, a decrease in muscle force has been assumed
to be mainly induced by muscle atrophy [1, 2]. However,
muscle atrophy cannot completely account for the
age-induced force decrease as the force decrease (40%)
has been noted to be often larger than the atrophy sign
(23%) [3, 4]. The change of microstructure in a single
muscle fiber, such as decreased myosin protein, slowing
of myosin-actin cross-bridge in single fiber [5], reduced
cross-sectional area of myosin heavy chain II fibers, and
decrease in intermyofibrillar mitochondrial size with
aging [6], might have contributed to the age-related muscle
force decrease. In addition, muscle properties like
passive muscle stiffness could also influence muscle force
[7, 8] as well as muscle performance in the elderly [9]. A
numerical study has demonstrated a causal association
between the age-related increase in passive muscle stiffness
and the reduced force generation capability with
aging [10].
However, the finding that age is related to alteration of
muscle stiffness is not always a consistent result. Previous
animal studies have revealed higher stiffness of the
aged soleus muscle [11, 12]. Similarly, the single fiber of
isolated vastus lateralis (VL) muscle from an older person
was noted to have greater passive stiffness compared
to a younger one [13, 14]. Using qualitative ultrasound
elastography in vivo, a greater muscle stiffness in biceps
brachialis muscle, rectus femoris (RF), and gastrocnemius
muscles was observed in elderly people [15, 16].
However, contrary results have been reported as well.
For example, lower muscle stiffness was observed in the
four heads of quadriceps muscle [17, 18], and comparable
level of stiffness in several leg muscles has been reported
in aged participants [19–22]. According to a previous
study [16], age-related modulation in muscle stiffness was
often influenced by muscle length, which was dependent
on joint angles in vivo. It further revealed that aged muscle
was stiffer than young muscle at long muscle length.
However, how the joint position affects muscle stiffness
was not considered in most reported studies. When the
muscle length was taken into account, the muscle stiffness
of triceps surae muscle in old participants was equal
to that of young participants at 0° and 15° ankle dorsiflexion
[23] and less than the young ones at maximal dorsiflexion
[24]. Therefore, the length-dependent modulation
of age on muscle stiffness has not been clarified as a
whole muscle in vivo.
When the stiffness of quadriceps femoris muscle was
measured at short muscle length, its relationship with
extension knee force was not observed [15]. Similar result
was found in medial gastrocnemius as well [25]. It should
be noted that muscle stiffness was measured only at a
given muscle length in these studies. As muscle stiffness
was length dependent [26], it is thus necessary to explore
the association between muscle stiffness and muscle
force generation capacity at different muscle lengths.
In this study, our primary aim was to determine the
effect of aging on the shear moduli of the superficial muscle
heads of the quadriceps. Second aim was to explore
the relationship between muscle shear moduli of the
superficial heads of the quadriceps and knee extension
force in the senior female adults. The hypotheses were
senior female adults would present with greater passive
muscle stiffness at long muscle length, and passive muscle
passive stiffness would be negatively associated with
muscle force.
Methods
In total, 20 senior healthy females (age range:
50–70 years) and 20 young healthy females (age range:
20–32 years) were included in this study. The participants’
demographic information is summarized in
Table 1. All participants were free of knee pain or injury
and have no history of knee surgery. They did not engage
in any regular exercise training or high-intensity sport
activities.
Passive muscle shear modulus measurements
The passive muscle stiffness was first measured. The
participants were positioned supine on the plinth of the
isokinetic dynamometer (Cybex, Medway, MA, USA)
with hip at 0° and neutral rotation, as the pelvis, trunk,
and thigh were stabilized with straps. The knee joint rotation
center (lateral femoris condyle) was aligned with the
rotation center of the isokinetic dynamometer. Measurements
were taken with the knee joint positioned at
30º, 60º, 90º, and 105º of knee flexion (0° being the knee
extended) in sequence in order to avoid the stretching
effect from muscle length (Fig. 1). The knee was then
passively positioned at each angle and remained for 30 s
before measurement started. Participants were instructed
to remain relax during the whole procedure.
The muscle shear modulus (an index for muscle
stiffness) of the dominant leg was assessed using an
ultrasound scanner coupled with a 4–15 MHz linear
transducer (AixplorerV4.0; Supersonic Imagine, Aixen-
Provence, France). The elastography machine was
then set to the musculoskeletal preset. A well-trained
examiner in musculoskeletal ultrasound examination
performed all the measurements. The following three
superficial heads of the quadriceps femoris muscle were
then measured: RF, VL, and vastus medialis (VM). The
measurement locations were marked on the skin with
a waterproof pen before the test. For VM and VL, the
transducer was placed 1/5 and 1/3 of the distance from
the midpoint of medial and lateral patella border to the
anterior superior iliac spine, respectively. For RF, the
transducer was placed 1/2 of the distance from anterior
superior iliac spine to the midpoint of the superior tip of
the patella [4, 27]. The transducer was held perpendicularly
to the skin with plentiful gel, and slight pressure was
exerted on the skin. The transverse images were obtained
to confirm the right muscle was measured; then, the longitudinal
images were captured at one sample per second
which was the temporal resolution of the current shear
wave elastography version, and the spatial resolution was
1 × 1 mm. The probe was aligned with either the muscle
fiber direction (VL and VM) or the muscle shortening
direction (RF). Five continuous elastography maps were
acquired in 5 s. During each measurement, the square
color box was adjusted accordingly depending on the
muscle thickness.
Maximal isometric voluntary contraction (MIVC) test
After elastography measurements, MIVC of knee extension
assessment was performed. The position of participants
was the same as that of the passive stiffness
measurement. Prior to measurement, the participants
were instructed to perform two submaximal contractions
for warm-up and to be familiar with the test procedure.
Each participant conducted three 5-s maximal isometric
voluntary contractions, with a 2-min interval between
each contraction. The MIVC was assessed at three knee
angles (30°, 60°, and 90° knee flexion; 0° = full extension).
Due to the discomfort of the joint, the MIVC at 105° was
not measured. The maximum peak torque of the three
contractions captured at each angle was considered as
MIVC torque at this angle.
Data reduction and analysis
The shear wave elastography data were exported in mp4
format and sequenced in png. Image processing was
performed using a custom Matlab script (MathWorks,
Natick, MA). Each image was then carefully inspected for
artifacts. If artifacts were present in any image, the region
of interest was reduced in size to remove the artifact. The
colored 2D maps were converted into shear modulus
values, and the shear modulus values were averaged over
the map and over the five images for further analysis.
Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS 21.0 software
package (New York, USA). Independent sample
t-test was performed to compare the difference of basic
demographic information and MIVC between young and
senior adults. The MIVC comparison between the two
age groups was analyzed via a two-way repeated measures
ANOVA with knee angle as within-subject factors
and group (young and senior adults) as between-subject
factors. A three-way repeated measures ANOVA with
muscle heads and knee angle as within-subject factors
and group (young and senior adults) as between-subject
factors was used to compare the shear moduli of the two
groups. Post hoc analyses were performed when appropriate
using the Bonferroni method. The correlations
between shear modulus and the MIVC of quadriceps
femoris muscle were calculated using Pearson’s coefficient
if the data were normally distributed; otherwise,
Spearman correlation coefficients were calculated. Statistical
significance level of p-value was set to be less than
0.05.
Results
The shear modulus values of the three muscles are presented
in Fig. 2. A significant main effect was noted
in terms of group, muscle, and angle; a significant
interaction between muscle, angle, and group was
also observed (all p-values < 0.001). Post hoc analysis
revealed that the muscle shear moduli of RF and
VL were significantly higher in the senior than the
young adults when the knee was positioned at 60°, 90°,
and 105° of knee flexion (all p-values < 0.006 for RF
shear moduli were 34% (p = 0.006) and 16% (p = 0.031)
greater in the senior than the young adults for RF and
VL, respectively. At 90° of knee flexion, the shear moduli
were 56% (p < 0.001) and 13% (p = 0.031) greater in
the senior adults for RF and VL, respectively. At 105° of
knee flexion, the values reached to 68% (p < 0.001) and
13% (p = 0.041) for RF and VL, respectively. When considering
the VM muscle, significant greater shear modulus
of the senior adults was only observed at 105° of
knee flexion, which was 11% greater than young adults
(p = 0.020).
The MIVC of the senior adults was significantly
lower than young adults at 60° and 90° of knee flexion
(Table 2). The correlations between passive shear
modulus and MIVC are depicted in Table 3 and Fig. 3.
As regards the association between the shear modulus
and muscle force, we have only detected moderate
and negative association between the passive RF shear
modulus at 60° of knee flexion and knee extension force
in the senior adults (r = − 0.485, p = 0.030). In addition,
there was a trend for a significant correlation in
the young adults (r = − 0.395, p = 0.085). However, no
significant association was found for other conditions
both in the senior and young adults.
Discussion
In this study, we aimed to assess age-related changes in
muscle stiffness in the female senior adults. We have
chosen the quadriceps muscle for analysis because of its
importance in daily function. Findings from this study
were in accordance with our hypothesis that the senior
adults had higher muscle stiffness at long muscle length.
More importantly, RF muscle stiffness was negatively
associated knee extension force.
In this study, we assessed passive muscle stiffness of the
superficial heads of the quadriceps muscle at its shortened
to lengthened positions by varying the knee positions.
The senior female adults exhibited greater muscle
stiffness at the RF and VL muscle heads when the muscles
were positioned over 60° of knee flexion (knee extension
= 0°) and at the VM muscle at a more lengthened
position (105° of knee flexion). This present result is consistent
with previous studies reporting higher passive
stiffness of aged muscles at long muscle length in either
animals [11, 28] or humans [16]. However, the difference
was not observed when assessed at shortened muscle
length [11, 16, 22]. In this connection, it is well known
that change in muscle length affects passive muscle stiffness
[26, 29, 30]. The muscle fiber will become taut and
even reach to a cross-bridges detached length when the
muscle is stretched beyond its slack length which is just
over 40° of knee flexion for quadriceps muscle [26, 31].
The underlying mechanisms responsible for the
observed increased passive stiffness in the senior
female adults could be multifactorial. These include
the increased extracellular matrix with aging, which, in
turn, increases the muscle stiffness nearly three times in
aged quadriceps femoris muscle [32, 33], the decrease
of the amount of highly compliant element in the
extracellular matrix such as elastin and collagen type
III [28], as well as the changes in muscle fiber type and
the declined level of estrogen in senior female adults. It
has been reported that the area and the percentage of
type I muscle fibers increase with age [34]. In response
to passive stretch, the type I muscle fibers in isolated
VL muscle exhibit greater passive stiffness than type II
fibers [35]. The aged muscles with greater amount of
type I muscle fibers might display greater passive stiffness
than young muscles. Estrogen deficiency might be
another factor that reduces passive muscle stiffness in
females by means of mediating collagen content within
the muscle [36]. Therefore, estrogen deficiency in senior
female adults, in particular, after menopause, might
contribute to the increase in passive muscle stiffness.
However, age-related increase in passive stiffness of
VM was not identically observed as RF and VL over 60°
knee flexion. The possible reason could be the imbalanced
reduction in muscle mass with aging. It has been
reported that the volume of VM was the least affected
when it comes to aging among the four heads of quadriceps
femoris muscle [37]. The loss of muscle mass with
aging would then be replaced by fat and connective tissue,
which, in turn, could induce increase in passive muscle
stiffness [8]. The relative preservation of VM volume
might be one of the reasons for the less increased stiffness
at 60° and 90° knee flexion.
We have also detected a negative relationship between
passive stiffness of RF and the maximal isometric extension
force in senior adults. More specifically, individuals
with stiffer RF would produce lower knee extensor force
when measured at 60° of knee flexion. In older adults
(mean age of 73), no association between the RF stiffness
and quadriceps extension strength was observed
[15].The authors used strain ratio as an index of passive
muscle stiffness. The strain ratio was computed from the
strain of the muscle to that of an acoustic coupler. More
importantly, the strain of the muscle was measured at its
shortened length (knee in extension). Similarly, we could
not delineate a significant relationship between muscle
stiffness of RF when measured at 30° of flexion and knee
extension force.
As muscles with higher echo intensity displayed lower
muscle shear modulus and greater muscle strength [38],
and echo intensity of RF was negatively associated with
maximal isometric force at 60° of knee flexion and functional
performance [39, 40], it might be possible that
muscle stiffness of RF is associated with knee extension
force. However, further investigation is required to
understand the underlying mechanism of this correlation.
This study had limitations. First, the results of this present
study should be interpreted in regard to the characteristics
of our population, i.e., females aged between 50
and 70 years old. This age group was examined because
of its association with muscle atrophy that almost apparently
occurred in all the skeletal muscles by 50 years old
[41]. It is likely that the effect of aging on increased passive
muscle stiffness would be more noticeable in more
advanced age (> 70) as muscle shear modulus increased
with age in person aged more than 60 years old [16], but
it remains to be investigated. Second, only females were
examined in this study. Thus, in the future, studies examining
the age-related alteration on muscle stiffness in
males and its effect on muscle force should be conducted.
Another limitation is that a rest time of 30 s between
passive shear modulus assessments at each angle might
be inadequate for stable muscle stiffness after position
change due to stress-relaxation effect. In addition, we
measured active muscle torque from all the knee extensor
groups, but only measuring stiffness from a single/
superficial muscle group. Also, the deep quadriceps femoris
muscle head (vastus intermedius) was not examined
in this study due to its deep position.
Conclusions
This present study has demonstrated that senior females
had greater passive stiffness at the superficial heads of
the quadriceps muscle when measured at long muscle
length. In the senior female adults, the passive stiffness
of RF muscle was found to be negatively associated with
the knee extensor force only at 60° knee flexion. No significant
association was found for other angles and muscles.
These findings highlight how aging affects muscle
stiffness of the quadriceps muscle and possible strategies
to keep muscle force for senior female adults.