Anomalies of the medial meniscus are rare compared
with those of the lateral meniscus. They include discoid
variants, hypoplasia of anterior horn, and anomalous attachment
of the anterior horn. Usually, the most common
anomaly of medial meniscus is related to the
anterior insertion that often shows anatomic variability
[1–3]. However, anomalous attachment of posterior
horn has been reported in only two cases [4, 5]. In the
first case [4], the authors described the presence of a
fibro-cartilaginous fold covering the medial femoral condyle.
The posterior horn was described as normal. In the
second case [5], the authors described the presence of a
fibrous band arising from the posterior horn and inserting
to femoral insertion of the ACL. Both cases were described
prior to the common use of arthroscopy.
Recently, Sadigursky et al. [6] reported a case of abnormality
in medial and lateral posterior horns. We present
the first report of an anomaly of both the anterior and
posterior roots of the medial meniscus, documented by
MRI and confirmed by arthroscopy.
failure to respond to non-operative management. He
first experienced pain on the medial side two years prior
that was noted after sports activities although no clear
injury was identified. The knee was intermittently painful
and with time these symptoms progressively worsened
despite several attempts at non-operative
management to include anti-inflammatories and physical
therapy. The symptoms limited the ability of the patient
to participate in sports. Physical examination revealed
no effusion, complete range of motion, and no signs of
meniscal pathology. There was no tenderness to palpation
of the medial or lateral joint line, a negative
McMurray, and a normal ligamentous examination.
There was no pain with hyperextension, and the only
positive examination finding was mild pain on hyperflexion.
Radiographs were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), was performed in another facility and,
showed normal medial and lateral menisci except for the
absence of a medial posterior root insertion both on coronal
and on sagittal images. There was no evidence of
meniscal extrusion or a meniscal ghost sign (Fig. 1). On
sagittal magnetic resonance images, the presence of thin
low-signal band was identified just anterior to the ACL
(Fig. 2). Diagnostic arthroscopy was performed secondary
to failure of nonoperative management and revealed
a white rounded band that was noted to extend from the
anterior horn of the medial meniscus to the intercondylar
notch adjacent to the femoral insertion of the ACL
(Fig. 3A). This band was clearly a distinct structure from
the ACL with probing. Next careful examination of medial
compartment revealed that the meniscus did not have
evidence of tearing or degenerative changes and appeared
to be floating into the medial compartment without
the typical anterior bony attachment. The posterior
horn showed absence of any firm bony attachment as
well. Some fibers were detected below the anterior
aspect of posterior cruciate running towards the lateral
compartment (Fig. 3B). No chondral pathology was detected.
Because of absence of meniscal lesions or other
intrarticular abnormalities, we elected close observation
rather than surgical intervention. The patient made
rapid recovery after diagnostic arthroscopy and returned
to his soccer activity after 2 months without any pain,
discomfort, or limitation of activity. At 4-year follow-up,
he had no symptoms or abnormal findings and he was
still playing soccer at a youth competitive level. On the
follow-up MRI there no meniscal or chondral lesions
and no significative change of the appearance of the
meniscal roots from the index MRI.
There were two different challenges that needed to be
addressed in treating this patient. The first one was the
diagnostic issue secondary to the vague and nonspecific
symptoms of the patient and lack of clear identifiable
objective pathology. The only positive finding was the
presence of an anomalous anterior horn insertion on
MRI scan. The anatomy of the anterior meniscal root
has been described by Berlet and Fowler [1]: they distinguished
four different types, three with bony insertion
and the fourth type inserting into the soft type (intermeniscal
ligament). In addition to differences of anatomical
insertions of anterior medial meniscus horn, in 1993
McCormack and McGrath [7] described a further type
of the anterior horn attachment without bony insertion
but with a strong ligament-like tissue attachment to the
posterolateral wall of the femoral intercondylar fossa,
covering the anterior portion of the ACL. They named
this anomaly as the anteromedial meniscofemoral ligament
(AMMFL). Following this first report, many other
observations of this anatomical variant have been described
[8–12]. The true incidence of AMMFL is not yet
known. Rainio et al. [13] reported an incidence of 1.2 %
in 987 consecutive arthroscopies. Cha et al. [14] in a cohort
of 1,326 arthroscopic examinations reported the incidence
to be 2.3 %. More recently, Kim and Joo [15]
have reported that in their patient population, the presence
of AMMFL was detected only in 0.5 % of cases.
The ability of the MR scan to detect an anomalous insertion
of the medial meniscus is challenging [16] with a
74 % false-positive rate for anterior horn tears [17].
Moreover, the AMMFL may easily be confused as fibers
of the ACL [18]. The senior author has performed over
4000 arthroscopies in the past 20 years and only identified
0.3 % which is consistent with published literature.
In all cases described in the literature, the AMMFL was
an incidental finding and its clinical significance remains
unknown. The symptoms are often vague and often referred
to the anterior knee. The cause of symptoms is
hypothesized to be related to impingement against the
femoral condyle [19] or to abnormal mobility of the anterior
horn that may predispose the meniscus to a possible
rupture or to progressive degeneration [7]. The
pain is often reported after athletic activity, but a clear
traumatic incident is seldom reported.
In our case, the diagnostic dilemma was complicated
by the concomitant lack of attachment of the posterior
horn of the meniscus to the tibia. On index MRI, because
of presence of an intact posterior horn, the classic
signs of meniscal root pathology, such as meniscal extrusion
or meniscus ghost, were absent. When probed, it
was possible to detect only few fibers running in front of
the anterior portion of posterior cruciate ligament toward
the posterior horn of the lateral meniscus. These
fibers could be interpreted as a rare posterior transverse
ligament or meniscomeniscal ligament [20]. Apart from
these fibers, no other bands or anomalies of the posterior
horn were detected. In the literature, anomalous attachment
of the posterior horn is extremely rare and
only two cases have been reported. In 1963 Riach and
Phares [4] described a case in which the posterior horn
continued through a fold to cover the articular surface
of the medial femoral condyle. In 1998, Bhagava and
Ferrari [5] described a case of an anomalous band from
the posterior horn area of the medial meniscus to insert
into the midportion of anterior cruciate ligament.
For this particular patient, the main problem we faced
was the choice of treatment given the intermittent symptoms.
Generally, an AMMFL does not seem to be related
to knee symptoms, and because is often an incidental
finding it may be left in situ. However, in some reports,
the ligament has been cut and removed with reported
improvement of symptoms [13, 19, 21, 22]. It is our
opinion that is difficult to support resection as an option
in a young patient with remaining growth given the lack
of consensus in the literature. We agree with other authors
who consider the AMMFL to have a biomechanical
effect as a ligamentous anchor of the anterior horn
[10, 15]. In our particular case, where a combined anomaly
of both horns was present, the AMMFL was the only meniscal attachment. Therefore, to remove this isolated
fibrous insertion could potentially increase hypermobility
of the medial meniscus and therefore be
counterproductive.
Because of the young age of our patient with open
physes there were potential deleterious effects that could
result from the absence of definitive attachment of anterior
or posterior horn. The absence of injury, the mild
complaints reported by the patient, his age, skeletal immaturity,
and remaining growth led us to adopt a conservative
approach to treating this anatomic variant. At
the present time, the patient still actively practices and
competes in soccer with no symptoms that limit
participation.
