Introduction
Kashin-Beck disease (KBD), a harmful endemic disease,
affects more than 567.6 thousand patients and according
to the “China Health and Family Planning Statistical
Yearbook 2016”, could potentially threaten more
than 1.16 million individuals in 377 counties from 13
provinces in China [1]. In addition, KBD cases have
also been reported in the Eastern Siberia of Russia, and
North Korea [2]. It is typically characterized by enlarged,
deformed and shortened joints in the extremities, causing
severe disabilities and disease burden [3, 4].
Diagnosing adolescents KBD is still a challenging task,
and the omission diagnostic rate of adolescents KBD is
more than 11.2% [5]. Currently, the national diagnostic
criteria for KBD (WS/T207-2010) is revised on the
basis of previous diagnostic criteria for Kashin-Beck Disease
(GB16003-1995). The previous diagnostic criteria
(GB16003-1995) focused on both clinical symptoms and
X-ray alterations of hands. However, the current diagnostic
criteria for KBD (WS/T207-2010) which emphasizes
the importance of pathological changes of finger joints is
a simpler and more convenient criteria for epidemiological
surveillance and fast diagnosis [6]. Considering that
KBD affects multiple joints in the whole body and the
clinical manifestations of KBD among adolescents varies
in individuals. Thus, single clinical manifestations could
not provide sufficient evidence for KBD diagnosing.
The available evidences indicate that even though single
clinical manifestations, and X-ray pathological changes
are strongly correlated with KBD diagnosis, they do not
show effective, strong diagnostic performance on their
own [7]. Therefore, it is crucial to find a cluster of features
with high specificity and sensitivity for KBD among
adolescents. In addition, the doctor’s experience is crucial
in KBD diagnosis. However, most patients live in
rural villages where doctors in the county-level hospitals
lacked the necessary diagnosis experience. Some patients
need to be transported to the cities for more specific
consultation, which increase the overall cost of consultation.
Therefore, a standard diagnostic method, contains a
group of highly specific features with high sensitivity and
specificity is warranted in order to KBD diagnosis among
adolescents.
Machine learning algorithms (MLAs) have been widely
applied in disease diagnosis and outcome predictions
in recent years [8–10]. Compared with traditional data
mining methods, the key advantage of using MLAs is
its ability to process large amount of data in short time,
uncovered new information and profiles of underlying
relationships between databases [11]. Random forest
algorithm (RFA), artificial neural network (ANN),
support vector machines (SVMs) and linear regression
(LR) are common algorithms of MLs. RFA is a substantial
modification of bagging algorithms with the ability
to process several possibly predictive variables which
are interrelated in complex ways by reducing bias, avoiding
overfitting and tolerating outliers [12, 13]. ANNs
are modelled after the structure and behavior of human
brain where each individual input variable is a “neuron”.
An output outcome will obtain from measuring and
processing the input variables after numerous rounds of
learning events [14, 15]. Comparing to traditional linear
regression(LR) ANN models are good at capturing nonlinear
relationships between dependent and independent
variables [16]. Support vector machines (SVMs) are a set
of related supervised learning methods for classification,
regression and ranking [17]. Therefore, one of the aims of
this study is to compare the diagnosis efficacies of these
methods.
Feature selection could offer support for machine
learning tasks and it is applied to identify important feature
variables from a large number of feature variables.
Through feature selection, irrelative, redundant and
noise data could be filtered and the accuracy of the classification
could be improved [18, 19]. According to the
relationship with the learning method, there are three
categories of feature selection method, including filters,
embedded methods and wrappers [20]. Considering
there are many feature selection algorithms, we chose
four representative methods including RFA, Max-relevance
and Min-Redundancy (mRMR), support vector
machine recursive feature elimination (SVM-RFE) and
relief for each category for identifying discriminative features
for KBD diagnosis.
To our knowledge, machine learning methods have
not been reported in KBD diagnosis. In this study, 26
features including clinical manifestations, and pathological
changes of X-ray images from 800 adolescents
(400 confirmed KBD subjects and 400 non-KBD subjects)
were extracted. Different machine learning algorithms
including RFA, ANNs, SVM and LR were applied
to build calssification models and the predictive efficacy
of them were compared. More importantly, four feature
selection algorithms were applied and we selected 10 discriminative
features from 26 features. These 10 features
with high sensitivity and specificity could provide a fast,
effective diagnostic method for KBD diagnosis among
adolescents.
Methods
Study population and sample size
The study was approved by Ethics Committee of Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China. All adolescents
were at age between 5 to 16 years old and were
from Linyou County and Bin County, two severelyaffected
endemic areas for KBD in Shaanxi province.
Adolescents with any cartilage abnormalities, such as
osteoarthritis (OA), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), rickets, or
achondroplasia were excluded from the study sample. A
balanced data set (1:1) including 400 KBD and 400 non-
KBD adolescents were included in the study.
Data collection
Anteroposterior radiographs of the right hand of each
subject were taken to observe the pathological alterations
of metaphysis, distal end of phalanges, epiphysis, and carpals.
Well-trained and experienced radiologists took the
radiographs and followed the standard operating procedures
strictly. X-ray pathological changes were extracted
by two experienced orthopedic surgeons. The diagnostic
criteria of X-ray radiographs for KBD are shown in Supplementary
data 1, and an example of pathological X-ray
radiograph changes of KBD is shown in Fig. 1. In addition,
clinical symptoms were also checked by orthopedic
surgeons. The examination checklist and evaluation
standard were shown in Supplementary data 2. Finally,
26 features were extracted according to the evaluation
standard (as lay-out in Table 1). KBD was diagnosed by
three experienced experts according to X-ray pathological
changes, clinical manifestations following the national
diagnostic criteria (WS/T207-2010).
Classification methods overview
We performed four existing classification methods, i.e.,
random forest algorithm (RFA), artificial neural network
(ANNs), support vector machine (SVM) and logistic
regression (LR), to predict the disease status (i.e., KBD
or normal). The classification models were trained with
default parameter settings companying with four feature
selection methods (i.e., RFA, mRMR [21], SVM-RFE [22]
and Relief [23]), which are falling into three categories,
i.e., wrappers, embedded methods, and filters [24–26].
All methods were implemented by Python (Version
3.6.10) within sklearn framework (v 0.23.1). The performance
of all four classification methods were evaluated
by fivefold cross validation (5-CV) over four popular
measures, i.e., sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and the
area under the ROC curve (AUC).
Random forest algorithm (RFA)
The first classification method we performed in our analysis
is random forest algorithm (RFA) [27], which is an
ensemble learning method for KBD diagnosis purpose
by constructing a multitude of decision trees (Supplementary
Figure 1). We performed the RFA with ensemble.
RandomForestClassifier function to construct RFA
object; then utilized fit function to train the model, in
which the training data sets and its corresponding class
labels (i.e., disease status, KBD or normal) as inputs;
finally carried out the predict function to predict the disease
status with testing data sets. We performed various
experiments to determine the optimal parameter, the
number of variables randomly sampled as candidates at
each split mtry, and the number of trees ntree (Supplementary
Figure 2), and finally, mtry = 3, and ntree = 300
were used in the following analyses.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs)
There were three layers in ANNs classification models, an
input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer [28]. The
scheme of classification models using ANN was showed
in Supplementary Figure 3 (F. S3.). For convenience, neural_
network.MLPClassifier was implemented as ANNs
classification model. By GridSearchCV which provide
convenience for finding optimal parameter, there was
only one hidden layer and the number of neurons was
5. In addition, the activation function was set as Relu.
Learning rate was set as adaptive. Lbfgs was taken as optimization
algorithm.
Support vector machine (SVM)
Non-linear SVM algorithm was applied in this study. The
hyperplane in non-linear SVM algorithm used kernel
function to transform the decision function in the low
dimensional plane. We establish non-linear SVM model
by using svm.SVC, then other training and prediction
steps is the same as RFA. For chosen of the kernel function
and the coefficient (gamma) of it, with the help of
GridSearchCV which provide convenience for finding
optimal parameter, different settings are tried. Finally, we
adopt rbf kernel and gamma value is set as the inverse of
the number of features included. The fivefold cross-validation
are also implemented for the propose of stabilized
results.
Logistic regression (LR)
Logistic regression algorithm adds a Sigmoid (for binary
classification) or Softmax (for multi-classification) based
on linear regression to solve dichotomous classification
task. In this study, Linearmodel.LogisticRegression was
applied and fit function was also implemented for training
process. Predict labels and probabilities are available.
Similar to SVM, GridSearchCV determines optimal
parameter, and optimization algorithm was lbfgs and
none penalties were chosen.
Results
General characteristic of study samples
Eight hundred adolescents (400 KBD and 400 non-
KBD) were recruited. General characteristics of all study
subjects were demonstrated in Table 2. There were significant
differences of the age distribution between KBD
and non-KBD group ( 
2 = 343.17, p < 0.001). Gender of
the two groups showed no statistical differences ( 
2 =
0.18, p = 0.669). For clinical manifestations, significant
differences between KBD and non-KBD group were
observed in clinical grading of KBD, joint pain, short fingers,
flexion of the distal part of fingers, wrist joint movement
limitation, elbow joint movement limitation, ankle
joint movement limitation, knee joint movement limitation,
squatting limitation, enlarged finger joint, enlarged
elbow joint, enlarged ankle joint, and deformed joints. In
addition, more adolescents in KBD group showed pathological
X-ray images in metaphysis alterations and distal
end of phalanges alterations than those in non-KBD
group and the differences were statistically significant.
Prediction performance of classification models
Classification models applied four different algorithms
i.e., RFA, ANNs, SVM and LR were built based on 26 features.
The prediction performance of four models were
listed in Table 3. All four models showed good predictive
efficacy with accuracy ranged from 93.63 to 99.76%
and AUC value ranged from 0.94 to 1.00. Among four
models, classification models of RFA and ANNs showed
better predictive efficacy with higher AUC value (1.00,
1.00) and accuracy (99.76%, 99.63%) than models based
on based on LR (0.97, 96.50%) and SVM (0.94, 93.63%).
RFA model presented highest sensitivity with 100.00%
and model SVM had lowest with 88.64%. Sensitivities of
LR model and ANNs were 96.20 and 99.86%, respectively.
The specificity of four models including RFA, ANNs,
SVM, and LR model were 99.22, 99.66, 98.51 and 96.89%,
respectively. To conclude, RFA and ANNs models had
the best comprehensive predictive efficacy with highest
AUC values.
Feature selection
In this study, four algorithms including RFA, mRMR,
SVM-RFE and relief were applied to select discriminative
features for KBD diagnosis. The importance ranking
of 26 features ranked by different algorithms were presented
in Table 4. The order from 1 to 26 represented the
range from the most important to the least important.
The rankings of 26 features in RFA and mRMR algorithm
were the same. The top 10 features in four algorithms
were the same even the order of them were slightly varied.
These top 10 features were distal end of phalanges
alterations, metaphysis alterations, elbow joint movement
limitation, ankle joint movement limitation, flexion
of the distal part of fingers, enlarged finger joints, squatting
limitation, carpals alterations, wrist joint movement
limitation and deformed finger joints.
To assess the predictive performance of selected features,
prediction performance with respect to the number
of selected features were showed in Fig. 2. We firstly
applied RFA which showed the best prediction efficacy
among four classification models to test the prediction
performance with the different number of selected features
(Fig. 2A). We found that the predictive efficacy was
stable and was the best when the number of features was
ten. Then we tested the predictive efficacy using different
ML classification models according to the ranking of
mRMR (Fig. 2B). Even the trends of four ML models were
slightly different, high AUC values were showed when
the number of selected features were ten. In model of
LR and SVM, the predictive efficacy peaked at where the
number of features were up to 10. In conclusion, the top
10 selected features out of 26 features showed high predictive
efficacy regardless of the chosen of classification
models and feature selection methods.
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that
the MLs and feature selection algorithms have been used
to aid diagnose KBD among adolescents. In this study, we
applied feature selection algorithms and found 10 out of
26 features with high sensitivity and specificity for KBD
diagnosis among adolescents.
In this study, four algorithms which represente three
categories of feature selection methods were applied
to select the discriminative features for KBD diagnosis
among adolescents (Table 4). We found that pathological
changes of X-ray images including distal end of phalanges
alterations, metaphysis alterations, and carpals alterations,
clinical manifestations including ankle movement limitation,
enlarged finger joints, flexion of the distal part of
fingers, elbow movement limitation, squatting limitation,
deformed finger joints, wrist movement limitation were
the top 10 diagnostic features of KBD regardless of the feature
selection methods. In order to confirm this finding,
predictive efficacies respect to the number of features were
also calculated in different classification models (Fig. 2).
We found that the predictive performace of different models
were stable and with high sensitivity and specificity
when the number of features were 9 and 10. These results
indicated that these 10 features could be discriminative
features for KBD diagnosis among adolescents.
The previous diagnostic criteria (GB16003-1995),
emphasized the importance of X-ray alterations in distal
end of phalanges, metaphysis, epiphysis and carpals
(Supplementary data 1) for KBD diagnosis [29–31]. In
our study, all four feature selection algorithms revealed
that alterations of distal end of phalanges, metaphysis,
carpals were discriminative features of X-ray images for
diagnosis of KBD among adolescents. A previous study
highlighted that the abnormities of carpal bones was helpful
for KBD diagnosis among children and there was also
a correlation between the abnormities of carpals and the
severity of KBD [31]. In this study, marginal interruption,
irregularity with sclerosis, defect, impaired development,
deformed and absence of carpals were defined as positive
X-ray alterations (Supplementary data 1). Even though the
distribution difference of carpals alterations among KBD
and non-KBD adolescents were not statistically significant
(Table 2; χ2 = 3.599, P > 0.05), features selection algorithms
still highlighted the importance of carpals alterations in
X-ray images in KBD diagnosis. However, the epiphysis
alterations in KBD diagnosis were not addressed in our
findings. Alterations of epiphysis was not a sensitive feature
for KBD diagnosis among adolescents. The reason
behind this was that the vascularity and metabolism were
not as strong as that in metaphysis. Therefore, the epiphysis
was less sensitive to damages than metaphysis. Usually,
alterations of epiphysis were indicators of irreversible damages
of cartilage [32]. In addition, the findings of this study
also revealed that ankle movement limitation was a significant
feature for KBD prediction among adolescents. In our
study, nearly 12.25% of adolescents with KBD (49 of 400)
presented ankle movement limitation, while only 0.5% (2
of 400) of healthy adolescents reported ankle movement
limitation. Previous studies reported that nearly 68.8%
KBD adult patients showed abnormal ankle radiographs,
pathological changes of X-ray images including talus, calcaneus,
navicular bone and distal tibia [33]. Until now, the
diagnostic value of ankles had not been emphasized. This
new finding suggests that the diagnostic value of ankles,
including clinical manifestations and radiological changes,
might be significant to KBD diagnosis. Even the prevalence
of KBD among adolescents is much lower than that
in adults, we believe that this cluster of features selected
based on importance ranking also apply to diagnosis of
KBD adults. KBD patients start showing symptoms during
adolescents and symptoms aggravates with age. Most adult
KBD patients share similar clinical symptoms with adolescent
patients while the X-ray alterations were a little different
between them since skeletal development. Among
these ten features, only three out of ten of them were X-ray
alterations. We believe these ten features also apply for
adult KBD patients.
RFA, ANNs, SVM and LR were applied to to develop
different classification models and predictive performance
of them were compared to choose the most suitable classification
model for KBD diagnosis among adolescents.
Among four classification models, RFA showed the best
predictive efficacy with highest AUC value (1.00). Studies
have reported that RFA was an optimal choice for building
predictive or diagnostic model with its high diagnostic
efficacy [9, 34]. Some scholars believed that ANNs are
inherently “opaque and lack interpretability”; its classification
process akin to “black box” and its input variables
cannot be adjusted independently at each intermediate
step [35]. While in a random forest model, there are many
decision trees, and each tree is built based on a randomly
selected subset from the training data and a random subset
of input variables. The variables can be ranked at each
decision tree and a final decision will be made by voting
these randomly generated subsets [13].
There are some limitations of this study. First, we
only used “KBD” or “non-KBD” as output results in all
three models, without considering the disease stages
of KBD. In order to give more accurate diagnosis for
adolescents KBD, more specific models focusing on
stages of disease with larger training data should be
developed. Second, we still spent some time reading
X-ray images to extract 26 features before we started
building classification model. Recent studies reported
image recognition algorithms, such as conventional
neural networks which could read radiographs to aid
diagnosis [36–38]. In the future, a smarter diagnostic
model which could read X-ray images combining with
our diagnostic model is needed to provide fast, effective
diagnostic method. Third, we excluded the subjects
with OA and RA, whom present similar clinical
manifestations and X-ray radiological changes with
KBD. Considering that identifying these three kinds of
diseases and classifying them is a daily work for orthopedists,
it is very necessary to build a comprehensive
model which could classify these three diseases based
on symptoms and changes of radiological images. Even
though, our study still gave us a hint that MLs would
be helpful and be generalized by increasing sample size
and accuracy of algorithms, multiple computer-based
methods and algorithms can integrate to establish a
more intelligent, specific model to provide a more
accurate diagnosis.
Conclusions
We calibrated classification models based on MLs in
order to integrate clinical manifestations and radiograph
alterations to aid diagnosis of KBD among adolescents.
We found 10 out of 26 discriminative features
with high sensitivity and specificity for KBD diagnosis
among adolescents. These features could provide a
quick, effective diagnostic methods for KBD.