Musculoskeletal disorders (MSD) defined as selfreported
musculoskeletal symptoms are prevalent in
working populations worldwide and cause major health
issues [1, 2]. Disorders of the muscles, tendons, joints,
and spinal discs may be caused by work and lead to a
decrease in work effectiveness and quality of life [3, 4].
Prolonged sitting and insufficient physical activity (PA)
may lead to a high risk of MSD. Previous studies also involving
the military population have suggested that age,
tall body height, low aerobic fitness and endurance, extremes
in flexibility, prior injury, participation in recreational
sports activity, a history of prior limited PA, and
even older running shoes are risk factors for developing
MSD [5–8].
The beneficial effects of PA are well documented,
however this documentation is restricted to leisure time
physical activity (LTPA). Emerging studies have shown
that this effect differs depending on the domain of the PA
[9], i.e. occupational physical activity (OPA), household
PA, active transport, and LTPA. Several studies have demonstrated
that OPA is not beneficial for health due to its
too low intensity, too long duration, static and constrained
postures, and insufficient recovery time [10, 11]. Moreover,
the dose of PA is also important. Greater intensities
and volumes of exercise may lead to greater the risk of injury
and harm, specially musculoskeletal [12]. Based on
WHO recommendations, a longer duration of moderateintensity
PA leads to achieving the same health benefits as
shorter durations of vigorous-intensity PA [13].
PA is described as a benefit for workers in the context
of decreasing the risk of musculoskeletal disorders.
Previous studies have indicated that PA can prevent and
reduce the occurrence of MSD regardless of age [2, 14–
16]. However, a majority of them were limited to the assessment
of LTPA. There is limited knowledge about PA
as a factor in preventing MDS, and studies on the association
between PA and MSD reveal inconsistent results
[17, 18]. Physical training may also be a source of musculoskeletal
injuries.
The role of the territorial defense forces in Poland is crisis
prevention. During the COVID-19 pandemic their role
has been special, although the training of soldiers is different
than during a non-pandemic period. Considering the
commonly known negative effects of the pandemic on
citizen [19], and health [20, 21], the main role of the territorial
defense forces was to provide comprehensive service
for the civilian population. From January 2020 to August
2021, Poland submitted to the WHO [22], 2,883,120 confirmed
cases of COVID-19 with 75,261 deaths.
Service in the territorial armies is voluntary and the
number of vocations depends on the capabilities and
availability of the volunteers, who are professionally active
and represent different levels of PA. However, all
soldiers are obliged to maintain their physical fitness individually,
with the army providing them the opportunity
to use the gym and improve their swimming skills at
a swimming facility up to 2 h a week. They are required
to pass an annual fitness test. The necessity of undertaking
PA among soldiers could have an influence on MSD.
The aim of this study was to assess the occurrence of
self-reported musculoskeletal disorders among male and
female territorial army soldiers during the COVID-19
pandemic, and to investigate whether there was a relationship
between occupational physical activity, leisure
time physical activity, and MSD.
Methods
Study design
A cross-sectional survey research of male and female
Polish territorial army soldiers was performed. This
study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the
Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education in
Katowice (certificate of approval No. KB/02/12) and
conformed to the standards established by the Declaration
of Helsinki. All participants were told about the
type and purpose of the study and gave their informed
consent prior to filling out the questionnaire.
Participants
The study recruited a sample of 373 territorial army soldiers
ages 18–55 years who had not previously suffered
from COVID-19 and were not convalescents. However,
it should be noted that participants were not tested,
therefore if they were asymptomatic, they may have been
infected without knowing.
The studied sample included all soldiers from one of
the fifteen Territorial Defense Brigades in Poland who
had completed the entire training cycle and were authorized
to perform tasks related to their official duties. The
inclusion criteria were: a) possession of a medical certificate
of fitness to serve in the territorial army, b) successful
completion of fitness examinations, c) at least 6
months of service in the territorial army, d) the consent
to participate in the study. Participants who did not
meet the inclusion criteria as well as those with missing
data were excluded. The basic characteristics of the
studied soldiers are presented in Table 1.
Methods and procedures
The study was conducted from October–November
2020 using a direct pen-and-paper interview method in
the workplace of the studied participants.
The symptoms prevalence data was collected using the
standardized Nordic Musculoskeletal Questionnaire
(NMQ). NMQ contains a view of the human body imaged
from the back and separated into the nine anatomical
localizations which may be affected by musculoskeletal
disorders. The NMQ quantifies musculoskeletal pain in
the following body regions: neck, shoulders, upper back,
elbows, low back, wrists/hands, hips/thighs, knees, and ankles/
feet. The participants provided information related to
their pain symptoms (discomfort, numbness, ache) during
the last 12months and during the last 7 days. In case of
pain complaints during the last 7 days, an estimation of
the pain intensity was given using a range of 1 to 10 (from
a minimal to intense or unbearable pain) [23–25].
Body mass index was estimated on the basis of the
participants’ body height and weight.
Occupational and leisure time physical activity data
was collected using the Seven-Day Physical Activity Recall
(SDPAR) with the authors’ own modification. The
questionnaire serves for collecting data concerning the
frequency, intensity, and duration of both occupational
and leisure time PA as well as the time spent sleeping
seven days prior to examination. Domestic PA and
active transport (commuting PA) were included in
leisure time PA, whereas active transport to work was
included in occupational PA due to the sparse reporting
of these activities by the studied soldiers (by four
participants or less).
Participants declared their occupational physical activity
(OPA) and leisure time physical activity (LTPA) separately
(in minutes) for each day of the week, describing
its intensity as moderate, vigorous, or highly vigorous, as
well as the number of hours spent sleeping. They also
declared the mean time spent sitting per day. The
declared PA was estimated according to the SDPAR procedure:
moderate-intensity PA – 4 METs, vigorousintensity
PA – 6 METs, high-vigorous-intensity PA – 10
METs [26, 27]. Taking all the data into consideration,
weekly and daily energy expenditures on PA were calculated
[kcal, METmin].
Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as the means, standard deviations,
medians, minimal and maximal values, and confidence
interval (95%) of standard deviations or are described
using frequencies (percentage). The normality of distribution
was verified with the Shapiro-Wilk test. To compare
the number of soldiers within each category of
energy expenditure (EE) on total PA, classified as < 2000
kcal, 2000–3999 kcal, 4000–6000 kcal, and > 6000 kcal,
and time spent sitting classified as < 2 h, 2–4 h, 4–6 h,
6–8 h, above 8 h, and BMI status classified as underweight
(< 18.5), healthy weight (18.5–24.9), overweight
(25.0–29.9), and obese (≥ 30.0) with the number of
workers with MSD (separately for each body region),
Pearson’s chi-squared test was used. To determine the
relationship between PA and the prevalence of MSD,
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient and multiple regression
were applied. To compare PA (total as well as
domain and intensity specific) between the soldiers who
reported MSD classified as a lack of MSD, 1 or 2 MSD,
or 3 or more MSD, the Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA
by ranks or one-way ANOVA was used. The level of significance
was set at p ≤ .05. Statistical analysis was
undertaken using Statistica ver. 13, TIBCO Software Inc.
Results
The basic characteristic of participants regarding their
sex, age, BMI, time sent sitting per day, and EE on total
PA is shown in Table 1.
The occurrence of MSD during the last 12 months and
the last 7 days is presented in Table 2. The 12-month
prevalence of low back pain was 36%, knee pain 22.5%,
and neck pain 21%. The last 7-day prevalence of MSD in
certain body regions was lower than the last 12 months.
The highest average pain intensity was reported for the
low back and knees (Table 2).
The occupational, leisure time, and total PA among
studied soldiers was very diverse and the mean level of
PA was relatively high (Table 3). As many as 40% of participants
spent more than 6000 kcal per week on their
total PA, and only 15% of soldiers declared more than 8
h spent sitting per day (Table 1).
Based on energy expenditures on total PA during the
week (as shown in Table 1), the analysis showed statistically
significant differences in the prevalence of low back
pain (Pearson χ2 = 8.13, p = .043). Other differences were
not observed.
Based on declared time spent sitting per day and BMI
status (as shown in Table 1), the analysis did not reveal
any significant differences in the prevalence of MSD.
The association between PA and the occurrence of
MSD during the last 7 days and during the last 12
months is presented in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. The
analysis showed a difference in high vigorous-intensity
OPA (p = .019) between soldiers who did not report any
MSD during the last 7 days, those who reported 1–2
MSD, and those who reported 3 or more MSD during
the last 7 days. Differences in moderate-intensity OPA
(p = .006), total OPA (p = .008), moderate-intensity
LTPA (p = .028), total LTPA (p = .021), total PA [METmin]
(p = .023), and total PA [kcal] (p = .003) were found
between soldiers who reported no MSD, those who reported
1–2 MSD, and those who reported 3 and more
MSD during the last 12 months.
The following relationships between the prevalence of
MSD during the last 12 months and PA were observed:
the occurrence of elbow pain was correlated with
vigorous-intensity OPA (r = 0.10, p = .044), the occurrence
of wrist or hand pain was correlated with high
vigorous-intensity LTPA (r = 0.11, p = .033), the occurrence
of low back pain was correlated with moderateintensity
OPA (r = 0.17, p < .0001), high vigorousintensity
OPA (r = 0.11, p = .029), total OPA [METmin]
(r = 0.16, p = .001), total OPA [kcal] (r = 0.17, p = .0001),
total PA [METmin] (r = 0.15, p = .004), and total PA
[kcal] (r = 0.14, p = .006).
The following relationships were observed between the
prevalence of MSD during the last 7 days and PA: the
occurrence of elbow pain was correlated with vigorousintensity
OPA (r = 0.13, p = .015), the occurrence of wrist
or hand pain was correlated with high vigorous-intensity
OPA (r = 0.12, p = .017), the occurrence of low back pain
was correlated with high vigorous-intensity OPA (r =
0.14, p = .006), the occurrence of hip or thigh pain was
correlated with high vigorous-intensity OPA (r = 0.13,
p = .015), and the occurrence of ankle or feet pain was
correlated with vigorous-intensity OPA (r = 0.13, p =
.013) and high vigorous-intensity OPA (r = 0.17, p =
.001). However, these correlations were weak.
The regression model explained only 3% of the variance
of low back pain symptoms. It was a coincidence
that with an increase in OPA moderate, the incidence of
low back pain symptoms during the last 12 months actually
slightly increased. The other parameters included in
this model (OPA vigorous, OPA high vigorous, OPA
total, and gender) were statistically insignificant. Different
models were not found.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to assess the occurrence of
self-reported MSD among male and female territorial
army soldiers during the COVID-19 pandemic and to investigate
whether there was a relationship between OPA,
LTPA, and MSD.
An investigation on the 12-month and 7-day prevalence
of MSD revealed that the most common was low
back pain, followed by neck and knee pain. A total of 56
and 40% of territorial army soldiers had experienced
pain or other discomfort in one or more of nine body regions
during the past 12 months and during the past 7
days, respectively. It should be emphasized, however,
that these pain symptoms were not related to COVID-
19, while myalgia, defined as muscle aches and pain, is a
common clinical feature of COVID-19 [28]. Morken
et al. in their study of the Royal Norwegian Navy observed
that 85% of these soldiers had experienced MSD,
and the most common MSD were also in the lower
back, shoulders, and neck. The authors noticed that civilians
had a higher prevalence of MSD than military
personnel [1]. In Serra et al., police officers often reported
pain in the lower back (47%) and dorsal region (33%) [29].
We observed relatively high and highly diverse PA
among territorial army soldiers. Most of them declared
EE on total PA above 6000 kcal peer week, and the mean
and median of the total PA in the studied soldiers was
above 6000 METmin per week.
In this cross-sectional study, we investigated the relationship
between PA and MSD among soldiers. The
study revealed that occupational PA, especially vigorousintensity
and high vigorous-intensity OPA, is positively
correlated with a higher prevalence of MSD in several
regions of the body, i.e. the lower back, elbows, wrists or
hands, hips or thighs, and ankles or feet. We observed
that along with an increase in energy expenditure on
total PA, a greater percentage of respondents experienced
low back pain. We also observed that undertaking
high vigorous-intensity LTPA is positively correlated
with a higher prevalence of wrist or hand pain. Our
study indicates that participants who were less physically
active experienced MSD less often during the last 12
months. This probably results from the declared high
levels of PA among most of the studied soldiers. Our
findings are partially in line with previous studies.
As showed in Weyh et al., welders who had a higher
physical work load demonstrated a higher prevalence of
MSD. The 12-month prevalence of low back pain in
welders was 71%, neck pain 61%, and shoulder pain 55%.
The authors stated that insufficient LTPA (< 600 MET/
week) was associated with low back pain [30].
López-Bueno et al., based on their study including
10,427 active Danish employees, observed an association
between LTPA and long-term sickness absence (LTSA).
The authors noticed that high LTPA reduced the risk of
LTSA by a borderline significant 23%, whereas moderate
LTPA also reduced LTSA but a lower percentage than
high LTPA [31].
Søgaard et al. revealed that employees with high work
activity had a higher frequency of recurring lower back
and hand/wrist symptoms, whereas employees with
mainly sitting work experienced a higher frequency of
recurrent neck symptoms [32]. Our findings were similar;
however, we did not find an association between
time spent sitting per day and the prevalence of MSD,
including neck pain.
The comparison of OPA, LTPA, and MSD between
physical education teachers (PET) and other teachers indicated
that PET who were more physically active had a
significantly lower risk of all MSD during the past year
then teachers who were more sedentary [33]. These findings
point out that long-term PA is associated with a
lower risk of MSD, which is not in line with our study.
This is likely due to different levels of PA between
teachers and soldiers.
Due to the demands of the annual fitness test, soldiers
are obliqued to maintain high fitness levels, which are
related to performing physical training. For the same
reason, this occupational group might differ from other
working groups and should not be compared directly.
The lack of the positive effects of PA, the relationship
between vigorous and high-vigorous PA, and the occurrence
of MSD in the hips or thighs or ankles or feet observed
in our study is supported by studies that indicate
physical training as the cause of injuries in the lower
limbs [34, 35].
The opposite findings were obtained by Serra et al.
who indicated that undergoing physical activities during
the last 12 months reduced the odds of getting MSD by
30%. Police officers who had performed PA during the
last 12 months reported less occupational stress than
those who did not. However, the authors mainly focused
on the assessment of stress perception, whereas information
about PA was limited to one question regarding
performing some type of physical exercise more than
three times a week [29].
Our results, based on the cross-sectional study design,
do not allow us to point out a clear causal relationship
between PA and MSD. However, we may assume that
performing high-intensity PA, the majority as OPA,
causes the more frequent occurrence of MSD.
Strengths and limitations of the study
The study was conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic
among a specific group of workers with relatively
high PA. These results should neither be generalized to
other working populations nor to non-pandemic
periods.
There are several limitations to this study which are
worth mentioning. In this study, PA was measured by a
questionnaire, a subjective method of assessing PA, and
the validity and reliability of this method may be questionable
[36]. As has been shown in previous studies,
self-reported PA is often overestimated [37, 38]. However,
a questionnaire may be the one practical method of
evaluating PA among a large population. Another limitation
is not distinguishing between domestic PA and active
travel as domains of PA due to the sparse reporting
of these activities, whereas participants reported occupational
and leisure time PA separately. Further, another
limitation is the lack of information about education, social
status, and physical fitness. However, as was shown
in the inclusion criteria, a fairly homogeneous group was
examined. We assumed that the physical fitness of the
studied soldiers would be similar due to the requirement
to pass obligatory annual fitness tests. On the other
hand, this study also included the following potential
confounders: age, gender, education.