Periprosthetic joint infection (PJI), one of the most
troublesome complications of total hip or knee arthroplasty,
exacerbates the burden on the individual and
health care system [1–4]. As the number of surgeries
surged yearly, the total number of PJI patients increased
[5]. However, the diagnosis and treatment of PJI remain
challenging for clinicians.
Current diagnostic methods of PJI include serological
testing, synovial fluid testing, and intraoperative
histological pathology [2, 5]. However, although
the diagnostic criteria are well defined, no gold standard
has yet been established [4, 6]. Similarly, treatment
of PJI is difficult for clinicians because there are
no widely accepted criteria [7, 8]. The two-stage revision
is currently the standard procedure for PJI, but
the proper time to perform the second-stage revision
is still debatable [9].
As recent literature revealed the close correlations
between the coagulation cascade and infection
course, coagulation-related biomarkers are gaining
attention. Some biomarkers, such as D-dimer and fibrinogen
(Fib), have been proven promising for PJI
diagnosis [10–13] and determining the reimplantation
timing [10, 14].
Thromboelastography (TEG) is a routine coagulation
test that assesses the whole process of clotting over time
in the body [15] and provides a full-scale evaluation of
clot formation, elasticity, and duration. Additionally,
various coagulation elements are measured as follows
[16]. The clotting time (K value) reflects the rate of
blood clot formation and is an indicator of fibrinogen
function [17]. The α-angle (angle) represents the clot
growth rate, while the maximum amplitude (MA) is the
maximum clot amplitude [18]. The amplitude at 30 min
(A30) measures clot strength at 30 min after MA [19],
and thrombodynamic potential index (TPI) was derived
from the MA and K values [20].
Moreover, TEG yields information about all phases of
coagulation and provides further information on standard
coagulation tests [16, 21]. Numerous studies have
proved that TEG is useful in evaluating coagulation status,
predicting bleeding in patients with severe sepsis,
monitoring haemostasis during cardiac surgery and liver
transplant procedures, etc. [15, 21, 22]. However, no
study has reported its value in diagnosing PJI and guiding
the timing of reimplantation for the second-stage
revision.
Therefore, this study aims to investigate (1) the value
of TEG in distinguishing PJI from aseptic loosening and
(2) the ability of TEG parameters to guide the proper
time for the second-stage revision. Furthermore, the
measured TEG parameters were compared with the
ESR, CRP, and D-dimer levels.
Methods
We conducted this retrospective study including all revision
total hip and total knee arthroplasties performed in
our hospital from October 2017 to September 2020,
under the ethical approval of the institutional review
board of our hospital. Among the 145 patient records
acquired, 61 patients were diagnosed with PJI according
to the Musculoskeletal Infection Society criteria [23],
and 84 patients were diagnosed with aseptic loosening.
Patients were excluded if at least one of the following
are present: (1) lack of needed data, (2) recent use of anticoagulants,
(3) presence of inflammatory arthritis such
as rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis, (4)
blood diseases such as thrombocytopenic purpura, (5)
formation of deep vein thrombosis of the lower limbs,
(6) liver diseases, (7) malignancy, and (8) infection of
other tissues or organs.
Finally, 62 patients who underwent revision arthroplasty
were included in this study: 23 in group A (treated
for PJI) and 39 in group B (treated for aseptic loosening).
A total of 83 patients were excluded due to lack of
needed data (n = 55), deep vein thrombosis in the lower
limbs (n = 24), recent use of oral warfarin due to coronary
stent implantation (n = 2), urinary tract infection
(n = 1), and rheumatoid arthritis (n = 1).
The patients’ fasting venous blood samples were collected
routinely on the second day of admission and sent
to the clinical laboratory of our hospital for blood examination,
including routine blood examination, conventional
coagulation tests, and TEG. The test results were
acquired approximately 30 min after blood collection.
Moreover, at least 3 tissue culture specimens (including
joint fluid) were obtained when the participants underwent
revision arthroplasty, and these samples were cultured
for 7–14 days. Group B underwent a one-stage
revision. Meanwhile, the two-stage revision for group A
consisted of the following procedures: 1) The first-stage
revision involved removal of the former prosthesis, supervened
with implantation of antibiotic-loaded cement
spacers (4 g vancomycin in 160 g gentamicin-containing
bone cement). 2) At least 3 months after the first stage
of treatment, surgeons decided whether to implant a
new prosthesis or continue antibiotic protocols based on
clinical symptoms and laboratory parameters. Aseptic
patients were prescribed oral rivaroxaban 10 mg daily for
35 days for thromboprophylaxis, and PJI patients
followed the same order after each staged surgery. All
included patients were regularly followed up at 1 month,
3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and then each year after discharge.
Functional outcomes, complications, and the
reasons for any reoperation were recorded. According to
Delphi-based consensus, success of reimplantation was
defined by (1) control of infection, as characterised by a
healed wound without fistula, drainage, or pain; (2) no
subsequent surgical intervention for infection after reimplantation
surgery; and (3) no occurrence of PJI-related
mortality [24, 25].
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics
for Windows (version 26; IBM Corporation,
Armonk, NY, USA), and statistical significance was set
at p < 0.05. Independent sample t-tests were used for
data conforming to normal distributions. In contrast, the
Mann-Whitney U tests were used for data not conforming
to normal distributions, and categorical variables
were summarised using chi-squared tests. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curves were drawn using
SPSS. The following parameters were calculated in each
test: area under the curves (AUCs), sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive
value (NPV), positive likelihood ratio (+LR), and negative
likelihood ratio (−LR). Moreover, we further studied
the diagnostic value of the different combinations of
mentioned parameters in pairs. The Youden index was
used to determine the optimal cut-off value of these biomarkers
for the diagnosis of PJI. Furthermore, a scatterplot
was drawn using GraphPad Prism (version 8.0.2;
GraphPad Software)8.
Results
The demographic characteristics of each group are
shown in Table 1. There were no statistically significant
differences between baselines of the two study groups,
except for involved joints. Particularly, the hip joint
accounted for 87.18% in group B and 30.43% in group
A, which was statistically significant (p<0.01).
We observed significant differences in tested markers
between Groups A and B (p < .001), as shown in Table 1.
The median values of CRP, ESR, D-dimer, and TEG parameters
(Angle, MA, A30, TPI) in group A were significantly
higher than those in group B (p < .001). In
contrast, the median K value was lower in group A
(p < .001).
To evaluate and compare the diagnostic value of the
tested markers, ROC curves of each inflammatory and
fibrinolytic marker are illustrated in Fig. 1, while the
AUC of each ROC curve was calculated (Table 2). The
biomarkers’ optimal cut-off values for the diagnosis of
PJI are shown in Table 2. The AUCs for CRP, ESR, and
D-dimer were 0.893 (95% confidence interval [CI],
0.787–0.958), 0.953 (95% CI, 0.866–0.991), and 0.717
(95% CI, 0.588–0.824), respectively. The AUCs of TEG
parameters ranged from 0.800 (K value, 95% CI, 0.680–
0.891) to 0.895 (MA, 95% CI, 0.790–0.958). Among all
tested biomarkers, ESR had the highest AUC, while Ddimer
had the lowest AUC. The AUC of MA ranked
first among the TEG parameters, followed by A30, TPI,
Angle, and K value. Although the AUC was lower than
that of ESR, MA achieved a better sensitivity and
specificity.
The diagnostic values of the different combinations of
tested parameters in pairs are shown in Table 3. The
combination of TEG parameters and CRP/ESR led to
improved AUC, sensitivity, and specificity, except for
ESR +MA and ESR + A30. In addition, CRP + A30
achieved an obvious boost in the diagnosis value.
The culture results of 23 patients with PJI are listed in
Table 4, wherein 19 (82.6%) patients had positive results.
Gram-positive bacteria, particularly S. aureus, are the
most common pathogens observed. According to
Table 5, the values of CRP, ESR, MA, A30, and TPI in
Fungi group were less than those of the other three
groups (G+ group, G- group and negative group).
Data from 17 patients who underwent two-stage revision
surgery were available in the history database management
system. The other six patients could not be readmitted
for the second-stage surgery due to short intervals
from the first-stage surgery (less than 3 months).
According to Delphi-based consensus, no patients
showed a failure of reimplantation during the follow-up
period (17.29 ± 8.29 (range, 3–28) months). However, 2
of 17 patients had poor knee function with limited range
of motion. On comparing the tested biomarkers between
stage 1 (the stage before spacer insertion) and stage 2
(the stage after re-admission for the second-stage surgery)
of PJI patients, all tested markers except for Ddimer
(p = 0.059) were found statistically significant. Furthermore,
the numerical values of ESR and MA decreased
below the cut-off value during stage 2 (Fig. 2)
when each patient’s parameters were compared with
corresponding cut-off values.
Discussions
Many studies have revealed a close association between
coagulation and infection. Endotoxins or components of
the bacterial cell wall were reported to trigger changes
in coagulation through tissue factor (TF) released by a
variety of cells, such as vascular endothelial cells and
monocytes, and maintain TF at high levels by stimulating
the release of cytokines, such as interleukins and
tumour necrosis factor α [21, 26, 27]. Correspondingly,
coagulation-related biomarkers have recently been
proven to be valuable in PJI diagnosis. D-dimer has been
adopted as a minor criterion in the 2018 International
Consensus Meeting criteria for PJI, but it has raised a
huge controversy. Yan et al. [28] conducted a metaanalysis
and observed that D-dimer is an effective serum
biomarker for PJI diagnosis in patients without a history
of hypercoagulation or inflammatory arthritis. In contrast,
Tejbir et al. [2] and Rui Li et al. [29] reported the
poor diagnostic value of D-dimer for PJI. Meanwhile,
Lauren et al. [30] found that D-dimer results vary significantly
in different laboratories, even for the same sample.
Thus, D-dimer as a PJI diagnosis criterion was
refuted. In our study, D-dimer exhibited a low value in
PJI diagnosis, and its numerical values remained high
after ESR and CRP levels were decreased in the normal
range. Moreover, these conventional coagulation biomarkers
can only reflect quantitative changes in platelet
and fibrinogen levels.
TEG can provide comprehensive coagulation status of
our body and provide additional data compared with
standard coagulation tests [21]. Many studies have
compared TEG and conventional coagulation tests in
many clinical fields. For example, Hani et al. [16] demonstrated
that TEG provides more information about
the haemostatic state of patients with cirrhosis than conventional
coagulation tests. Furthermore, Luo et al. [31]
reported that TEG may be a reliable alternative to conventional
coagulation methods for diagnosing sepsisinduced
coagulopathy.
To date, no study has compared the TEG’s value with
the three most used biomarkers (CRP, ESR, and Ddimer)
in diagnosing PJI. In the present study, we highlight
the value of ESR in diagnosing PJI, with AUC,
optimal cut-off, sensitivity, and specificity for ESR of
0.953, 34.0 mm/h, 81.82, and 94.87%, respectively. Ddimer
had the lowest AUC, and it remained high in PJI
patients before the second-stage surgery. Although there
were small differences in the numerical values of AUC,
cut-off value, sensitivity, and specificity, our results are
similar to those of several other studies [11, 12, 29].
Additionally, our study found that MA achieved a good
diagnostic value with a specificity of 97.44%. The combination
of CRP/ESR with TEG parameters (K, Angle,
MA, A30, TPI) achieved higher sensitivity and specificity
than any individual marker, except for the two combinations
(ESR + MA, ESR + A30). Thus, despite lower AUCs
of these parameters than ESR, TEG remains a promising
diagnostic test for PJI.
Performing the second-stage revision in proper timing
is the key to boosting the success rate of PJI treatment.
Hence, researchers continue exploring the optimal timing
for reimplantation. In recent years, various indicators
have been developed. Hoell et al. [32] reported that CRP
was not a reliable parameter to exclude persistent infections.
Tao Bian et al. [33] also concluded that ESR and
CRP were of limited value in determining the
reimplantation timing by pooled analysis. Meanwhile,
some studies report that coagulation-related biomarkers
perform well in guiding reimplantation. Shahi et al. [14]
highlighted D-dimer in determining the optimal timing
of reimplantation. Moreover, Geng Bin et al. [10] reported
fibrinogen as a useful tool for assessing infection
outcomes after first-stage surgery. However, a small
sample of both studies limited their credibility.
Furthermore, we found that ESR and MA were good indicators
for determining the timing of reimplantation. Our
study showed a 100% success rate of two-stage revision,
which is higher than those reported in most published
studies. Several reasons contribute to this result: 1) the
follow-up time of 4 patients was shorter than 1 year, which
may not be enough to judge infection control. 2) Although
widely adopted by many researchers, the Delphi-based
consensus is not the gold standard for evaluating the success
of the two-stage revision, as it overlooks the functional
outcomes of surgery. Therefore, our success rate would be
lower when the functional outcome is considered.
According to the results of this study, TEG has the following
advantages. First, as a regular and routine serological
test for coagulation, the TEG assay does not
incur additional costs or suffering to patients. Second,
the TEG parameters may be applied to differentiate PJI
from aseptic loosening, particularly the combination of
CRP and MA/A30. Finally, MA/A30 appears to be a
valuable tool for assessing infection control after spacer
insertion.
Our study has several limitations. First, the samples in
this study were small; a larger sample size might have
produced different results. Second, lower extremity Doppler
ultrasound was routinely performed to exclude venous
thromboembolism of the lower limb, which did not
rule out clots in other parts of the patient’s body. Moreover,
we did not consider PJI patients’ use of antibiotics
before admission to our hospital. Furthermore, this
study has some inherent biases due to its retrospective
nature. Finally, we only checked the TEG of PJI patients
before spacer insertion and before reimplantation, rather
than checking them regularly. Hence, the changing trend
of the biomarker levels in PJI patients was not clear.
Conclusion
This study reports 5 measured TEG parameters (K value,
angle, MA, A30, TPI) that are statistically different between
patients with PJI, with aseptic loosening, and
those who were re-admitted for reimplantation in twostage
arthroplasty. With high specificity, MA was considered
a valuable biomarker in diagnosing PJI and assessing
infection control after the first-stage surgery.