Background
Arthroplasty is currently recognized as the most effective
method for treatment of advanced joint diseases [1]. Accordingly,
the annual number of arthroplastic surgeries
has increased rapidly in recent years, and is expected to
exceed 4 million by 2030 [1]. Infection is a catastrophic
complication of surgical operations, especially those involving
arthroplastic procedures. The reported incidence
rates of infection are 0.5–3.0% following primary total
hip arthroplasty (THA) and 4.0–6.0% following revision
THA, resulting in extremely high costs and poor clinical
outcomes; these infections represent considerable burdens
to both patients and society [2–4].
As the number of THA procedures increases, greater
numbers of periprosthetic joint infections (PJIs) and revision
surgeries are expected. Currently, total two-stage
exchange (TTE) revision, which removes both the acetabular
and femoral components and involves placement
of an antibiotic-loaded spacer, is considered the standard
of care for chronic PJI in the United States [2, 4, 5].
However, TTE remains a technically complex procedure
requiring a long duration of hospitalization due to serious
injury caused by the removal of all components [3–
5]. Moreover, the removal of well-fixed femoral components
using aggressive debridement inevitably sacrifices
bone stock and compromises reconstruction fixation.
Therefore, it is important to explore more effective surgical
procedures.
In 2009, partial two-stage exchange (PTE) revision was
proposed as an alternative treatment for PJI, as a method
to address many of the limitations of TTE [6]. For patients
with localized infections that do not involve wellfixed
femoral components, PTE is able to reduce the
level of surgical trauma, thereby accelerating the rehabilitation
process [7]. However, a systematic search of
PubMed, the Web of Science, and the Cochrane Library
revealed only a handful of preliminary reports describing
the use of PTE for infected THA, highlighting the slow
adoption of this procedure in clinical practice [7–11]. In
this retrospective study, we examined the use of PTE for
infected THA, providing additional clinical evidence regarding
the efficacy and reliability of this surgical
procedure.
Methods
Patients
Between September 2000 and June 2019, a total of 35
patients with chronic PJI were treated by PTE at our institution.
Of these, 2 patients were lost to follow-up and
5 patients were excluded from analysis due to insufficient
follow-up (< 2 years). The remaining 28 patients
(28 hips) were included in this retrospective study, consisting
of 13 women and 15 men. The mean age at the
time of surgery was 61 years (range, 40–78 years). The
average body mass index was 23.7 kg/m2 (range, 18.4–
31.7 kg/m2). The Harris hip score upon admission to the
hospital was 39.8 ± 10.7 points. The underlying diagnoses
for primary THA were osteoarthritis in 25 patients,
posttraumatic arthritis in 1 patient, and femoral head
necrosis in 2 patients. 21 primary THA procedures were
performed at our institution; the remaining 7 primary
THAs were performed at other hospitals. The baseline
demographic data were listed in Table 1. Meanwhile,
135 patients with no significant difference in clinical
conditions but receiving TTE treatment were included
to compare the success rate of different treatment
methods.
The diagnosis of deep infection was made based on
the new definition for PJI established by the Musculoskeletal
Infection Society workgroup [12]. Briefly, diagnosis
of infection was defined as the presence of a
discharging sinus communicating with the joint, growth
of a microorganism from joint fluids or at least two separate
tissues from the affected prosthetic joint, or by the
presence of four of the following six criteria: (a) elevated
C reactive protein (≥ 10 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (≥ 30 mm/h); (b) elevated synovial white
blood cell count (≥ 2000/μL); (c) elevated synovial neutrophil
percentage (≥ 65%); (d) presence of purulence in
the affected joint; (e) isolation of a microorganism in the
culture of periprosthetic tissue or fluid; (f) detection of
> 5 neutrophils per high-power field on histopathologic
examination [12]. The definition of chronic infection
was based on the criteria of Tsukayama et al. [13].
The femoral components were preoperatively measured
for loosening based on the criteria described by
Harris [14] and Engh et al. [15]. Possible loosening of all
femoral components was further confirmed during the
operation. For well-fixed cementless stems where radiographic
evidence indicated bone ingrowth along the entire
length of the stem, the femoral stems were retained
without any attempt to remove them [8, 15, 16], and a
PTE revision was made. For patients with evidence of
bone ingrowth in one-third or less of the proximal area
and radiolucent lines around the distal portion of the
stem on preoperative radiographs, a PTE revision was
made if removal of the femoral stem failed [8, 15, 16].
Surgical technique
All surgeries were performed by the same experienced,
fellowship-trained arthroplasty surgeon. The basic principles
of PTE revision were as follows: radical debridement,
removal of the acetabular component and
artificial femoral head, retention of the uninvolved femoral
stem component, and insertion of an antibioticloaded
cement spacer, followed by two-stage
reimplantation.
In the first stage of the operation, all patients received
radical debridement under general anesthesia through
the original THA incision, which was extended distally
when necessary. The acetabular component and artificial
femoral head were then removed; the femoral stem component
was retained in place. For each patient, at least
two separate tissues from the affected prosthetic joint
were harvested for intraoperative frozen biopsy and bacterial
culture. Afterwards, the wound was successively
flushed with 0.9% NaCl solution and hydrogen peroxide
solution, followed by pulsatile lavage for 15 min in iodine
solution. The removed components were then replaced
with antibiotic-loaded cement spacers. These spacers
consisted of high-viscosity cement (Palacos, Zimmer,
Warsaw, IN, USA) and vancomycin [17]. The dose of
vancomycin was determined based on previous studies
(4 g vancomycin per 40 mg bag cement) [18, 19]. Spacers
were handmade using a pediatric ear and ulcer syringe
(outer diameter, 44 mm; CR Bard, Inc., Covington, GA,
USA) or other suitable spherical tools when necessary.
Additional antibiotic-loaded cement was applied around
the proximal end of the femoral stem prosthesis to reduce
bone loss and prevent bacteria from affecting the
femoral stem components (shown in Fig. 1). At this
stage, the acetabular bone defect would not be treated,
and the patient would be told to avoid stress on the surgical
side.
Postoperatively, a 6-week period of organism-sensitive
intravenous antibiotic therapy was applied; all patients
were observed for at least 3 months (mean, 4.7 months;
range, 3–12 months). Serum C reactive protein level,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and white blood cell
count were monitored monthly. During this period, all
patients were permitted to bear weight on the affected
joint as tolerated.
Second-stage reimplantation was performed based on
a combination of the patient’s general condition, wound
healing without signs of infection (determined using the
same criteria as initial diagnosis), and normalization of
laboratory data. During the operation, the spacers were
removed under general anesthesia through the original
incision. Intraoperative pathological examination of frozen
biopsy confirmed that the level of neutrophil
granulocytes was < 5 per high-power field. Routine flushing
of the wound was performed using 0.9% NaCl solution
and hydrogen peroxide solution, followed by
pulsatile lavage for 15 min in iodine solution. Patients
with acetabular bone defects were treated following the
common recommendation [20]. Generally, Paprosky
Type I, Type IIA and Type IIB defects were managed
with a noncemented, porous-coated hemispheric implant
with or without the use of adjunctive screw fixation.
Bone grafting was usually not considered.
Paprosky Type IIC defects were treated with a noncemented,
porous-coated hemispheric implant with the
use of adjunctive screw fixation, and bone grafts were almost
all required. The treatment of Paprosky type III defects
often required supplemental porous metal
augments such as tantalum metal blocks, as well as ‘cup-on-cup’ or ‘cup-cage’ technologies to reconstruct the
acetabulum [21, 22]. Finally, the new prosthesis was
implanted.
Data recording and follow-up
Patients were followed up regularly in our clinic postoperatively
at 1, 3, and 6 months, then once yearly thereafter.
Perioperative parameters, wound condition, and
Harris hip scores were evaluated to assess clinical outcomes.
In this study, we defined failure as recurrence of
infection in the same hip, requirement of additional surgical
procedures for infection control, or use of longterm
(> 6 months) suppressive antibiotics.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS Statistics,
version 22.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Mean values and
standard deviations were calculated for continuous variables;
comparisons between groups were performed
using a paired sample t-test. Pearson chi-squared tests
were used to compare categorical data. The generalized
estimating equations (GEE) and repeated measures
ANOVA were used to assess the correlation between
sorts of parameters that received multiple measures. p
values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results
We retrospectively analyzed 28 patients with chronic PJI
who were treated by PTE at our institution. Patients
were followed up for an average of 4 years (range, 2–11
years). The interval from the appearance of infection to
the first surgery was 17 months (range, 6–72 months);
the second-stage surgery was accomplished after a mean
interval of 4.1 months (range, 3–12 months). The success
rate of treatment in this study was 85.7% (24/28). Except
for recurrent infection, no complications were observed
in this study, such as deep vein thrombosis, implant
loosening, nerve injury, dislocation, or death (shown in
Figs. 2, 3).At the final follow-up, inflammatory indicators such as
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C reactive protein level,
and white blood cell count were within the normal
ranges. Slight increases were evident in a handful of patients,
although it is uncertain whether these changes
were due to recurrent infection or complications from
other unrelated diseases. The ESR of men declined more
slowly than women after surgery in an age-dependent
manner. The GEE results showed that there was a positive
correlation between postoperative pain score and
CRP values. The average Harris hip score at 1 month
postoperatively was 51.8 ± 8.9 points, which increased to
61.3 ± 8.2 points at 3 months postoperatively and 76.2 ±
11.7 points at the final follow-up, revealing significant
improvement in hip function (Table 2).
A total of four treatment failures were observed in this
study. Three were due to persistent infection before
second-stage revision, while the fourth was attributed to
recurrent infection after two-stage revision (Table 3).
Failure 1: A 69-year-old woman had undergone prior
hip operations due to trauma; she presented with poor
local soft tissue condition, including severe scarring.
This patient exhibited delayed wound healing, which
manifested as redness and swelling. The patient’s serum
erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein
level were abnormally high. After receiving radical debridement,
she underwent TTE revision, resulting in
successful control of the infection.
Failure 2: A 60-year-old man failed treatment due to a
refractory infection that was detected after the first stage
of revision. Three complete radical debridement surgeries
were performed to control the infection, after which
the patient underwent second-stage revision. Recurrent
infection was not observed at the final follow-up.
Failure 3: A 78-year-old woman failed to complete the
second-stage revision after careful evaluation due to advanced
age and extremely poor health, as well as several
underlying diseases (i.e., hypertension, mellitus diabetes,
and prior cardiovascular infarction). She is currently
using a wheelchair and has not experienced recurrent
infection.
Failure 4: A 47-year-old man experienced recurrent infection
at 6 months after second-stage revision. The results
of bacterial culture were similar to those obtained
prior to surgery. After complete debridement, TTE revision
was performed. Recurrent infection was not observed
at the final follow-up.
Discussion
Compared with TTE, PTE is only indicated for a narrow
subset of patients with PJI; however, no consensus has
been reached regarding selection criteria for this procedure
(Table 4) [6, 7, 9–11, 23–26]. Based on the data presented
here, as well as the data from previous studies,
we propose that the stricter eligibility criteria should be
used for PTE revision for hip PJI [11]. We suggest the
following inclusion criteria for PTE revision for chronic
hip PJI: 1) chronic infection (> 6 months) after primary
THA; 2) localized mild infection not involving the femoral
component (assessed carefully based on laboratory
and histopathological tests, both preoperatively and intraoperatively);
3) no sign of femoral component loosening,
determined using the criteria described by Harris
[14] for cemented femoral components and the system
developed by Engh et al. [15] for cementless femoral
stems; 4) fair condition of surrounding soft tissue without
a history of multiple hip surgeries; and 5) Removal
of the femoral component would lead to significant femoral
bone loss and compromise of future fixation, or Elderly
patients in worse health status with high risk of
operation;
PTE represents a promising new surgical option for
the treatment of PJI; however, considerable uncertainty
remains regarding whether this approach can guarantee
effectiveness similar to that of TTE. To address these
concerns, We retrospectively analyzed our 135 TTE patients
who received TTE treatment during the same
period. After adjusting for factors such as age, BMI and
organism type, we found there was no significant difference
in the surgical success rate between these two
groups (p = 0.5). Lee et al. [8] retained well-fixed
cementless stems as part of the treatment of infected
THA for 19 patients; their overall success rate was 90%.
Subsequent studies by Ekpo et al. [7] and Lombardi
et al. [11] demonstrated a success rate of 89% for PTE,
with an average follow-up of 4 years [7, 11]. These results
were similar with our findings. Recently, another
study examined the use of PTE revision surgery in 26
patients with infected THA; 100% of patients were free
of infection at the time of publication and the max
follow-up was approximately 6.2 years [9]. The extremely
high success rate may be the result of the shorter average
follow-up time in that study; however, it strongly
suggests that PTE with an antibiotic-laden cement spacer
is an acceptable method for the management of
chronic hip PJI. We performed a retrospective statistical
analysis of relative articles focusing on two-stage exchange
for hip PJI. The overall success rate was 92% for
2476 TTEs in 46 studies and 89% for 57 PTEs in 5 studies
[27, 28]. Although the analysis is not rigorous and
there may be bias, it can still initially show that there is
no significant difference between both groups in terms
of success rate (p = 0.5).
Whether to retain the femoral stem or not is the fundamental
difference between the TTE and PTE. Therefore,
the key to deciding to adopt PTE lies in the
judgment of whether the femoral prosthesis is infected.
Unfortunately, there is no systematic analysis yet, and
there are no quantifiable evaluation indicators as standards.
Fukui et al. [25] proposed that it can be comprehensively
determined by plain radiography, computed
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and bone
scintigraphy. For unclear cases, fuorodeoxyglucose
positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan can help
to assess the stability of the prosthesis and determine if
the infection has invaded the femur. Anagnostakos et al.
[23] pointed out the antigranulocyte scintigraphy plays
an important role in evaluating infection, and also mentioned
that it can be further confirmed during surgery,
but the exact procedure has not been clarified. Chen
et al. [29] defined the criterion of femoral stem loosening
as meeting any one of the following conditions: (a)
subsidence > 2 mm; (b) a complete radiolucent line along
the stem surface > 2 mm; (c) The endosteum became
scallop-shaped; (d) Visible migration of the prosthesis.
Previous studies have indicated that, if it is difficult to
remove the femur implant without osteotomy, the implant
can be considered stable and reliable [8, 29]. Combined
with these related reports, we believe that the
preoperative X-ray, intraoperative soft tissue condition
around the prosthesis, and the difficulty of pulling out
the femoral stem can be used to determine whether the
femoral prosthesis is free of infection and is safe to
retain.
Another controversial aspect regarding implementation
of the PTE procedure is the interval between the
two surgeries. It is generally believed that a longer
period of inactivity is associated with a better outcome;
however, some reports have questioned this paradigm,
suggesting that a longer interval between stages may increase
the chance of failure [30]. In a study of 50 patients
with PJI, Haddad et al. [31] achieved a 92%
infection control rate using an interval of approximately
3 weeks between surgeries. The mean time to reimplantation
in most studies has been 6–12 weeks [7, 10, 11],
which is slightly shorter than the mean interval of 4.3
months (range, 3–12 months) between first and second
surgeries described in the present study; success rates
have been broadly similar across studies. All patients in
our study received oral antibiotics for at least 3 months
after the second-stage surgery; this was intended to control
opportunistic infections and may have improved patient
outcomes.
In contrast to the approaches used in previous PTE studies,
we removed the femoral head prostheses and applied
additional antibiotic-loaded cement around the proximal end
of the femoral stem; this approach was expected to further
reduce bone loss and prevent bacteria from affecting the
femoral stem components. We presume that this procedure
will ultimately prove beneficial to patients, despite the lack of
difference in success rates compared to other studies. Continued
follow-up is needed to properly assess the long-term
effects and other aspects of the procedure.
The average Harris hip score observed in this study
was high at the final follow-up. This outcome may be
due in part to cultural differences regarding pain tolerance
in Chinese people. Within Chinese society, there is
a strong sentiment that drugs should be avoided as
much as possible. Accordingly, Chinese patients are
often less likely to take painkillers than other groups,
resulting in higher hip scores over time.
We acknowledge several limitations of this study. This
was a retrospective study with a relatively small group of
patients, which reduced the robustness of the conclusions,
compared with a large randomized controlled
trial. Furthermore, the follow-up time was relatively
short, and the results may differ with a longer follow-up
period. In addition, we were unable to assess clinical differences
related to the virulence of the infecting organism,
due to the small sample size. Nevertheless, the
results of the present study provide useful insights regarding
the clinical efficacy of PTE revision.
Conclusions
PTE may be an acceptable option for a subset of patients
with infected THA, offering a satisfactory infection
control rate and clinical outcomes comparable to those
of TTE, and with less harm. Further studies are needed
to more comprehensively determine the potential applications
and limits of this approach.