Gait deviation in the transverse plane is common in patients
with cerebral palsy (CP). It comprises lever arm
dysfunctions, resulting in inefficient energy consumption
and problems in gait appearance [1]. Increased femoral
anteversion, external tibial torsion, abnormal foot appearance,
and muscle imbalance attribute to gait problems
in the transverse plane [2]. Most of all, increased
femoral anteversion is notable in patients with CP. Femoral
anteversion in CP patients increases according to
the Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFC
S) level [3], and it is believed to not improve with age.
Therefore, femoral derotational osteotomy is one of the
common procedures used in single-event multilevel surgery
to improve gait function in patients with CP [4–6].
Although femoral anteversion in CP has been extensively
reviewed in previous studies, only a few studies focused
on external tibial torsion. This lack of research is
owing to the paucity of pathologic tibial torsion compared
with increased femoral anteversion, and physical
examination depicting tibial torsion is not as good as
that depicting femoral anteversion in terms of validity
[7, 8]. With the above background, this study aimed to
evaluate external tibial torsion in patients with CP and
investigate its affecting factors, such as age, GMFCS
level, and concomitant deformities.
Methods
Ethical statements
This study was approved by the institutional review
board (IRB) of our hospital (a tertiary referral center of
CP, IRB number: B-2003-601-103), and it was performed
in accordance with the guidelines of the World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki. The need of obtaining
informed consent was waived because of the retrospective
nature of this study.
Participants
Overall, 639 patients were screened using a clinical data
warehouse (CDW) in our hospital [Healthcare Information
and Management Systems Society (HIMSS), stage
7] according to the following inclusion criteria: (1) consecutive
patients with CP between March 2003 and December
2019, (2) patients aged < 18 years at the time of
assessment, and (3) patients who had torsional 3-
dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) scans.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) inadequate 3D
CT scan for measuring femoral anteversion or tibial torsion,
(2) patients with a history of orthopedic
intervention (bony or soft-tissue procedures) for the
treatment of CP before assessment, and (3) patients with
neuromuscular diseases other than CP (Fig. 1).
Data collection
After implementing the inclusion and exclusion criteria,
two authors (MJJ and PMS) reviewed the patients’ medical
records. Patients’ age at surgery, sex, GMFCS level,
involvement (unilateral/bilateral), and date of the 3D CT
scan were included as demographic data.
Building consensus and reliability
Five authors (JJM, KHS, KML, and MSP, who are orthopedic
surgeons with 3, 17, 18, and 20 years of experience,
respectively, and S-SK, a statistician) held a consensusbuilding
session for the CT measurements and agreed
on the methods of the measurements. Previous studies
on CT measurements were reviewed, and 3D images
were used for measurements. Before the main measurement,
three authors (JJM, KHS, and MSP) measured
femoral anteversion and tibial torsion to ensure interobserver
reliability, and one of the authors (JJM) performed
the measurements after 4 weeks to ensure interobserver
reliability.
CT images (Mx8000-IDT; Philips Healthcare Korea,
Seoul, South Korea) were used in this study. Femoral
anteversion and tibial torsion were measured using the
picture archiving and communication system software
(INFINITT Healthcare, Seoul, Korea), and the Rapidia
software (version 2.8; INFINITT Healthcare) reconstructed
the 3D image from the CT scan. Following the
reliability testing, two authors (MJJ and PMS) measured
the CT indices.
Definitions
On an axial 3D CT scan, femoral anteversion was defined
as the angle between a line connecting the centers
of the femoral head and greater trochanter and another
line connecting the posterior margins of the medial and
lateral femoral condyles (Fig. 2 A). Tibial torsion was defined
as the angle between a line connecting the posterior
margins of the medial and lateral tibial condyles and
another line connecting the midpoints of the medial
malleolus and syndesmotic articular surface of the lateral
malleolus (Fig. 2 B).
Building a linear mixed model
Tibial torsion was adjusted by multiple factors using a
linear mixed model, with sex, GMFCS level, involvement
(bilateral/unilateral), and ipsilateral femoral anteversion
as the fixed effects, and laterality and each subject as the
random effects. The covariance structure was assumed
as the variance components. The restricted maximum
likelihood estimation was used to estimate parameters
for the linear mixed model [9, 10]. A linear mixed model
with a random slope and a random intercept was suggested.
The slope was tibial torsion according to age.
The models were accepted as valid for estimating the responses
according to the Akaike information criterion
(AIC) and Bayesian information criterion (BIC). A
smaller AIC or BIC value is preferred in terms of model
selection.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics was used to summarize the patients’
demographics and CT measurements. Data normality
was determined using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test.
This study used intraclass correlation coefficients
(ICCs) for reliability testing [11, 12]. The required sample
size for reliability testing of CT indices was calculated
before the reliability session. The target value of
ICCs for CT and radiographic measurements was 0.8
with a 95% confidence interval (CI) of 0.2. The sample
size was calculated using the Bonnet approximation [13]
(36 limbs for two observers). Eighteen right legs and 18
left legs were randomly selected for statistical independence
and included for reliability testing [13]. ICCs and
their 95% CIs were determined in the setting of a twoway
random effect model, a single measurement, and absolute
agreement [11, 12].
All statistical analyses were performed using the SAS
Statistical Package, version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC,
USA) and R version 3.5.1 (R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria; ISBN 3–900,051–07-0,
URL http://www.r-project.org) with the stats package
2.3. All statistics tests were two-tailed. CIs were considered
significant when they did not include zero, and pvalues
< 0.05 were considered significant.
Results
Overall, 639 patients were screened. After implementing
the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 472 patients were
enrolled in this study. The mean age of the patients at
the time of assessment was 12.0 ± 7.0 years (Table 1, Fig.
1).
The measurements of femoral anteversion and tibial
torsion from 3D CT images showed good to excellent
intra-observer and inter-observer reliabilities (Table 2).
With age, external tibial torsion increased, while femoral
anteversion decreased (Table 3). Although femoral anteversion
decreased with age, the mean femoral anteversion
was 41.0° (95% CI, 39.2–42.7) at skeletal maturity.
Statistically significant factors affecting external tibial
torsion were age, GMFCS levels IV/V, hemiplegia, and
femoral anteversion. With a 1-year increase in age, external
tibial torsion increased by 0.29° (p < 0.0001). External
tibial torsion was 4.30° greater in GMFCS levels
IV and V than in GMFCS levels I and II (p < 0.0001).
Both involved and uninvolved sides of hemiplegic patients
were statistically significant factors affecting tibial
torsion, with the involved side showing 2.63° (p = 0.0471)
and the uninvolved side showing 3.87° (p = 0.0047)
greater external tibial torsion in hemiplegic patients than
in diplegic patients. Additionally, with 1° increase in
femoral anteversion, external tibial torsion increased by
0.08° (p = 0.0057) (Table 4).
In addition, factors affecting femoral anteversion were
age, GMFCS level, and uninvolved limb in hemiplegia.
With 1-year increase in age, femoral anteversion decreased
by 0.28° (p < 0.0001). Femoral anteversion was
3.03° higher in GMFCS level III than in GMFCS levels I
and II (p = 0.0036), whereas anteversion was 2.82° higher
in GMFCS levels IV and V than in GMFCS levels I and
II (p = 0.0029). The uninvolved side in hemiplegia was a
statistically significant factor. The uninvolved limb
showed 13.31° lower femoral anteversion in hemiplegic
patients than in diplegic patients (p < 0.0001).
Discussion
In this study, statistically significant factors affecting
both external tibial torsion and femoral anteversion were
age, GMFCS level, and hemiplegia. Femoral anteversion
itself was a risk factor of increased external tibial
torsion.
It is well-accepted knowledge that femoral anteversion
improves with age in typically developing children
(TDC) [14, 15]. Previous evidence from studies of hemiplegic
CP patients proved a pattern contrary to that of
TDC [16, 17]. This evidence was refuted in our study
with CP patients; the analyzed patients tended to show a
decrease in femoral anteversion as they aged, even in the
affected limbs of hemiplegic patients. Although the overall
pattern showed a decrease in femoral anteversion, the
remaining deformity was great even at skeletal maturity,
necessitating an interventional procedure to correct the
deformity. Previous evidence regarding TDC has shown
an increase in external tibial torsion as children age [15],
yet only a few studies examined the rotational profiles of
the tibia in patients with CP. Our study results showed
that external tibial torsion in CP patients also followed
the pattern seen in TDC, showing increase with age.
This pattern may be a developmental change, or it may
be a compensatory change to decreased femoral
anteversion.
In tibial torsion and femoral anteversion, patients in
GMFCS levels IV and V showed higher values than
those in GMFCS levels I and II. Previous studies have
shown that femoral anteversion and femoral neck-shaft
angle tend to be higher in patients in GMFCS levels IV
and V [3]. Our results are consistent with the findings of
previous studies, probably because of increased spasticity,
delay in motor development and weakness
expressed in patients with an aggravated functional status.
Our findings regarding hemiplegic patients are difficult
to explain. There is no evidence as to why
hemiplegic patients tended to show higher femoral anteversion
than diplegic patients. Further study is required
for a reasonable explanation of this phenomenon.
External tibial torsion tended to increase with increasing
femoral anteversion. This may be a compensatory
phenomenon to increase the femoral anteversion to
maintain neutral foot progression. The relationship between
pelvic external rotation as a result of increased
femoral anteversion has been proven in a previous study
[2]. Additionally, a study has shown that correction of
increased femoral anteversion also corrects the external
pelvic torsion [5, 18]. If external pelvic torsion is a
short-term compensatory mechanism of increased femoral
anteversion, it is our speculation that increased external
tibial torsion may be a long-term consequence of
increased femoral anteversion.
Excessive external tibial torsion causes torsional malalignment,
which impairs the functional lever arm needed
for adequate transfer of ground reaction force [1].
Missed external tibial torsion may also cause aggravation
of out-toeing gait after correction of increased femoral
anteversion. Tibial torsion shows lower validity between
physical examination and CT than does femoral anteversion
[7, 8]. Thus, it is challenging to evaluate the extent
of external tibial torsion solely using physical examination,
and an imaging study is crucial for evaluation.
Therefore, in patients with increased external tibial torsion
and risk factors, an imaging study is recommended
to assess the severity of external tibial torsion.
It is crucial to mention the limitations of our study.
First, the study had a retrospective design, and a uniform
protocol was not implemented. In addition, sex, age,
GMFCS level, and laterality at assessment could not be
unified; however, a linear mixed model was implemented
to overcome this limitation [10]. Second, selection bias
must be addressed in our study. The examined patients
had either clinically or physically suspected torsional
malalignment, which is why they underwent torsional
CT. Therefore, this study’s results may be applied to the
general population. However, our goal was to address
the presence of excessive tibial torsion in those expressing
rotational gait problems and to determine the risk
factors that contribute to this phenomenon. Thus, we
believe that even though our results may not be representative
of the general population, they are more relevant
to the setting where we see our patients in the
clinic. Third, this study is limited to evaluation of external
tibial torsion. Evaluation of internal tibial torsion has
not been done, which may foster future study. Fourth,
although we have observed statistically significant risk
factors of external tibial torsion, our results may not be
clinically significant. However, this study is to set evidence
for other clinicians that in patients with asserted
risk factors, follow-up of changes in external tibial torsion
should be performed along with femoral anteversion.
Fifth, although the landmarks we have used for
femoral anteversion and tibial torsion are set, the normal
reference values for these two landmarks in TDCs are
void. A future study may be conducted on setting the
refence of femoral anteversion and tibial torsion in
TDCs. Due to the cross-sectional nature of this study,
the severity of external tibial torsion according to each
age group could not be assessed. A future longitudinal
analysis may be done for further analysis on external tibial
torsion. Lastly, because we focused on external tibial
torsion, an analysis on pes planovalgus, a foot deformity
often co-exists with external tibial torsion, was excluded
in this study. Further study is needed to discuss relationship
between pes planovalgus and external tibial torsion.
Conclusions
Older age, GMFCS levels IV/V, hemiplegia, and increased
femoral anteversion are independent risk factors
of increased external tibial torsion in patients with CP.
Therefore, those with addressed risk factors of increased
external tibial torsion, a careful surveillance of external
tibial torsion is recommended.