Background
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) allows
serial blood pressure (BP) measurements over a 24-h
period. Compared to office BP measurement (OBPM),
ABPM is a stronger predictor of target organ damage
(TOD), cardiovascular (CV) events as well as all-cause
and CV mortality in hypertensive patients [1, 2]. The
normal BP profile follows a circadian pattern where
night-time values are at least 10% lower than daytime
values (dipping status). Blunting or absence of this physiologic
phenomenon (non-dipping status) is common in
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and has been associated
with decline of kidney function and progression of CV
diseases [3–5]. Whether dipping status is correlated to
adverse outcome independently of hypertension (HT)
and other confounders is debated as various studies
showed conflicting results [6–8].
HT is a frequent disorder in kidney transplant (KTX)
recipients and is regarded as a major risk factor for CV
disease, chronic allograft nephropathy and graft loss [9–
11]. As in the general population, HT is frequently misclassified
in KTX patients and ABPM has proved to be
a valuable tool in detecting white-coat HT, masked HT
and non-dipping status, which are highly prevalent after
successful transplantation [12–14]. Some studies previously
reported on the relationship between circadian BP
pattern and kidney function in KTX patients [15–17].
However, cross-sectional design and lack of adjustment
for potential confounders such as BP values and proteinuria
hampered definitive conclusions. Recently, the
longitudinal relationship between baseline ABPM readings
and evolution of estimated glomerular filtration rate
(eGFR) over a 3.7 year follow-up has been investigated in
260 KTX recipients [18]. Authors showed that 24 h, daytime
and night-time SBP were negatively associated with
eGFR decline. However, circadian BP patterns were not
considered and the evolution of eGFR over time was not
specifically described.
Based on current state of knowledge, we conducted a
longitudinal cohort study in order to i) characterize circadian
BP patterns measured by ABPM in KTX patients,
ii) compare OBPM and ABPM readings in this population
and iii) describe the evolution of eGFR over time
and its relationship with dipping status independently of
potential confounders.
Methods
Study design
We retrospectively screened adult KTX patients between
2003 and 2016 at a single tertiary hospital. During this
time period, 401 adults had a renal transplant. Of those,
140 (34.9%) had ABPM performed as part of their routine
follow-up. Inclusion criteria were i) ABPM available
after KTX, ii) a minimum of 2-year follow-up after
ABPM and iii) age ≥ 18. Exclusion criteria were i) unwilling
to participate, ii) multi-organ graft, iii) haemodialysis
or peritoneal dialysis and iv) pregnancy. At our institution,
post-transplant ABPM are not routinely ordered but
are instead requested by the attending physician based on
individual clinical appreciation.
Variables were longitudinally collected at four distinct
visits: T0 corresponded to discharge after transplant, T1
corresponded to ABPM while T2 and T3 corresponded
to subsequent follow-up visits, 1 and 2 years after ABPM
respectively. The time interval between T0 and T1 was
not predefined. The time interval between T1 and T2 as
well as T2 and T3 was 1 year. Thus, all included patients
had a 2-year follow-up.
Variables collection
All patients underwent a 24 h ABPM using a DIASYS
INTEGRA II monitor at T1. Cuff size was chosen based
on arm circumference. BP was recorded every 15 min
from 7 am to 10 pm and every 30 min from 10 pm to 7
am. Daytime and night-time periods were defined by
patient themselves according to their own daily schedule.
Measures validity intervals were as follows: Systolic BP
(SBP) > 50 mmHg and diastolic BP (DBP) > 30 mmHg and
< 150 mmHg [5].
Demographic characteristics, medical history, current
medication, OBPM and laboratory data were collected
at T0, T1, T2 and T3. Serum creatinine was analysed
by standard clinical laboratory method. Proteinuria was
estimated on a single urinary specimen. OBPM was
measured by oscillometric sphygmomanometer in the
seated position after a resting period of ≥ 5 min according
to European guidelines [19].
Renal ultrasound (US) was performed by experimented
radiologists as part of routine follow-up in a subset of
patients. Renal resistive index (RRI) were measured in
three segmental arteries (superior, middle and inferior).
Definitions
HT related definition were based on latest European
guidelines [19]. Thus, HT on ABPM was defined as 24-h
SBP ≥ 130 and/or DBP ≥ 80 mmHg. HT on OBPM was
defined as SBP ≥ 140 and/or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg. The terms
“white-coat”, “masked” and “sustained” HT were used in
untreated as well as treated patients. Dipping and nondipping
statuses were defined as BP night-time decline
of ≥ 10% and < 10% compared to daytime values, respectively
and independently of the presence of HT. eGFR
was estimated by the CKD-EPI equation using IDMS
measured creatinine [20]. In statistical analyses, the presence
HT was defined exclusively by related medication,
unless otherwise specified. The presence of diabetes and
dyslipidaemia were defined by related medication.
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables are expressed as mean ± standard
deviation (SD) or median (interquartile range) according
to distribution and categorical variables as number and
relative frequencies (%). Normality of distribution was
assessed graphically. No outliers were predefined. Variables
were compared between groups (dipping vs nondipping
status as well as low eGFR vs high eGFR) using
Student’s T test and Chi2 for continuous and categorical
variables respectively.
First, multivariate linear regressions were used with
eGFR at T1 as the dependent variable and systolic dipping
status as the main independent variable. The following
covariates were a priori selected as potential
confounders, based on prior scientific knowledge: gender,
age, body mass index (BMI), smoking, HT, diabetes,
graft vintage (corresponding to the timespan between
T0 and T1), proteinuria, donor type (deceased vs living),
past rejection, use of calcineurin inhibitors, use of steroid
and use of renin angiotensin aldosterone blocker. Then,
in longitudinal analysis, we considered repeated measures
over time (T1, T2, T3) and implemented multi-level
mixed effect analysis to account for inter-dependence
of data. The same above specified covariates were used
in longitudinal models. Patient identification was considered
as the grouping variable while random effects
were applied to time variable and intercept. Interaction
between ABPM parameter and time was considered in
every model. Modification effect was considered significant
if p-value for likelihood ratio test (LRT) comparing
models with and without interaction term was < 0.1
Sensitivity analyses were conducted considering i) HT
defined by ABPM values instead of related medication,
ii) diastolic and mean dipping status instead of systolic
dipping status and iii) systolic dip as continuous variable
instead of systolic dipping status as a binary variable.
For every model, linearity of relationship, normality of
residuals and homoscedasticity of residuals were assessed
graphically. Collinearity was assessed using the variance
inflation factors method. Log-normal variables were logtransformed
when used in regression models if necessary.
Data were considered to be missing completely at random
and therefore patients with any missing value were
excluded from the multivariate analyses. For every model,
results are presented as β coefficients and associated 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI) as well as p-values. A twosided
p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. Statistical
analyses were conducted using STATA version 15 (Stata-
Corp, 4905 Lakeway Drive, College Station, Texas 77845
USA) [21].
Results
Between 2003 and 2016, 401 adults had a renal transplant.
Of those, 140 (34.9%) had ABPM performed
as part of their routine follow-up. We excluded 17
patients: Eight for undocumented follow-up, one for
unavailable night-time ABPM, one for insufficient
ABPM quality and four because of missing values on
ABPM. Finally, three patients were excluded as they
required haemodialysis. Thus 123 (87.8%) patients
without missing values on ABPM were included in the
present analysis. Compared to renal transplant patients
who had an ABPM performed, those who did not have
an ABPM performed had similar mean age and proportion
of men: 52.8 ± 15.0 vs 50.7 ± 15.4, p = 0.20 and 63.0
vs 59.1%, p = 0.45 respectively.
Among included patients, 21 (17.3%) had no HT on
OBPM or ABPM, 13 (10.7%) had white-coat HT, 26
(21.4%) had masked HT and 61 (50.4%) had sustained
HT. Non-dipping status was present in 81 (65.8%) of
patients.
Patient’s characteristics according to systolic dipping
status at the time of ABPM (T1) are described in
Table 1. Median graft vintage at ABPM (corresponding
to the timespan between T0 and T1) was 2.5 (0.7 – 6.0)
years. Compared to the non-dipping group, dippers
had higher eGFR, lower prescription rate of CNI and
lower tacrolimus trough levels (p < 0.05 for all). Patients
tended to be younger and to have longer graft vintage
in the dipping group without reaching statistical significance.
Other considered characteristics were similar
between groups.
ABPM readings according to systolic dipping status at
T1 are described in Table 2. Systolic dip was 0.6 ± 6.9%
in non-dippers and 14.5 ± 3.5% in dippers. Preserved
systolic dipping status was associated with preserved
diastolic and mean dipping statuses (p < 0.001 for both).
Pearson correlation coefficients between systolic dippers
and diastolic dippers as well as between systolic dippers
and mean dippers were 62.7 and 82.9% respectively.
Compared to the non-dipping group, dippers had higher
diurnal MAP (p = 0.047) and lower nocturnal SBP, DBP
and MAP (p < 0.001 for all). Prevalence of HT was similar
between groups.
Median value of eGFR at T1 was 52.6 mL/min/1.73m2
in 126 patients without missing values on eGFR. Patient’s
characteristics according to median eGFR value at T1
are described in supplementary table 1. Compared to
patients with low eGFR, patients with high eGFR were
younger (p = 0.029), had less frequently HT (p = 0.010)
and had less frequently deceased donor (p = 0.024).
Other characteristics were similar between groups.
Relationship between dipping status and eGFR at T1:
cross‑sectional analysis
Proteinuria required log-transformation in regression
analyses. In univariate analysis, dipping status was positively
associated with eGFR at T1 (p = 0.013) and compared
to non-dippers, dippers had a 9.4 mL/min/1.73m2
higher eGFR. In multivariate analysis, dipping status was
positively associated with eGFR (p = 0.019) and compared
to non-dippers, dippers had a 10.1 mL/min/1.73m2
higher eGFR (Table 3). Age and proteinuria were negatively
associated with eGFR (p = 0.018 and 0.002 respectively).
Other covariates were not associated with eGFR.
Relationship between dipping status and eGFR over time:
longitudinal analysis
Mean follow-up after ABPM was 2.12 ± 0.45 years. In
univariate analysis, dipping status was positively associated
with eGFR (p = 0.012) and compared to nondippers,
dippers had a 9.1 mL/min/1.732 higher eGFR.
An interaction between time and dipping status was
present (p = 0.085 for LRT): eGFR slope was -0.3 mL/
min/1.73m2/year in non-dippers (p = 0.59) and -2.4 mL/
min/1.73m2/year in dippers (p = 0.010). eGFR evolution
over time between dippers and non-dippers is
illustrated in Fig. 1. In multivariate analysis, dipping
status was positively associated with eGFR (p = 0.009)
and compared to non-dippers, dippers had a 10.48 mL/
min/1.73m2 higher eGFR (Table 4). Interaction between
time and dipping status was not significant (p = 0.17 for
LRT) and eGFR slopes were thus not different between
dippers and non-dippers. HT was negatively associated
with eGFR (p = 0.003). Other covariates were not associated
with eGFR.
Sensitivity analyses
HT defined by ABPM values instead of related medication
was substituted in the final multivariate model.
Dipping status remained positively associated with eGFR
(p = 0.005). HT based on ABPM definition was negatively
associated with eGFR (p = 0.019).
Diastolic and mean dipping status instead of systolic
dipping status were substituted in the final multivariate
model. Mean and diastolic dipping statuses were
positively associated with eGFR (p = 0.029 and p = 0.010
respectively).
Systolic dip as continuous variable instead of systolic
dipping as a binary variable was substituted in the final
multivariate model. Systolic dip was not associated with
eGFR (p = 0.06).
Discussion
In this longitudinal study, we described circadian BP patterns
in KTX recipients, compared OBPM and ABPM
value in this setting and identified systolic dipping status
as a major determinant of kidney function.
In our cohort, prevalence of HT when combining
OBPM and ABPM measurement was 82.6%. Prevalence
of HT based on ABPM only was 71.9%. Those numbers
are in agreement with previous studies where HT has
been reported to affect as many as 80% of KTX recipients
depending on BP measurement modality [22].
Non-dipping status was present in 65.8% of our patients.
Again, similar studies found comparable results [12, 14].
Systolic, diastolic and mean dipping statuses were wellcorrelated
and systolic dippers tended to be mean and
diastolic dippers as well. Finally, dipping status was not
associated with the presence of HT on ABPM in our
cohort and dippers were as likely as non-dippers to have
HT. This absence of a direct relationship between HT
and dipping status was also highlighted in CKD patients
where non-dippers with controlled BP were almost as
prevalent as non-dippers with HT [8].
Globally, systolic dipping status and the presence of HT
were independently associated with eGFR in our study
on KTX recipients, while other traditional determinants
of kidney function were not as important.
Relationship between dipping status and kidney function
Circadian BP patterns have been extensively studied in
non-KTX patients. In 48 HT CKD patients followed by
Timio et al., non-dippers had faster rates of renal function
decline and higher proteinuria compared to dippers
over a 3-year follow-up [23]. In 322 patients referred for
ABPM, Davidson et al. found that eGFR remained stable
among dippers over a 3.2 year follow-up but declined
among non-dippers independently of SBP load [4]. The
same year, Agarwal et al. reported on 217 CKD patients
followed during 3.5 years where non-dipping status was
an independent predictor of end-stage renal disease
[24]. Finally, McMullan et al. found that nocturnal dipping
was associated with a decreased risk of incident
CKD over a 8.1 year follow-up in 603 Afro-American
patients with normal renal function [25]. As these studies
globally concluded that dipping status was an independent
determinant of renal function over time, some
evidences suggest that such a relationship does not exist.
As such, Gabbai et al. noted that, although 24 h SBP was
associated with subsequent renal and CV outcomes, dipping
status did not per se predict progression of renal
disease in 617 Afro-American with HT CKD [26]. Likewise,
two similar successive studies were published by
another group enrolling 676 and 1′107 CKD patients
with two and 4.7-year follow-up periods respectively [6,
8]. Authors generally concluded that non-dipping pattern
with normotension did not predict the future incidence
of renal outcomes.
In KTX patients, description of BP patterns is much
more sparse. Successful KTX is generally thought to
improve circadian BP profile in the long term [27, 28].
The impact of these profiles and renal function is however
less well defined. In an early study, Kooman et al.
described a relationship between nightly decrease in
MAP and kidney function in 36 renal recipients [15].
Cross-sectional design and absence of adjustment for
potential confounders however hampered conclusions.
Haydar et al. conducted a similar study on 177 patients
where SBP circadian variation was associated with eGFR
[16]. The same limitations were found although a limited
set of covariates was considered. Later, Wadei et al.
described an association between nocturnal fall in SBP
and eGFR at 1 year after KTX in 119 patients [17]. This
study was however cross-sectional in nature and very few
potential confounders were considered. The same group
focused on a sub-group of 36 of these patients who had
a 3 to 4-year follow-up [29]. They found that the importance
of nocturnal fall in SBP at 1 year was related to
eGFR at last follow-up while adjusting for donor age and
office SBP.
The main finding of our study is the strong and independent
association between preserved systolic dipping
status and improved renal function in KTX patients over
a 2-year follow-up. Compared to previous publications
on KTX patients, our study differs on several aspects.
First, owing to the longitudinal design, we implemented
multi-level mixed effect analysis in order to account for
repeated collection of data. By adding subject-specific
random intercept and slope effects to the population
average, these models permit quantification of subject
heterogeneity [30]. Moreover, this methodology allows
comparison of eGFR slopes, recently recognized as a
valid surrogate end point and likely more useful than
time-to-event analysis for short follow-up with high
baseline eGFR [31]. Second, an extensive set of potential
confounders was a priori selected for multivariate analysis.
This is of prime importance in this field as several factors,
particularly BP control and proteinuria, were shown
to confound the intricate relationship between dipping
status and renal function. As an example, Agarwal et al.
found that non-dipping status was predictive of CV
events in a prospective cohort of 217 CKD patients [7].
However, this relationship disappeared when adjusted
for proteinuria or clinic BP. In our study, a preserved dipping
status was associated with a higher eGFR independently
of potential confounders. The presence of HT was
the only other significant determinant of renal function
in longitudinal analysis. However, it is worth noting that
not only did dipping status maintain its association with
renal function beyond intensity of BP control but also its
effect size on eGFR was comparable to that of HT itself.
A recent study by Mallamaci et al. was designed similarly
to ours as the authors reported on the impact of baseline
ABPM on subsequent renal function over a 3.7-year follow-
up in a cohort of 260 KTX recipients [18]. In multivariate
analysis, 24 h, daytime and night-time absolute
BP values were negatively associated with eGFR. However,
this crude description of main ABPM components
gave no specific information about a potential impact
of circadian BP patterns or dipping status. Moreover,
although presented analyses account for elapsed time,
eGFR slopes are not depicted. The purpose of this study
was thus rather different than ours and results are not
directly comparable.
Finally, in previous studies, whether alteration in circadian
BP profile was the cause or the consequence of kidney
function decline was not entirely clear. In our study,
although dippers had higher eGFR compared to non-dippers
overall, differences seemed most striking at T1 when
ABPM was recorded. eGFR slope analysis confirmed that
dippers had a faster rate of function decline compared
to non-dippers in univariate analysis. When considering
potential confounders however, kidney function decline
rates were similar between groups. This type of time trajectory
is in agreement with the underlying physiological
assumption that correlation between dipping status
on a single ABPM assessment and induced TOD should
be maximal at the time of initial measurement to then
decrease during follow-up owing to the low reproducibility
of circadian patterns over time [32]. As a matter of
fact, any inter-group comparison in a follow-up study is
based on dipping classification defined at baseline ABPM
that does not necessarily represent actual dipping status
at later time points. In a previous study on CKD patients
with established diabetic nephropathy, time trajectories
of renal function according to dipping status were similar
to ours [33]. Globally, those findings are thus in favour of
a causal effect of dipping status on renal function and not
the other way around. It has to be noted that Wadei et al.
described the opposite phenomenon in their longitudinal
study where the association between dipping status
and renal function was inexistent at initial evaluation but
became significant during follow-up [29]. This apparent
paradox is however not incompatible with our results.
First, compared to our study, minimal adjustment only
was considered and those results could represent residual
confounding. Second, ABPM was conducted 1-year post
transplant in their cohort while median graft vintage at
ABPM was 2.5 years in our study. Thus, the longer time
span between transplant and initial evaluation in our
study could have allowed sufficient influence of established
circadian BP patterns to impact renal function.
Limitations
Our study has limitations that should be considered
when interpreting the results. First, the observational
nature of the design hampers definitive conclusions
on causal relationship between considered variables.
Namely, as the interplay between dipping status (and
more generally BP control) and renal function is intricate,
reverse causality should be considered. While the
longitudinal design, statistical methodology and pathophysiologic
considerations could indicate a causal effect
of circadian BP patterns on renal function, a reverse
impact of eGFR on dipping status is possible. Second,
as in most similar studies, a single ABPM measurement
was conducted. Longitudinal evaluation could thus be
hampered by the intrinsic moderate reproducibility of
dipping categorization. We believe however that our
findings were discussed in the light of this phenomenon.
Third, the rather limited sample size prevented
us to further investigate specific sub-group of patients
and to detect potential association with smaller effect
size. However, achieved statistical power was by definition
sufficient to investigate our primary objective as
attested by the highly significant and robust associations
presented. Fourth, as a fraction only of screened
KTX patients had ABPM performed, selection bias
cannot be excluded. Excluded patients were however
similar to those included. Finally, the number of donor
characteristics considered in our study was limited, as
ethics regulation does not allow documentation of such
data in medical records at our institution.
Conclusion
In conclusion, we confirm that non-dipping status is
highly prevalent in KTX patients while not necessarily
associated with the presence of HT. Moreover, we suggest
that systolic dipping status could be a major determinant
of renal function in KTX patients. This relationship was
independent of major potential confounders, including
HT and proteinuria. The only other determinant of
renal function was the presence of HT itself, in agreement
with prior knowledge in non-KTX patients. Posttransplant
ABPM should be offered to all KTX recipients
as a screening tool, even in those with controlled OBPM.
Whether modification of dipping status by chronotherapy
would preserve renal function cannot be inferred
from our results and remains to be tested in clinical trials.