Introduction
Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is the most common
complication in patients exposed to long-term hyperglycaemia
[1]. In China, the prevalence of DKD is rising
dramatically. Diabetes-related chronic kidney disease
(CKD) has overtaken glomerulonephritis as the leading
cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) [2]. Studies have
shown that patients with diabetes in Asia are younger
than those in Western countries and are more likely to
develop ESRD [3, 4]. However, there are still few biomarkers
to predict the progression of DKD to ESRD [5].
Although clinical risk factors, including albuminuria and
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) [6], are most
commonly used to predict the progression to ESRD,
there is still a lack of pathologic markers, such as those
associated with the Oxford classification of IgA nephropathy
[7–11], partly because the proportion of patients
who receive kidney biopsies remains drastically
lower than that of patients with primary
glomerulonephritis.
In 2010, the Research Committee of the Renal Pathology
Society (RPS) developed a pathologic classification
system of diabetic nephropathy [12]. However, the connections
of pathological lesions with renal prognosis
have not been fully established. An evidence-based approach
is needed to better define pathologic lesions
within the classification of the DKD spectrum, including
the significance of vascular damage. Some studies have
suggested that Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules have a
higher risk of ESRD than diffuse DKD [13], while others
have found segmental sclerosis and extracapillary hypercellularity
to be poor prognostic indicators for ESRD
[14, 15]. Thus, the prognostic significance of pathological
parameters in DKD remains controversial [16].
DKD is a common vascular complication of diabetes.
Renal ischaemia and endothelial injury play important
roles in the pathological processes that promote renal fibrosis
and CKD [17–19]. Although the DKD pathologic
classification of RPS takes into account and defines renal
vascular damage, its prognostic value has not yet been
proven [14, 15]. Because the original arteriosclerosis
score for DKD classification was based on the worst artery,
this classification only considered the severity of
the injured artery but not the proportion of the damaged
arteries of all counted arteries.
In the current study, we hypothesized that the proportion
of damaged arteries to all arteries in the tissue may
contribute to the prognosis of DKD. To validate the significance
of renal artery damage in the prediction of
renal outcomes of DKD, we employed dual immunoperoxidase
staining to better identify arteries with or without
lesions and developed a modified arteriosclerosis
score for the severity and proportion of all counted arteries.
Nomograms were then used to predict the risks
of DKD with all clinical characteristics as well as the
pathological score [20–22].
Methods
Study design and population
This was a multi-centre, retrospective study of patients
with DKD diagnosed by renal pathology. Patients were
enrolled between January 2010 and July 2017 from three
hospitals (Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital,
Wenzhou Central Hospital and Wenzhou People’s Hospital).
Of the 174 patient-included cohorts, 135 patients
were eventually enrolled. The exclusion criteria included
patients with DKD coincident with other patterns of kidney
injury and inadequate renal tissue samples (renal tissue
section should contain at least 10 glomeruli) [12].
All demographic and clinical data were carefully documented
from electronic medical clinical records of three
hospitals. Demographics included age at the time of biopsy
and sex. Clinical parameters collected included
body mass index (BMI), blood pressure, hypertension,
diabetic retinopathy (DR), diabetes duration, smoking,
glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) level, total cholesterol
(Chol) level, serum albumin (ALB) level, urine protein
(UPRO) level, eGFR, follow-up time, and follow-up
serum creatinine (sCr) level. Hypertension was considered
in patients with systolic blood pressure greater than
140 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure greater than 90
mmHg or antihypertensive drug administration. DR was
defined as the presence of any characteristic lesion as
described by the International Clinical Diabetic Retinopathy
Disease Severity Scale, which is a grading standard
designed according to the Wisconsin Epidemiologic
Study of Diabetic Retinopathy (WESDR). Hyperuricaemia
was defined as serum uric acid ≥420 μmol/L in
males or ≥ 360 μmol/L in females. Urinary protein was
expressed in g per 24 h. The eGFR was estimated using
the creatinine-based Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology
Collaboration equation [23].
Outcomes
The clinical outcomes were considered to evaluate the
predictive value of renal pathology variables, ESRD (i.e.,
haemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis for ESRD, or kidney
transplantation), or all-cause death. The follow-up time
was defined as the duration from renal biopsy to ESRD
or all-cause death [24, 25], the date of last patient contact,
or the study end date of July 2017.
Pathology evaluation
All renal biopsies were performed and processed by
standard techniques [24, 25]. The diagnosis of DKD was
completed with the findings of light microscopy, immunofluorescence
microscopy and electron microscopy
as well as supportive clinical information. Any coexisting
disorders were reviewed to rule out other accompanying
glomerular diseases. In addition, dual immunohistochemistry
of the paraffin sections with an antibody
against α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA, NCL-L-SMA,
Aq-meditech, China) and an antibody against CD31
(NCL-L-CD31–607, Aq-meditech, China), which is an
endothelial marker, was performed to highlight the
arteries.
Glomerular lesions and interstitial lesions were scored
according to the DKD pathologic classification issued by
RPS [24, 25]. For vascular lesions of DKD, a modified arteriosclerosis
score and modified arteriolar hyalinosis
score [26] were employed on dual immunoperoxidase
staining sections, which could be more convenient to
distinguish arterial damage. In addition, the thickness of
the basement membrane under electron microscopy was
added as one of the pathological characteristics.
To assess the proportion of all involved arteries distributed
in the tissues, severe arteriosclerosis, which was
defined as arteries with thickening exceeding the intima
thickness, to all arteries in sections was calculated. Since
the proportion of severe arteriosclerosis was a continuous
variable, X-tile software was used to find the best
cut-off value and convert it to hierarchical data [27, 28].
Eventually, the optimal cut-off value for the proportion
of severe arteriosclerosis was defined as 50%. We scored
extent of arteriosclerosis together as a percentage of the
total involved arteries of all severe arteriosclerosis. A
score of 0 was assigned when the biopsy specimen
showed no arteriosclerosis, a score of 1 was assigned
when less than 50% severe arteriosclerosis was present,
and a score of 2 was assigned when more than 50% severe
arteriosclerosis was present. RPS glomerular class,
IFTA, interstitial inflammation, arteriolar hyalinosis
score, and arteriolar hyalinosis score were determined
following standard procedures [24, 25].
Without knowledge of the clinical outcomes, two experienced
nephropathologists (Qifeng Jiang and Yifan
Zhang) were assigned to independently evaluate and
score light microscopy slides. Pathological scoring disagreements
were resolved by consensus.
Statistical analyses
Variables with a normal distribution are presented as the
means and standard deviations and were subjected to
unpaired Student’s t-test between groups, one-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) in multiple groups, or Pearson’s
test for correlation analysis. Nonparametric
variables are presented as the medians and interquartile
ranges (IQR) and were analysed with the Mann–Whitney
test between groups, Kruskal–Wallis test in multiple
groups, or Spearman rank correlation test. Categorical
variables were expressed as percentages and compared
using the Pearson χ2 test.
The modified arteriosclerosis score cut-off value was
analysed using the X-tile plot [28]. Survival analysis for
renal survival or death was performed using Kaplan-
Meier (KM) survival curves with log-rank tests and the
Cox proportional hazards model to identify the potential
association between clinical and pathologic variables and
outcomes. Variables with a significance of P < 0.1 in the
univariate models were included in the multivariable
models [29]. Three multivariable models were established,
and the first multivariable model (the “Clinical
Model”) included only those clinical variables significant
to P < 0.1 in the univariate models. The second multivariable
model (the “Pathological Model”) included only
those pathological variables significant to P < 0.1 in the
univariate models. The “Fully Risk-Adjustment Model”
incorporated clinical variables significant at P < 0.05 in
the clinical model, as well as pathological variables significant
at P < 0.05 in the pathological model. Then, the
AUCs of different risk variables and two models in predicting
RS were estimated using time-dependent receiver
operating curves (ROCs).
To estimate median and individual postdiagnosis renal
survival probabilities at 1, 3, and 5 years, a nomogram
was constructed based on the “Fully Risk-Adjustment
Model” [20]. Validation of the prediction model was performed
using two parameters: discrimination and calibration
[30]. Discrimination was measured by the
concordance index (C-index), whereas calibration was
evaluated using a calibration plot. By convention, a concordance
index of less than 0.6 indicates poor discrimination,
0.60–0.75 indicates possibly helpful
discrimination, and more than 0.75 indicates outstanding
discrimination [30].
All tests used were two-sided, with a P-value < 0.05
considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses
were performed using X-tile software version 3.6.1
(http://tissuearray.org), GraphPad Prism 7 software
(GraphPad Software) or R version 3.6.3 (Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; http://www.Rproject.
org/).
Results
Clinical characteristics at presentation and during followup
Of 174 patients with biopsy-proven DKD, 37 patients
were excluded due to coincidence with other kidney diseases,
and 2 patients were excluded due to inadequate
tissue samples. Finally, 135 patients were enrolled in this
study. The mean number of glomeruli for each biopsy
specimen was 21.07 ± 9.7. During the 21-month followup
(interquartile range, 15–38 months) [31], 10 patients
(7.4%) lost connection, 57 patients (42.2%) developed
ESRD, 5 individuals (3.7%) died before reaching ESRD,
and 9 individuals (6.7%) died after progression to ESRD.
The flowchart of the study is shown in Fig. 1.
The baseline clinical data of 135 DKD patients are
listed in Table 1. The average age of the enrolled participants
at baseline was 52.13 ± 10.42 years, and the majority
of patients were male (71.9%), with a BMI of 24.74 ±
3.88 kg/m2. The median duration of diabetes was 7 (3–
11) years, with HbA1c of 7.72 ± 3.88%, SBP of 157.12 ±
25.92mmHg, and total cholesterol of 5.89 (4.9–6.81)
mmol/L. The median urine protein at enrolment was
4.52 (2.45–7.66) g/24 h, with a median baseline eGFR of
45 (29–70) ml/min per 1.73m2.
The pathological characteristics of the patients are tabulated
in Table 2.
As depicted in Fig. 2, the proportion of severe arteriosclerotic
lesions exhibited a correlation with glomerular
classification (r = 0.28, P<0.012) and IFTA (r = 0.39, P<
0.001) (Fig. 3a and b). In glomerular class IV, the proportion
of severe arteriosclerosis was higher than in
other classes, but there was no significant difference between
class IIb and class III. In some cases, the severity
of arteriosclerosis of class III was not more severe than
that of class IIb (Figs. 2 and 3a). IFTA is more closely related
to arteriosclerosis, and a continuous increase in
progressive fibrosis parallels the increase in the proportion
of severe arteriosclerosis (Fig. 3a and b).
Figure 4 shows the correlation between the proportion
of severe atherosclerosis and clinical variables. The
proportion of severe atherosclerosis was significantly
negatively correlated with baseline eGFR (r = − 0.285,
P = 0.001) but significantly positively correlated with
urine protein (r = 0.213, P = 0.013), SBP (r = 0.305, P =
0.000), and age (r = 0.221, P = 0.010). Univariable and
multivariable Cox regression analyses were used to explore
the association between clinical characteristics and
renal survival (ESRD or death). Only clinical variables
that showed significance in the univariate analysis (P <
0.1) were included in the multivariable clinical model.
The only clinical variables to remain significant in the
multivariable clinical model were baseline eGFR, urine
proteinuria and albumin (Table 3).
As shown in Table 4, univariate analysis of pathological
factors revealed that RPS glomerular class
(hazard ratio, HR: 2.24, 95% confidence interval, CI:
1.47–3.40), IFTA (HR: 2.44, CI: 1.61–3.69), arteriosclerosis
score (HR: 2.14, CI: 1.26–3.63) and modified
arteriosclerosis score (HR: 4.15, CI: 2.35–7.36) were
significantly associated with renal survival. KM survival
curve for renal survival was performed. Higher
RPS glomerular class (Fig. 5a, P = 0.00026), IFTA
(Fig. 5b, P < 0.0001), arteriosclerosis score (Fig. 5c, P
= 0.0035) and modified arteriosclerosis score (Fig. 5d,
P < 0.0001) were correlated with shorter RS time in
DKD patients.
Pathological variables with P < 0.05 in univariate analysis
were also used to construct two multivariable
models. In the pathological model, only RPS glomerular
class and IFTA were statistically significant if RPS glomerular
class (HR: 1.72, CI: 1.153–2.57), IFTA (HR: 1.96,
CI: 1.26–3.06) or arteriosclerosis scores (HR: 1.29, CI:
0.73–2.29) were included. However, if the modified arteriosclerosis
score (HR: 2.21, CI: 1.18–4.13) was used
instead of the arteriosclerosis score in the model, all
three variables were statistically significant. In the second
multivariable model, clinical features (baseline
eGFR, urine proteinuria and albumin) and RPS glomerular
class, IFTA or modified arteriosclerosis score were
included. The full risk-adjustment model showed that
only baseline eGFR (HR: 0.97, CI: 0.96–0.98), urine proteinuria
(HR: 1.10, CI: 1.04–1.17) and modified arteriosclerosis
score (HR: 2.01, CI: 1.10–3.67) were
independently associated with RS. The forest plot in
Fig. 6 shows the results of the stepwise model selection
for time to renal survival using multivariable Cox
regression.
Figures S1 and S2 show the AUCs of different risk variables
and two models (pathological model and full riskadjustment
model) for RS at 24 months after the start of
follow-up using time-dependent ROC analysis. In the
comparison of individual factors, eGFR showed the highest
correlation with RS, with an AUC of 0.81 (95% CI:
0.71–0.92). The full risk-adjustment model had stronger
predictive power than the pathological model after correction
for multiple factors.
A prognostic nomogram for 1-, 3-, and 5-year RS was
established (Fig. 7a). Baseline eGFR, urine proteinuria
and modified arteriosclerosis score, which were shown
to be independent predictors for renal survival in the
multivariable Cox regression analysis, were included in
the nomogram.
In terms of discrimination, the C-index for renal survival
was 0.82 (95% CI: 0.75–0.87). The calibration curve
for the probability of survival at 1, 3 or 5 years after biopsy
showed optimal agreement between the prediction
by the nomogram and the actual observation (Fig. 7b-d).
According to the calibration curve, the predicted survival
probabilities at 1, 3 and 5 years were in line with the actual
survival probability, and the confidence interval
intersected with the 45° diagonal. In addition, the confidence
interval of some prediction probabilities was very
wide, which indicated that the sample size needs to be
increased for further assessment.
Discussion
Herein is a detailed study of the association of advanced
vascular lesions and clinical outcomes in patients
with biopsy-proven DKD. With respect to the
first research question, we found that the proportion
of severe arteriosclerosis was an independent predictor
of clinical progression to ESRD for DKD patients.
In lupus nephritis and IgA nephropathy, some
studies have supported vascular lesions as independent
risk factors for predicting renal disease progression
[32–35]. Although the pathological classification
of DKD included the vascular score in the original literature,
the authors did not validate the relationship
between vascular lesions and renal prognosis [12].
Furthermore, we found that studies implementing
specific analyses based on the correlation of renal vascular
lesions and renal prognosis were scarce.
Yu An et al. [36] studied more than 300 patients
with type 2 DKD confirmed by biopsy and found that
vascular lesion scores demonstrated no association
with renal outcomes. However, a different study demonstrated
that the presence of arteriolar hyalinosis
and arteriosclerosis were associated with renal replacement
therapy (RRT) initiation in univariate
analyses, although there was no statistical significance
in multivariable analyses [37]. The original classification
of arteriosclerosis in DKD only assessed the most
severe arteriosclerosis but did not assess the proportion
of the arteries involved. This may have caused
sampling error, and we therefore revised the new
scoring systems for vascular lesions to highlight the
extent of involvement throughout the tissue. In our
study, we found that the higher the proportion of severe
arteriosclerosis was, the poorer the baseline renal
function, and the more rapidly the creatinine level
progressed in the future. Similar to previous research
on lupus nephritis, we also found that the proportion
of arteriosclerosis was associated with proteinuria.
Therefore, we established a new arteriosclerosis score
based on the proportion of severe arteriosclerosis.
In the present study, the original arteriosclerosis score
was a risk factor in univariate analysis but not in multivariable
analysis (Fig. 5c, Table 4). However, univariate and
multivariable analyses demonstrated that the modified arteriosclerosis
score was an independent factor for prognosis
in DKD (Fig. 5d, Fig. 6, and Table 4). Compared with
the previous scoring system, we believe the new scoring
system can distinguish DKD, which is more likely to
worsen. Bohle et al. [38] described that increases in vascular
disease correlated with more severe glomerular disease.
Gambara et al. [39] also described different renal patterns
in diabetic patients that led to renal dysfunction, a subset
of which was due to significant vascular sclerosis. Salvatore
et al. [40] proposed that the spectrum of ischaemic
glomerular disease and podocyte injury may depend on
the degree and duration of micro- and macrovascular occlusion
and that severe vascular changes in diabetic nephropathy
lead to hypoxic injury.
Arteriolar hyalinosis is another indicator of vascular
lesions. We also modified this scoring system; however,
neither the original indicator nor the improved
indicator was statistically significant in our study.
This result is controversial, however, because some
studies have suggested that, similar to the role of hyaline
arteriolosclerosis in renal transplantation [41, 42],
this pathological feature is associated with the progression
of diabetic kidney disease [40]. This
phenomenon might be associated with the prevalence
of severe arteriolar hyalinosis in our DKD cohort.
More than one vessel of moderate to severe arteriolar
hyalinosis was commonly observed in 88.9% of patients
with diabetic nephropathy, suggesting that this
index in the classification was incapable of discriminating
lesions with various severities for our cohort.
This result was similar to a previous study [36].
Glomerular lesions are the most characteristic
pathologic changes of DKD. Although the glomerular
classification of RPS aims to help reveal the progression
of DKD, its prognostic value remains to be verified.
In their recent study on patients with biopsy
confirmed DKD, Mottl et al. [14] found that glomerular
pathologic classification had statistical significance
for predicting renal prognosis only in the single-factor
analysis; however, it was not statistically significant in
the multifactor analysis. Two other research teams
also reported that the renal prognostic significance of
the glomerular pathologic classification lost power
after multivariate correction [16, 43]. In contrast, several
studies have shown a significant correlation between
the RPS DKD classification and decreased GFR
after multivariate correction [36, 44–46]. With regard
to tubulointerstitial lesions, studies conducted by An
Yu et al. [36] and Mise et al. [46] suggested that the
IFTA score is an independent risk factor for renal
prognosis of diabetic nephropathy, but the research
conducted by Mottl et al. [14] suggested that IFTA has
no statistical significance for renal prognosis of DKD.
In our study, glomerular lesions and IFTA were statistically
significant in both univariate and pathological
models but not after adjustment for proteinuria, eGFR,
serum albumin levels, or arteriosclerosis.
On the basis of previous work, we established a novel
user-friendly renal survival prediction model built on
three key parameters (urine protein, eGFR and modified
arteriosclerosis score) and provided a prognostic nomogram
and score [20]. As a tool to predict clinical prognosis,
nomograms are widely used in oncology and other
medical aspects to help clinical decision-making. Nomograms
satisfied our need for an integrated biological and
clinical model to realize the goal of personalized medicine;
thus, it is reasonable to predict renal prognosis of
DKD with a nomogram. The present work revealed considerable
heterogeneity among DKD patients regarding
their renal survival risk profiles. Our nomogram could
provide the nephrologist with a precise probability of
renal survival in patients with DKD and might offer an
opportunity to define risk-adapted strategies for DKD
management in the future.
Our study has multiple strengths. The main strength
of our study is that we illustrated the modified arteriosclerosis
score vascular lesion as an independent
marker of time to diabetic ESRD with a modified definition.
Our method could identify DKD patients with
a worse prognosis. Furthermore, the new immunohistochemical
method we performed showed more comprehensive
characteristics of vascular lesions than
conventional staining, which may be used as a reference
for the pathological score of DKD in the future.
Third, our study was constructed in the framework of
a multicentre cohort study with a broad spectrum of
parameters available at diagnosis. Multicentre studies
can better represent real-world heterogeneity and are
more generalizable than single-centre studies. Moreover,
we created a nomogram for DKD patients to
help nephrologists make clinical decisions. Nomograms
have the ability to generate an individual probability
of a clinical event by integrating diverse
prognostic and determinant variables, which meets
our desire for biologically and clinically integrated
models and fulfils our drive towards personalized
medicine. Finally, the blinded evaluation of renal biopsy
is another strength of this study.
Despite these strengths, some limitations must be considered
when interpreting our findings. First, it was a
retrospective study. However, all end points were based
on objectively measured laboratory values that reduced
the chance for bias. Second, it was a small sample size.
Therefore, our findings are hypothetical and need to be
reexamined with a larger data set. Third, we did not
evaluate the therapeutic interventions during follow-up,
which may have had miscellaneous impacts on renal
prognosis. Finally, histologic changes were assessed
based on a simple classification, but diabetic glomerulopathy
is far more complicated.
In conclusion, we present here a novel renal survival
prediction model based on three key independent prognostic
factors. Other studies are required to determine
whether the modified arteriosclerosis score can be applied
as a novel, independent marker of time to ESRD
for DKD patients. The prognostic nomogram and the
score proposed may help offer the opportunity to define
risk-adapted strategies for DKD management in the
future.
