Background
Sepsis is a major global cause of high morbidity and
mortality for critically ill patients [1] with a continuously
increasing incidence [2]. Besides, sepsis is an enormous
burden, accounting for ∼850,000 emergency visits per
year and up to 381,000 annual related deaths in the USA
[2, 3]. Sepsis can lead to various complications. For
instance, SA-AKI is a common and severe complication
of sepsis that meets consensus criteria for both sepsis
and AKI [4], indicating multiple organ dysfunction and
significant poor clinical outcomes [5, 6]. Noteworthy,
sepsis is associated with up to 50 % of AKI [7], and up to
60 % of patients with sepsis have AKI [8]. Among
critically ill patients with SA-AKI, the mortality rates
range from 38.2 to 70.2 % [8, 9]. Nevertheless, so far, no
single effective therapy has been reported to change the
outcome of SA-AKI [10]. Notably, early diagnosis and
treatment improve the long-term outcome of patients.
Therefore, early identification of high-risk patients is
important for AKI prevention [11].
SA-AKI is diagnosed based on specific, contextdependent,
and imperfect definitions, besides, an increase
in serum creatinine or a decline in urine output remains
its key diagnostic criteria [12]. Accumulating knowledge
has highlighted the clinical risk factors, pathobiology,
response to treatment, and elements of renal recovery
thereby improving the prevention, detection, and treatment
of SA-AKI [4]. Nonetheless, the pathogenesis of SAAKI
remains completely unclear and its risk factors
emerge from various sources, making it a major clinical
challenge in early detection [13, 14]. Despite many novel
biomarkers related to the early diagnosis and prognosis of
SA-AKI being reported, few are applied in clinical practice
[15]. Recent studies have used the patient and disease
characteristics of AKI to identify patients with an increased
risk, however, most of them have not integrated
these with clinical prediction models [16–19]. Other studies
have developed risk assessment models for AKI in
patients based on patient and disease characteristics alone
[20, 21], yet few have been developed for SA-AKI. As
such, there is an urgent need for a more modern framework
for rapid clinical diagnosis of SA-AKI.
A nomogram is a reliable tool that predicts and quantifies
risk for a clinical event by creating a visualized
graph of the predictive model based on relevant factors
[22, 23]. Herein, we identified a combination of routinely
available clinical variables for a highly precise prediction
of SA-AKI in critically ill patients.
Methods
Database
Retrospectively, data were extracted from the MIMIC-III
database (version 1.4), a large US-based, publicly available
critical care database [24]. The MIMIC-III (v1.4)
database included unidentified health-related data of 61,
532 ICU stays at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
between June 2001 and October 2012. The
establishment of MIMIC-III (v1.4) was approved by the
institutional review boards of the Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center (Boston, MA) and Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA), thus, this
study was granted a waiver of informed consent. One
author (L-H F) completed the online training course of
the National Institutes of Health (certification number
35,897,462) to access the MIMIC-III (v1.4).
Participants
Adult patients (≥ 18 years old) diagnosed with sepsis
identified from the International Classification of
Diseases 9th Edition (ICD-9) code were selected from
the MIMIC-III v1.4 database. Patients with AKI before
admission to the ICU were excluded. For patients with
more than one ICU stay, only the first ICU admission of
each patient was analyzed.
A pre-seeded random number (123) generator in R
software (version 3.6.2) was used to determine the
grouping. Finally, the patients were randomly divided
into primary (n = 2012) and validation (n = 859) cohorts
based on the ratio of 7:3.
Data extraction
Data extraction was performed using PostgreSQL tools
(V.1.13.1). The following information was extracted directly
or calculated using data from the database: Age, gender,
body mass index (BMI), Systemic inflammatory score
(SIRS), laboratory variables, chronic medical conditions,
comorbidities, length of stay in the intensive care unit, the
time of AKI, administration of drugs. Laboratory variables
including hemoglobin, platelet counts, glucose, serum
creatinine, and albumin were measured during the first
24 h in the ICU. Chronic medical conditions included
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic
kidney disease (CKD), diabetes, coronary disease, malignant,
chronic liver disease, and hypertension. Comorbidities
included acute pancreatitis, lactic acidosis, heart failure, and
hypotension. Notably, comorbidities and chronic medical
conditions were collected based on the recorded ICD-9
codes in the MIMIC-III database. The drugs administrated
to patients included vasoactive drugs, diuretic, aminoglycosides,
lactated Ring, and human albumin. Variables associated
with the risk of SA-AKI were assessed a priori based
on scientific knowledge, clinical importance, and predictors
identified in previously published articles [9, 14, 25].
Definitions and outcomes
AKI during ICU stay was the primary outcome. AKI was
defined following the Kidney Disease Improving Global
Outcomes (KDGIO) criteria [26]. Considering that the
patients might have used diuretics, AKI was defined only
based on the change of serum creatinine value. Vasoactive
drugs, diuretic, and aminoglycosides were defined
as any vasoactive drugs, diuretic and aminoglycosides
use during ICU stay for any reason. The severity of
anemia was established following the reference standard
of the World Health Organization (WHO) [27]. WHO
international BMI cut-off points were used for BMI
group categorization [28]: underweight (BMI < 18.5),
normal weight (BMI 18.5 to 24.9), overweight (BMI 25
to 29.9), and obesity (BMI > 30).
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were presented as interquartile
ranges (M (P25, P75)) unless indicated otherwise while
categorical variables were presented as frequency and
proportion of patients in each category. In the primary
cohort, the assumption of linearity in the logistic for
the continuous variable was assessed and univariate
logistic analyses were used to analyze the relationships
of relevant variables with SA-AKI. All variables with
P < 0.05 in the univariate logistic analyses were further
assessed by multivariable logistic regression using
backward stepwise selection, where the variable with
the largest p-value was eliminated at each step until
all remaining variables had significant p < 0.05. Multicollinearity
was evaluated using variance inflation factors
and there was no evidence of Multicollinearity.
Nomograms predicting the risk of SA-AKI were determined
using the independently selected significant
variables. While ensuring the stability of prediction
performance, a few features were removed to simplify
the nomogram [23].
The performance of the nomograms was evaluated
using the C-index [29] and calibration curves. The
discriminative ability of the nomograms was evaluated
by C-index, where a C-index of 0.5 indicated
the absence of discrimination, whereas a C-index of
1.0 suggested perfect discrimination. Calibration was
assessed using calibration curves, graphic representation
of the relationship between the frequency of
observations and the probability of prediction, with a
1000-bootstrapped sample of the primary cohort. The
final nomogram was verified in the validation cohort
to assess the stability and generality of the nomogram.
Moreover, the clinical utility of the final nomogram
was evaluated using decision curve analysis by
quantifying the net benefit at different threshold probabilities.
The net benefit was calculated by subtracting the
proportion of false positives from the proportion of true
positives and weighing by the relative harm of foregoing
treatment compared to the negative consequences of an
unnecessary treatment [30].
For missing data, median imputation was used if the
numbers were small (< 5 %), while multiple imputations
were used if the numbers with missing data were large.
All statistical analyses were performed using the R
software (version 3.6.0). All tests were two-sided, with
a significance level of 5 %.
Results
Characteristics of patients with SA‑AKI
In total, 2,871 patients with sepsis were recruited and 1,
137 patients (39.6 %) positively tested for SA‑AKI. The
mean age of patients was 67 years, and a majority
(55.1 %) were male. Patients were randomly assigned to
primary (2,012 patients) or validation (859 patients) cohorts.
Table 1 shows the characteristics of the patient in
each cohort. The baseline clinical characteristics were
similar between the two cohorts, with SA‑AKI
proportions of 39.2 and 40.6 % in the primary and validation
cohorts, respectively.
Model specifications and predictors of SA-AKI
Established risk factors, AKI, and demographic characteristics
of clinical importance were selected as candidate
variables for the prediction model. Variables relevant to
SA-AKI in the primary cohort were subjected to univariate
and multivariate logistic regression analyses, and the
result is illustrated in Tables 2 and 3. Final statistical
analysis identified 12 predictors for SA-AKI, including
BMI, LOS in ICU, baseline SCr, glucose, anemia incidence,
CKD, heart failure, coronary disease, chronic liver
disease, and the use of human albumin or vasoactive
drugs.
Nomograms and model performance in the primary cohort
Nomograms for SA-AKI incorporating significant
predictive factors from the multivariate analysis were
established (Figs. 1 and 2). Nomogram 1 included 12
significant predictors for SA-AKI prediction (Fig. 1),
depicting moderate discrimination in prediction with an
unadjusted C-Index of 0.773 (95 %Cl, 0.752–0.794).
However, nomogram 1, combining 12 predictors was
cumbersome. Besides, BMI, albumin, CKD, heart failure,
coronary disease, chronic liver disease, and human albumin
predictors demonstrated insignificant influence on
the point in nomogram 1. For effective visualization, a few
predictors were reduced to simplify the nomogram.
Nomogram 2 (Fig. 2) including factors with LOS in ICU,
baseline SCr, glucose, anemia, and vasoactive drugs maintained
similar discrimination (C-index 0.752, 95 %Cl
[0.730–0.774]).
Therefore, nomogram 2 was identified as the effective
predictive model. To use nomogram 2, a vertical
line should be delineated to the point raw to assign
point values for each predictor. Each patient obtains a
total point by plus the points of five predictors in
nomogram 2. For instance, a patient with mild
anemia, the glucose of 10 mmol/L, is using vasoactive
drugs, baseline SCr of 200 umol/L and 10 days Los in
ICU, total point taken from nomogram 2 of the patient
is 38 (5 + 4 + 12 + 6 + 11 = 38), and the risk of
SA-AKI probability is 60 %. The weights for each feature
are list in Table 4 for calculation without a
nomogram. The bootstrap-corrected C-index for the
prediction nomogram 2 was 0.749 and the calibration
plot for the probability of SA-AKI revealed a good
correlation between nomogram 2 prediction and actual
observation (Fig. 3), indicating moderate discrimination
by our final model.
External validation of the nomogram 2 in the validation
cohort
In the validation cohort, nomogram 2 displayed a Cindex
of 0.757 (95 % CI 0.724–0.790) for estimation of
SA-AKI risk. Also, there was a good calibration curve
for risk estimation (Fig. 4).
Clinical use of nomogram 2
The decision curve analysis (DCA) for nomogram 2 and
the individual predictor is illustrated in Fig. 5. The DCA
revealed that nomogram 2 would effectively predict SAAKI
if the threshold probability of SA-AKI is between
15 and 80 %. Within this range, the predictive effect of
the nomogram is better than that of a single predictor,
respectively.
Discussion
Sepsis Associated Acute Kidney Injury (SA-AKI) is a frequent
complication among critically ill patients causing
alarming mortality and morbidity. SA-AKI has a higher
risk of in-hospital death and longer hospital stay than
AKI caused by other factors [31]. However, crude
markers of renal function including SCr and Urine
output are not effective in early diagnosis. This study developed
and verified a diagnostic nomogram for predicting
SA-AKI in critically ill patients. The nomogram
incorporates five items, including LOS in ICU, baseline
SCr, glucose, anemia, and vasoactive drugs which can be
used to diagnose critically ill patients, enabling individualized
decisions on the surveillance and treatment. Our
findings are valuable since the nomogram was established
based on a large database of critically ill patients.
Additionally, in contrast with previously proposed
models based on the clinical risk factors [25], the current
nomogram has stable performance with ease of
visualization.
Inflammation, oxidative stress, microvascular
endothelial dysfunction, and renal tubular epithelial
cell injury are the potential mechanisms of SA-AKI,
however, its pathogenesis remains elusive [9]. The
occurrence and development of these mechanisms [4,
9, 20] are potentially attributed to the variables in
our model which might promote or balance each
other and influence the process of SA-AKI. Therefore,
predicting the occurrence of SA-AKI via these
clinical variables is of importance.
Our study considered a wide array of clinical risk
predictors previously linked to SA-AKI [4, 9, 14]. Specifically,
in the medical treatment, we noted no relationship
between diuretic, aminoglycosides, and SA-AKI. In contrast,
data on SA-AKI demonstrated that diuretics might
not be conducive to the prevention of AKI [4], and
aminoglycosides are harmful to renal function. Predictors
associated with AKI extensively vary, but rarely
for sepsis and limited studies have integrated them
with clinical prediction models. Recently, Zhou et al.
analyzed 2,617 patients with sepsis and constructed a
comprehensive risk score comprising 16 factors to
predict SA-AKI [25], and lacked analysis of drug use
(For example, vasoactive drugs), which might be
unspecific for clinical use. The multivariable model
including all contrast-enhanced ultrasonography
variables created by Liu et al. was also complex and
unsuitable for quick risk assessment [32]. This work
differs from the previous simple multi-factor analysis
[33] in that we removed predictors with little effect
on the points in the nomogram to simplify the model
for clinical application. Furthermore, none of the
existing risk models was estimated by the DCA for
their clinical utility. To our knowledge, this is the
first risk model to consider previously proposed risk
factors to develop a nomogram for prediction the
prognosis of SA-AKI.
Since the treatment strategies are potentially heterogeneous,
accurate AKI risk stratification of the critically ill
patients with sepsis is critical. Although the prevention
of AKI in critically ill patients has formed a certain consensus,
instances, where a recommendation cannot or
should not be followed for an individual patient, have
been reported [11]. Rather than using biomarkers or
clinical risk factors alone, derived based on large population
or cohort data, the nomogram provides a more individualized
admonition for risk information to septic
patients. For example, the European Society of Intensive
Care Medicine suggests a mandatory review of all medications
with cessation of nephrotoxic ones in addition to
the treatment measures [11]. However, many aspects
may affect the treatment strategy of septic patients and
the lesions changed quickly, clinicians depend on their
clinical experience. Clinicians may be more accurate in
selecting treatment strategies for a higher probability of
benefiting from treatments, using a nomogram with clinical
factors.
The most important and final argument for the use of
the nomogram is based on individual needs for additional
investigation or care [22]. Although is have good
prediction performance, discrimination and calibration,
the nomogram cannot capture the clinical consequences
of miscalibration or a particular level of discrimination.
The DCA is a valuable decision-making tool when
different means are compared with their clinical value
[34–36]. Therefore, to justify its clinical utility, DCA was
applied to unravel the usefulness of nomogram 2 decisions.
This novel method provides insights into clinical
consequences based on threshold probabilities, where a
net benefit is derived [34]. The decision curve revealed
that nomogram 2 caused a positive net benefit with a
threshold probability of between 15 and 80 %. For example,
if the threshold probability of a patient is 40 %,
the net benefit would be 15 % when nomogram 2 is used
to predict AKI, hence more benefit than either the treatnone
or the treat-all scheme.
Despite these promising findings, this paper has some
limitations. First, the nomogram was retrospectively
constructed and new biomarkers were not included in
the analysis, potentially reducing the performance of
the model. Secondly, the urine standard was not used
in the diagnosis of AKI since urine volume data may
be unreliable due to the use of diuretics. This may
reduce the overall incidence rate of AKI. Thirdly, the
missing data were settled with median imputation and
multiple imputation techniques, potentially decreasing
the accuracy and C-index of the final model. Nonetheless,
data for these predictors can easily be obtained
in the intensive care units and not an obstacle
in implementing the nomogram. Furthermore, these
disadvantages are natural in any retrospective studies,
and population-based research thereby increasing
concerns on the stability of the results. Nevertheless,
this nomogram may somewhat help clinicians make
reasonable risk judgments and treatment strategies in
the absence of high-quality SA-AKI prediction tools.
Conclusions
This study developed and verified an AKI risk prediction
nomogram applied to critically ill patients with sepsis,
which may partially help clinicians make reasonable risk
decisions and treatment strategies. Nonetheless, further
verification using external data is essential to enhance
the applicability of this nomogram in clinical practice.