Acute kidney injury (AKI) is rapid functional or structural
kidney abnormality characterized by increased
serum creatinine (Scr) or decreased urine volume [1].
The definition of AKI has evolved rapidly from Risk, Injury,
Failure, Loss of kidney function, End-stage renal
failure (RIFLE) criteria, Acute Kidney Injury Network
(AKIN) criteria into Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO) criteria during the past two decades.
The KDIGO criteria merges RIFLE criteria and
AKIN criteria, encompasses both a relative and an absolute
change of Scr and allows a short and an extended
time frame for diagnosis [2]. Providing simple and practical
definition of AKI, KIDGO criteria gradually became
standard criteria, allowing for more consistent estimates
of epidemiology. A meta-analysis demonstrated that the
incidence and mortality rate of AKI was 21.6 and 23.9%,
respectively [3]. These numbers are even higher for
patients undergoing liver transplantation (LT), where
the incidence of AKI and severe AKI requiring renal replacement
therapy (RRT) after LT is up to 40.8 and
7.0%, respectively [4].
AKI is a common and critical complication of LT,
which remains particularly prominent among different
postoperative organ injuries [5, 6]. Evidence has indicated
that even transient or subclinical AKI is known to
be of substantial clinical significance [7]. Previous studies
have reported that AKI after LT is not only associated
with immediate complications including volume overload,
metabolic acidosis, and electrolyte disturbances,
but also an increased rate of inferior long-term outcomes
such as mortality, graft loss, infection, chronic
kidney disease (CKD), prolonged stay in the intensive
care unit (ICU), and augmented hospital costs [5–7]. Although
much effort has been taken to the treatment of
AKI, it does not seem to reverse the natural course of
AKI syndrome and effectively improve prognosis [8].
AKI is increasingly recognized as a disease process with
continuum of kidney injury instead of a single-hit or
freestanding condition [1]. With in-depth research, the
past decades have witnessed the shift of attention from
treatment to prediction and early detection to avoid repetitive
hits and additional damage. Thus, investigating
the modifiable risk factors of AKI after LT is of vital
importance.
In the past few years, a number of risk factors and predictors
of AKI after LT have been reported. However,
some of the conclusions remain conflicting and the role
of modifiable factors are understudied with insufficient
supportive evidence. So far, no comprehensive metaanalysis
regarding the modifiable risk factors of AKI
after LT has been conducted. Therefore, we performed a
systematic review and meta-analysis via an extensive
search of observational studies to identify the modifiable
risk factors of AKI after LT.
Methods
This systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted
according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) statement
(see Supplementary 1, Additional File:PRISMA 2009
Checklist) and Meta-analysis Of Observational Studies
in Epidemiology (MOOSE) [9, 10]. The protocol for this
systemic review is registered with the international prospective
register of systemic reviews (PROSPERO) (No.
CRD42020166918).
Study identification and search strategy
A literature search of Pubmed, EMBASE and Cochrane
was performed to identify articles reporting the risk factors
of AKI in patients undergoing LT. The research
strategy consisted of the key search terms ‘liver transplantation’
and ‘acute kidney injury’ and their synonyms,
as well as related Mesh terms combined by Boolean operators.
The full search strategies for all databases are
available in Supplementary 2, Additional File. Only studies
published in English were included. In addition, a
manual search for conceivably related studies using
references of the included articles was also performed.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (a) observational
studies including cohort, case-control and crosssectional
studies; (b) studies investigating patients
undergoing LT; (c) a minimum of 1 risk factor identified
as being associated with AKI after LT, studies illustrating
the risk factors of RRT due to AKI after LT were also included
as RRT per se is one of the diagnostic criteria of
AKI; (d) studies reporting odds ratio (OR) with corresponding
95% confidence interval (CI) data or enough
data to calculate these figures; (e) online full-text available
publication. Studies were excluded for the following
reasons: (a) studies did not include human subjects; (b)
nonoriginal studies (conference abstracts, editorials, letters,
reviews, meta-analysis, commentaries or case reports)
and duplicated studies; (c) sample size was less
than 50; (d) studies exploring new biomarkers or predictors
of AKI after LT that are not clinically used. If more
than one article were found to have used the same data,
we chose the one with higher quality score, and where
the quality score was equal, we chose the study with the
larger sample size. Retrieved citations were first screened
for relevance at the title and/or abstract level, studies
remaining after the initial screening were appraised in
the full text with respect to the aforementioned inclusion
and exclusion criteria. Two authors (XYZ and LL)
independently evaluated the eligibility of all studies. If
there was disagreement regarding whether to include
some articles, these articles would be further evaluated
by a third author (JZ) and discussed in detail until an
agreement was reached.
Data extraction and quality assessment
For each article the following data were extracted when
available: name of the first author, year of publication,
country, cohort source, types of study design, sample
size, donor type, surgical technique, baseline patient
characteristics, definition and diagnostic criteria of AKI,
duration of evaluation, incidence of AKI after LT, risk
factor(s) studied, adjustment variables, the statistical
methods used for multivariate analysis, effect size and
95% CI. When both of the univariate OR and the multivariate
OR were reported in one study, only multivariate
OR were extracted. If the OR was not reported, it was
calculated from the original data if possible. When more
than one definition of AKI were adopted to stratify study
population in one study, we only extracted data with the
latest diagnostic criteria. Modifiable risk factors refer to
risk factors that can be modified by medical interventions
or by individual behavior. Clinical variables were
also included if they can be modified by medical interventions
during perioperative period. Extracted data of
the included studies were registered on dedicated electronic
forms. The forms were piloted over the first 5 included
studies for consistency and discrimination.
The quality of the included studies was assessed by the
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) [11]. The studies were
judged on three broad perspectives: the selection of
study populations, the comparability of the populations,
and ascertainment of exposure and the outcomes of
interest for case-control or cohort studies, respectively.
A maximum score of 9 reflects the highest quality. No
study was excluded because of a low-quality score. Two
authors (XYZ and XJM) performed the data extraction
and quality assessment independently. Disagreements
were settled by discussion involving a third author
(HCC) and consensus was reached on all items finally.
Statistical analysis
If a risk factor was reported by at least 2 studies in a
consistent manner, we would conducted a metaanalysis.
Effect size and 95% CI were pooled using a
random-effect model with inverse-variance method
[12, 13]. I2 statistic and Cochran’s Q test were applied
to determine the between-study heterogeneity. A
value of I2 of 0–25% represents insignificant heterogeneity,
26–50% low heterogeneity, 51–75% moderate
heterogeneity and 76–100% high heterogeneity [14].
In addition to the value of I2, we will also consider
strength of evidence for the heterogeneity (CI, chisquared
test and/or P value) and the size and direction
of effect in the analysis [15]. P-values on the
Egger’s test greater than 0.05 and symmetry of the
funnel plot determined the absence of publication
bias (N ≥ 10) [16]. If significant publication bias was
noted, Duval and Tweedie’s trim and fill method was
used to acquire adjusted values [17]. To minimize
heterogeneity, subgroup analyses by diagnostic criteria
of AKI, duration of evaluation and statistical method
were conducted. Meta-regression analyses (N ≥ 10)
were also used to assess the potentially important covariates
that might exert a substantial impact on
between-study heterogeneity. Sensitivity analyses were
performed after excluding 1 study at a time to assess
the stability of the results and explore the source of
heterogeneity. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant
except where otherwise stated. If data were
not available for the meta-analysis or only 1 single
study was identified for a given risk factor, these
studies were only listed in this systematic review.
Statistical analyses were performed using Stata
Version 14.0 (StataCorp, Texas, USA).
Results
Literature search and study selection
A total of 3273 citations were retrieved after searching
PubMed, EMBASE and CENTRAL database. There
were 170 full-text articles assessed for eligibility after
screening titles and abstracts. After hand-searching the
references of included articles and existing reviews and
meta-analyses, 1 reference was added. Three articles
were excluded due to duplicate data (see Supplementary
3, Additional File). In total, 67 articles were eligible
for inclusion in the systematic review and meta-analysis
(see Supplementary 4, Additional File). Full details of
the selection process were presented in Fig. 1.
Characteristics of included studies and quality assessment
A total of 67 observational studies published between
2001 and 2019 with 28,844 patients were included. The
incidence of AKI after LT ranged from 3.97% [18] to
71.9% [19]. Most of the included studies adopted multivariate
logistic regression analysis to adjust confounding
factors followed by propensity score matching method.
The outcome indexes consisted of AKI, and RRT due to
AKI. The RIFLE, AKIN, or KDIGO criteria were often
used in combination with other scales to assess and classify
AKI. The duration of evaluation varied from 12 h
after reperfusion to 3 months after LT. Based on the
NOS, the mean quality score of all included studies was
6.686 (standard deviation = 0.633) (see Supplementary 5,
Additional File).
Results of meta-analysis
Incidence of AKI after LT
Overall, the pooled estimated incidence rate of AKI after
LT was 37.5% (95% CI: 32.3–42.7%, I2 = 99.5%, Fig. 2).
Besides, we further did a subgroup analysis based on different
diagnostic criteria. The outcomes indicated that
prevalence of AKI after LT was 33.5% (RIFLE), 40.0%
(AKIN), 44.2% (KDIGO), and 35.2% (Others), respectively.
Meta-regression showed that the publication year
did not significantly affect the incidence rate of AKI after
LT (P = 0.489, Fig. 3).
Modifiable risk factors of AKI after LT
We pooled a forest plot for each factor that was
described in at least 2 articles (see Table 1; Details are
shown in Supplementary 6, Additional File). Considering
the smaller pooled population (< 500) reported for some
modifiable factors (cadaveric donor liver graft, intraoperative
colloidal use, large postoperative red blood cell
[RBC] transfusion, postoperative hypotension), here we
only presented the modifiable factors with a relatively
large population (> 500) to lower the error of estimates.
Modifiable factors showing significant associations with
AKI after LT are presented in Fig. 4. All of these factors
were classified into the following 4 groups: recipient factors,
donor and graft factors, surgical factors, postoperative
factors.
Recipient factors
Overweight (OR = 2.437, 95% CI = 1.629–3.646, I2=%,
P = 0.000), preoperative use of diuretic (OR = 2.733, 95%
CI = 1.302–5.739, I2 = 41.4%, P = 0.008), preoperative
anemia (OR = 1.621, 95% CI = 1.073–2.449, I2 = 24.5%,
P = 0.022) were identified as modifiable risk factors of AKI
after LT. Preoperative hypertension and preoperative hypoalbuminemia
were not correlated with AKI after LT.
Donor and graft factors
Donation after cardiac death (DCD) organ (OR = 2.704,
95% CI = 1.938–3.772, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000), donor body
mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2 (OR = 2.672, 95% CI =
1.173–6.085, I2 = 57.8%, P = 0.019), ABO-incompatible LT
(OR = 2.761, 95% CI = 1.602–4.759, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000),
low graft weight to recipient body weight ratio (GW/
RBW) (OR = 1.902, 95% CI = 1.013–3.568, I2 = 52.3%, P =
0.045) increased the risk of AKI after LT. However, no significant
associations were found for long cold ischemia
time (CIT) and long warm ischemia time (WIT).
Surgical factors
Intraoperative hypotension (OR = 5.582, 95% CI = 3.934–
7.920, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000), major bleeding (OR = 2.900,
95% CI = 1.495–5.627, I2 = 83.1%, P = 0.002), intraoperative
use of vasopressor (OR = 2.079, 95% CI = 1.492–
2.899, I2 = 70.3%, P = 0.000), large intraoperative RBC
transfusion (OR = 3.124, 95% CI = 1.986–4.914, I2 =
72.8%, P = 0.000), postreperfusion syndrome (OR =
1.689, 95% CI = 1.275–2.236, I2 = 52.8%, P = 0.000) were
associated with an increased risk for AKI after LT.
Nevertheless, no obvious associations were detected with
piggyback surgical technique, split LT, venovenous bypass
and intraoperative platelet transfusion.
Postoperative factors
Postoperative use of vasopressors (OR = 2.234, 95% CI =
1.431–3.488, I2 = 75.9%, P = 0.000), overexposure to calcineurin
inhibitor (CNI) (OR = 2.762, 95% CI = 1.737–
4.391, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000), CNI without mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) (OR = 2.087, 95% CI = 1.404–3.103, I2 =
0.0%, P = 0.000), graft dysfunction (OR = 3.124, 95% CI =
2.036–4.795, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000), infection (OR = 3.162,
95% CI = 2.315–4.320, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000) were associated
with a higher risk for AKI after LT. Neither postoperative
tacrolimus use nor postoperative
hypoalbuminemia showed significant association with
AKI after LT.
Sensitivity analysis, subgroup analysis, meta-regression
analysis, and publication bias
Evident heterogeneity in the meta-analysis of 34 factors
was found (I2 > 50% or P < 0.1), and 28 factors
could be further analyzed (N ≥ 3). The results of the
sensitivity analysis are shown in Supplementary 7,
Additional File. When 1 single study was excluded
each time, the heterogeneity was obviously reduced
(I2 change > 30%) for the following 10 modifiable factors:
overweight, preoperative hypoalbuminemia, low
GW/RBW, long CIT, long WIT, piggyback surgical
technique, venovenous bypass, large intraoperative
blood loss, intraoperative platelet transfusion, postoperative
use of vasopressor. The source of
heterogeneity may have been due to several design
differences among the studies, including sample size,
diagnostic criteria, duration of evaluation, cutoff point
of factors, or insufficient adjustment for confounding
factors. The details are shown in Supplementary 8,
Additional File.
After conducting subgroup analysis by diagnostic
criteria of AKI, the heterogeneity was obviously reduced
(I2 change > 30%) for low GW/RBW, indicating diagnostic
criteria might be the source of heterogeneity. The
statistical significances were changed for preoperative
hypoalbuminemia after conducting subgroup analysis. In
the subgroup of RIFLE, preoperative hypoalbuminemia
showed statistically significant association with AKI after
LT without heterogeneity (see Supplementary 9,
Additional File).
After conducting subgroup analysis by duration of
evaluation, no obvious reduction of heterogeneity (I2
change > 30%) was observed for the aforementioned factors.
However, the statistical significances were changed
for several modifiable factors (see Supplementary 10,
Additional File). In the subgroup of ≤7 days, intraoperative
platelet transfusion showed association with AKI
after LT, whereas low GW/RBW showed no association
with AKI after LT; in the subgroup of > 7 days, major
bleeding, large intraoperative RBC transfusion, postoperative
use of vasopressor showed no association with AKI
after LT.
After conducting subgroup analysis by statistical
method, no obvious reduction of heterogeneity (I2
change > 30%) was observed for the aforementioned
factors, indicating statistical method was not the source
of heterogeneity of aforementioned modifiable risk factors
(see Supplementary 11, Additional File).
We also performed meta-regression analyses for
factors with evident heterogeneity (see Supplementary
12, Additional File), and statistical method may
partially explain the source of heterogeneity in intraoperative
use of vasopressor. Based on the results
from the funnel plot and Egger test (see Supplementary
13, Additional File), no evidence for publication
bias was detected in factors described in ≥10
studies.
Systematic review
A total of 75 factors were included only in the systematic
review rather than the meta-analysis (see Supplementary
14, Additional File) because the assessment was
performed in only 1 study. A total of 15 risk factors and
1 protective factor were associated with AKI after LT
(here we only presented the factors adjusted for confounding
factors with a relatively large population [>
300] to lower the error of estimates) (Fig. 5). In this systematic
review, additional modifiable risk factors of AKI
after LT were preoperative hyponatraemia, preoperative
cerebrovascular diseases, pulmonary hypertension, increased
perioperative glucose variability, long anesthetic
time, intraoperative use of diuretic, long anhepatic time
and postoperative aminoglycoside use. Besides, patients
with intraoperative terlipressin therapy were associated
with a decreased risk for AKI after LT.
Discussion
Main findings
In this systematic review and meta-analysis we have
identified the modifiable risk factors of AKI after LT for
the first time. Our work involved extensive analyses and
shed new light on early identification and preventive
strategies for AKI after LT. A total of 25 modifiable risk
factors and 1 protective factor of AKI after LT were
found (Fig. 6), of which 17 factors had data eligible for
meta-analysis, including overweight, preoperative use of
diuretics, preoperative anemia, DCD organ, donor BMI ≥
30 kg/m2, ABO-incompatible LT, low GW/RBW, intraoperative
hypotension, major bleeding, intraoperative
use of vasopressor, large intraoperative RBC transfusion,
postreperfusion syndrome, postoperative use of vasopressor,
overexposure to CNI, CNI without MMF, graft
dysfunction and infection (Fig. 4).
Explanation of results
It is challenging to explore modifiable risk factors of
AKI after LT because of numerous and heterogenous
diagnostic criteria. Both criteria use Scr and urine output
as markers of renal function [20]. Considering the retrospective
nature of most observational studies, all included
studies uniformly use Scr only to classify AKI
after LT as detailed hourly urine output is often not
available. The between-study heterogeneity may be the
result of discrepancies in definition and classifications,
various cutoff points of factors and different duration of
evaluation. In addition, Scr can be influenced by dietary,
volume overload, body muscle-mass and liver function
[6]. In fact, Scr is a marker of renal function instead of
kidney injury and can be delayed and insensitive under
some circumstances [1]. As patients awaiting LT tend to
have a reduced creatinine production compared with
healthy subjects and fluid accumulation might mask the
increase in Scr, it is likely that Scr overestimates the severity
of preoperative renal function and delayed
diagnosis and underestimates the severity of postoperative
AKI after LT. Another issue is the relevance of baseline
Scr to the perioperative period. On the one hand,
over-diagnosis can occur when the immediate Scr or the
Scr after fluid resuscitation are selected as baseline Scr;
on the other hand, comparing Scr after massive fluid
administration in the postoperative period to preoperative
baseline Scr can lead to under-diagnosis of AKI
[21]. Thus, the diagnosis of AKI after LT faces challenges,
and new biomarkers and adoption of standard
definition are warranted.
That AKI after LT are multifarious in etiology is undeniable.
As for recipient factors, overweight patient are
at increased risk of AKI after LT, which is consistent
with the findings of other clinical settings [22, 23]. Patients
with high BMI are more likely to suffer from
metabolic syndromes, including hypertension, dyslipidemia,
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. Metabolic
syndromes and obesity-related glomerulopathy
may provide a vulnerable physiological reserve to handle
the stress of hypoperfusion of kidney during surgery
[24]. Though loop diuretic is widely used in different
stages of AKI, data from randomized controlled trials
and observational studies concerning the theoretical advantage
of diuretics in preventing and treating AKI
remain controversial and unproven [25–27]. Thus use of
diuretics can lead to renal damage and nephrotoxicity and
is recommended only if volume overload exists [28, 29].
Anemia may contribute to AKI through reducing the oxygen
capacity of blood, enhancing oxidative stress and
impairing hemostasis [30]. Therefore detecting and optimizing
recipient preoperative hemoglobin status as early
as possible is highly recommended in established consensus
[31]. It is worth mentioning that sensitivity analysis revealed
that the Cabezuelo (2006) study was the source of
statistical heterogeneity in the meta-analysis for the association
of preoperative hypoalbuminemia with AKI after
LT. When this outlying study is removed, there was no
evidence of heterogeneity in the remaining studies and the
result showed that preoperative hypoalbuminemia increased
the risk of AKI after LT (OR = 2.134, 95% CI =
1.412–3.225, I2 = 0.0%, P = 0.000), which was broadly in
line with previous studies cross different clinical settings
[32]. The mechanism for the association of preoperative
hypoalbuminemia with AKI after LT remains elusive,
serum albumin may decrease the risk of AKI by maintaining
renal perfusion, binding endogenous toxins and
nephrotoxic drugs, alleviating oxidative damage, and delivering
protective lysophosphatidic acid [32]. However, the
association of serum albumin level and AKI might be Ushape
[33], and there is evidence that administration of
exogenous albumin failed to alter renal outcomes in the
clinical scenario of living donor liver transplantation [34].
Hypotheses are proposed that not hypoalbuminemia itself
but rather the underlying causes of it affect the occurrence
of AKI after LT [6]. It appears that DCD organ is an
independent risk factor for AKI after LT. Leithead hypothesized
that hepatic ischaemia reperfusion injury (HIRI) is
a leading cause for renal injury in recipients of DCD grafts
[35]. It remains questionable whether the greater graft injury
is attributed to the added donor WIT as previous
studies have obtained conflicting results [36]. Unexpectedly,
long WIT and long CIT are not risk factors for AKI
after LT in our meta-analysis, though several previous
studies have proved that they showed good performance
in predicting AKI after LT. We postulate that though to
some extent these risk factors reflect graft quality, they
may be weak in promoting the occurrence of AKI after
LT compared to other risk factors. Besides, with the improvement
of organ procurement techniques, long ischemia
time does not mean poor graft quality. Donor obesity
and graft steatosis increase the susceptibility of the liver to
HIRI, which is hypothesized as one of the driving forces of
AKI after LT [35]. The exact mechanism for AKI in ABOincompatible
LT patients has not been elucidated, probably
owing to plasmapheresis, high isoagglutinin titer and
enhanced immunosuppression [37, 38]. Low GW/RBW
precipitates patients to persistent portal hypertension and
a hyperdynamic state, which may impair the balance between
vasodilatory and vasoconstrictor factors and lead to
AKI after LT [39]. Overall these findings suggest that graft
quality and HIRI may play an important role in the development
of AKI after LT and optimizing graft quality and
limiting HIRI is feasible measures to prevent AKI after
LT.
With regard to surgical factors, our study indicates
that intraoperative hypotension, major bleeding, use of
vasopressor, large RBC transfusion, and postreperfusion
syndrome (PRS) during operation are associated with increased
risk of AKI after LT. Those variables reflect that
hemodynamic instability, which exerts a major effect on
reduction in renal blood flow and renal tissue hypoxia,
may play a leading role in the development of AKI after
LT. Notably, intraoperative hypotension had the highest
OR as a modifiable risk factor for AKI after LT. Hypoperfusion
and subsequent inflammation and neuroendocrine
response to surgery are the frequent mechanisms
affecting renal perfusion during perioperative period [2].
Only when the mean arterial pressure is above the autoregulatory
threshold can the kidney maintain glomerular
filtration rate in the face of unstable arterial pressure
and changing volume status. PRS leads not only to the
release of cold and acidotic components by the graft but
also pro-inflammatory cytokines that trigger inflammatory
response and subsequent renal tubular injury [5]. In
this regard, AKI after LT crosses the boundaries of traditional
pathophysiological categories and encompasses
pre-renal AKI and intrinsic renal AKI. Besides, RBC
transfusion can induce oxidative stress and systemic
inflammatory response syndrome, impair oxygen
delivery and vascular regulation, release procoagulant
phospholipids, and increase adhesiveness to vascular
endothelium, thereby harming the kidneys [40]. In fact,
many modifiable risk factors are interrelated and
preventive strategies targeting multiple modifiable risk
factors are crucially needed. Therefore, maintaining normovolaemia,
reducing blood loss and avoiding unnecessary
blood transfusion are of utmost importance for
preventing the occurrence of AKI after LT. In addition,
it is noteworthy that apart from norepinephrine, vasopressors
like epinephrine, dopamine or phenylephrine
did not show clinical benefit of renoprotective [41].
Concerning postoperative factors, patients with AKI
after LT seemed to have more aggressive immunosuppressive
regimen, more often had graft dysfunction, and
experienced more hemodynamic insults immediately
after operation. The relationship between graft dysfunction
and AKI after LT is being increasingly recognized.
As for graft dysfunction, evidences from animal experiments
have shown that renal cells go through apoptosis
during ischaemia reperfusion injury like hepatic cells
after LT [42]. Intravascular oxidative stress and functional
impairment of the mitochondria can trigger a systemic
inflammatory response, thus the deleterious
effects not only impair the liver, but also the kidney [43].
In this regard, AKI after LT is not only a pathological
condition of single organ failure but also can be seen as
a marker of multi-organ injury [4], as there is increasing
evidence that AKI directly contributes to remote organ
injury and plays an active role in the progression of
multi-organ dysfunction [2, 44]. Sepsis is the most frequent
cause of AKI in the inpatient population and systemic
inflammation resulting in tubular injury can
account for sepsis-associated AKI irrespective of ischaemia
as an initiating factor [45]. CNIs remain the mainstay
of immunosuppression regimens after LT in spite of
the well recognized nephrotoxicity. Renal artery vasoconstriction
and development of thrombotic microangiopathy
are presumed mechanism of CNI related injury
[5]. Our work indicated that reduced or delayed CNI
regimen combined with MMF decreased the incidence
of AKI of LT. Overall tailoring the immunosuppression
regimen in recipients at high-risk of developing severe
AKI should be first priority in the immediate postoperative
period.
The presence of heterogeneity was as expected, which
may be due to the differences between individual studies,
such as small sample size (postoperative use of vasopressor),
different diagnostic criteria (intraoperative platelet
transfusion), relatively long duration of evaluation (preoperative
hypoalbuminemia, large intraoperative blood
loss), relatively high cutoff point of definition (low GW/
RBW, long CIT) and insufficient adjustment for confounding
factors. Therefore, we conducted specific analyses
based on clinical and methodological characteristics
of studies and adjusted for the heterogeneity as much as
possible. Recruiting larger samples with unified diagnostic
criteria and searching for appropriate statistical methods
to adjust for confounding factors are necessary in future
studies.
Future directions
Our study raised several questions that need to be
addressed in future studies: (1) recipients with different
baseline characteristics might show different sensitivity
to perioperative precipitating factors and interventions.
Therefore, risk stratification for AKI after LT using baseline
characteristics is warranted in the future studies and
clinical practice. (2) Considering that Scr can only serve
as a retrospective marker of kidney function, it is reasonable
to imagine that we might detect an ideal biomarker
like highly sensitive troponin in the diagnosis of myocardial
injury which is easily identifiable and will provide
more timely and specific diagnosis of AKI in the near future.
(3) At present, most risk prediction models for AKI
after LT are lack of external validation in large multicentre
cohorts, which significantly limits their clinical implementation.
Therefore, finding reliable risk prediction
tools (e.g. deep learning model [46] and automated clinical
decision support systems [47]) using routinely measured
variables continues to be intensive areas of
research. (4) It is necessary to establish nonpharmacologic
interventions specific for LT recipients based on the
identified modifiable risk factors to improve prognosis of
AKI after LT. To enable this, multidisciplinary cooperation
including surgeons, anesthesiologists, and nephrologists
are crucial in both clinical practice and future
randomized controlled studies.
Strengths and limitations
There are several limitations in our study that should be
addressed. First, only observational studies are included,
thus some high-quality randomized controlled trial studies
must have been missed, and our results cannot establish
a cause-and-effect relationship. Second, studies
included in this review represented a wide range of LT
experience, institutional routines, and other possible existence
of unknown or unmeasured factors that might
influence the heterogeneity and potentially hamper the
generalizability of the results. Third, different risk factors
and predictors reported in various studies constrain us
from accurately describing them in a similar manner.
Fourth, not all studies made enough adjustment for confounding
factors or provide precise effect size of multivariate
analysis, and we can not fully unify the
confounding factors due to the large number of studies.
Fifth, inevitable heterogeneity may preclude conclusions
regarding some factors that are likely to increase or
decrease the development of AKI after LT. Finally, although
efforts are made to eliminate duplicate data by
title, author, cohort source, patient recruitment time,
donor type and surgical technique, overlapping data may
have been included in our study.
This is the first comprehensive systematic review and
meta-analysis taking into account all modifiable risk factors
of AKI after LT. The numerous modifiable risk factors
could lay foundation for risk stratification, early
identification, and effective prevention. Further highquality
studies with larger sample sizes and randomized
controlled trials targeting multimodal interventions are
crucially needed.
Conclusions
This is by far the first study to quantitatively summarize the
modifiable risk factors of AKI after LT. The modifiable risk
factors identified in our study include overweight, preoperative
use of diuretics, preoperative anemia, DCD organ,
donor BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2, ABO-incompatible LT, low GW/
RBW, intraoperative hypotension, major bleeding, intraoperative
use of vasopressor, large intraoperative RBC transfusion,
postreperfusion syndrome, postoperative use of
vasopressor, overexposure to CNI, CNI without MMF, graft
dysfunction and infection. Effective interventions in the
perioperative management and graft allocation and preservation
may be promising to reduce the incidence of AKI
after LT.