Background
Baclofen has been clinically available for over 60 years [1].
It is a gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) derivative that
is thought to work via the metabotropic GABAB
receptor.
Used mainly for the treatment of muscle spasticity,
it has also found a role in the treatment of neuropathic
pain [2–4]. Recent experiments reported by ourselves
[5] which assessed the effects of commonly employed
adjuvant agents on peripheral nerve stimulation-related
neuromodulation identified that baclofen may have an
analgesic effect on bladder nociception. However, the
rats used in those particular experiments had extensive
surgeries and received numerous other manipulations.
Therefore, to properly assess the effects of baclofen on
responses to urinary bladder distension (UBD), experiments
need to be performed in isolation from those
other manipulations. Moreover, concerns about opioid
overdose/misuse have become of paramount clinical
concern [6] and so it is important to determine whether
non-opioid drugs which are already approved for use in
humans may be repurposed for the treatment of specific
types of pain such as bladder pain.
Numerous basic science reports suggest that
baclofen, administered either systemically or intrathecally,
inhibits nociception. It is known to produce analgesia
by itself as measured in rats and mice in the hot
plate, tail flick and acetic acid-induced writhing [7–21].
Baclofen also produces analgesia in primates in the formalin
test [22]. In chemotherapy-induced neuropathic
pain models baclofen produces significant but erratic
analgesia [4]. It has also been demonstrated to have
peripheral analgesic effects in a mouse arthritis model
[23]. In humans, baclofen has had a particular role as
an analgesic for cranial nerve-related neuropathic pains
such as trigeminal neuralgia [2]. Anecdotal reports (e.g.
[3]) suggest it also works for postherpetic neuralgia
in facial distributions. In humans, the spinal administration
of baclofen has also demonstrated short-term
analgesic effects on spinal cord injury-related pain and
post-stroke pain [24] and provides analgesia following
surgery, in most cases by augmenting opioid effects
[25–27].
Despite these encouraging basic science and clinical
reports, baclofen has not been used frequently for
non-neuropathic pain in humans. This is unfortunate
because baclofen may have other beneficial effects
related to the attenuation of abuse/misuse of opioids.
In rat models, baclofen dose-dependently reduced heroin-
seeking behavior [28, 29], reversed behavioral sensitization
to morphine [30], prevented reinstatement of
heroin-seeking behaviors [28] and enhanced extinction
of opiate and methamphetamine-induced conditioned
place preference [31, 32]. These effects of baclofen on
reward and dependence systems are particularly important
given the present societal concerns related to opioid
overuse and misuse. Having an effective non-opioid
therapy (or supplemental therapy), such as baclofen, as
an alternative to high doses of opioids is therefore both
desirable and an ethical imperative. The following studies
were therefore performed to test the potential utility
of baclofen as an analgesic agent in the treatment of
bladder pain and more generally, to enhance the database
for alternatives to the use of opioids in the treatment
of chronic pain.
Experimental procedures
Overview
In the present experiments, we examined the antinociceptive
effects of both systemic and spinal administration
of baclofen. We used several models of bladder nociception
with endpoints which included spinal dorsal horn
neuronal responses, UBD-evoked changes in arterial
blood pressure and the VMR (abdominal contractions)
evoked by UBD. In addition to normal, healthy rats,
we also assessed responses in rats whose bladders were
made hypersensitive to bladder distension by inflammation.
These studies were all approved by the UAB Institutional
Animal Care and Utilization Committee.
Animal subjects
A total of 205 Sprague–Dawley female rats obtained
from Harlan/Envigo (Prattville, AL) were used as adults
(mean weight 283 ± 12 g) in all experiments. In some
experiments, rats were raised from birth, treated as
pups and allowed to mature to adulthood (description
in section “Neonatal bladder inflammation (NBI)”). All
rats were housed with food and water available on an
ad libitum basis. A 12:12-h light:dark cycle was maintained,
where lights were off between 6:00 pm and 6:00
am. Female rats were exclusively employed for practical
reasons (difficult to cannulate male rats’ urethras) but
can be justified by the observation that VMRs and cardiovascular
responses to urinary bladder distension in
female rats are more reliable and robust than in male rats
[33] and chronic bladder pains have a high female prevalence
in humans [34]. There was no attempt to control
for estrous cycle, as the focus of this study was not on
estrous-related changes in pain, and we have previously
shown that hormone fluctuations due to the estrous cycle
do not alter the vigor of UBD-evoked VMRs in rats without
bladder inflammation when the current methodology
is employed [35].
Adult bladder inflammation (ABI)
As adults, some rats received a treatment 24 h prior to
UBD testing on the following day. At that time, animals
were anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane and oxygen
(5% for induction, 2% for maintenance) and separated
into groups receiving either no treatment or intravesical
zymosan. Intravesical zymosan treatment has been demonstrated
to produce a robust bladder inflammation and
hypersensitivity to UBD [36]. Zymosan-treated animals
had their urinary bladders catheterized with a 22-gauge
angiocatheter via the urethra. Zymosan (0.5 ml, 1% in
saline) was administered intravesically for 30 min and
drained. Rats in the anesthesia only control group were
maintained on 2% isoflurane for 30 min, immediately
after induction with 5% isoflurane. All animals received
ampicillin at the end of the procedure (50–100 mg/kg,
s.c.).
Neonatal bladder inflammation (NBI)
Some groups of female rat pups were given three daily
neonatal treatments of zymosan beginning on postnatal
day 14 (P14–16). Each rat was anesthetized with
isoflurane (5% induction; 2% maintenance) delivered by
mask. In one group, a 1% zymosan (0.1 ml) solution was
instilled intravesically via a 24 gauge angiocatheter placed
through the urethra and allowed to dwell for 30 min. The
bladder then was drained, the catheter removed, and the
rat permitted to recover. The control group only received
anesthesia and no catheterization or zymosan treatment.
All rats were kept on a warmed heating pad during treatments
and received ampicillin (0.05 mg in 0.05 ml s.c.) at
the end of each treatment before being returned to their
dams. All rats were weaned at 3 weeks and then raised
to adulthood before use (12–15 weeks of age). This treatment
has been demonstrated to produce hypersensitivity
to UBD and is described more completely elsewhere [37].
Reflex responses to urinary bladder distension (UBD)
Animals were anesthetized with urethane (1.2 g/kg s.c.)
and/or isoflurane (2–5% during surgery, later reduced
to < 0.75%). A 22-gauge polytetrafluoroethylene angiocatheter
(Johnson and Johnson, Arlington TX) was
placed into the bladder via the urethra and held in place
by a tight suture around the distal urethral orifice. Silver
wire electrodes were inserted into the external oblique
musculature immediately superior to the inguinal ligament
for recording of abdominal EMG activity. In some
cases, a carotid arterial catheter was placed to allow for
hemodynamic measures. Following surgery, anesthesia
was reduced until flexion reflexes were present in
the hind limbs but spontaneous escape behaviors were
absent. In most experiments, the primary response
measure was the visceromotor reflex (VMR), an abdominal
contraction evoked by UBD which consisted of air
distension of the urinary bladder using the intravesical
catheter. An in-line, pneumatically-linked, low volume
pressure transducer was used to monitor distending
pressures. VMRs, recorded as electromyographic activity
of the abdominal musculature, was measured via
the electrodes using standard differential amplification
and rectification and saved on a computer (Spike 2 software,
Cambridge Electronic Design, UK). “Evoked” VMR
responses were defined as the mean rectified electromyographic
activity (in mV) during 20 s of UBD minus the
mean baseline electromyographic activity (in mV) measured
in the period immediately preceding the onset of
UBD. Hemodynamic responses to UBD were defined as
the maximal sustained change in mean arterial pressure
measured during UBD minus the mean arterial pressure
measured immediately prior to UBD. This model system
has been described more extensively elsewhere [38, 39].
Intrathecal catheters
In experiments in which selective spinal action of drugs
was studied a 7.8 cm catheter made of PE10 tubing was
inserted via an incision in the atlanto-occipital membrane
following surgical exposure and threaded down
through the subarachnoid space to the lumbosacral
region under deep isoflurane/oxygen anesthesia. In most
cases, the catheter was used immediately in non-survival
experiments (as per sections “Protocol for spinal baclofen
cumulative dosing experiments” and “Protocol for assessing
effects on hemodynamic responses to UBD”), but
in 13 rats the catheter was attached to an Alzet 2001
osmotic minipump (Durect Corp, Cupertino, CA, USA)
allowing for a 7-day infusion of either normal saline or
a baclofen solution as described in section “Dorsal horn
spinal neuronal responses to UBD”.
Protocol for systemic baclofen cumulative dosing
experiments
Repeated 60 mmHg UBDs were administered with a
3 min inter-trial interval until stable VMRs were established.
Graded, constant-pressure air distensions of the
urinary bladder (20 s duration; 3 min inter-trial interval)
of ascending pressures at intervals of 10, 20, 30, 40,
50 and 60 mmHg were then administered to quantify
the graded stimulus–response. A cumulative dosing
paradigm was then initiated with consecutive doses of 1,
1, 2 and 4 mg/kg of baclofen (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA; Cat. No. B5399) or equal volumes of normal
saline (1 ml/kg) administered IP for cumulative doses of
1, 2, 4 and 8 mg/kg respectively in the case of baclofen.
The saline injections served as a repeated measures control
procedure. Fifteen minutes following each injection
graded stimulus–response measures (10–60 mm Hg, 20 s
UBDs) were re-determined using the method described
above.
Protocol for spinal baclofen cumulative dosing
experiments
Rats were prepared following a surgical procedure similar
to that used in section “Protocol for systemic baclofen
cumulative dosing experiments”, but with the addition
of an acutely placed IT catheter. A protocol similar to
that described in section “Protocol for systemic baclofen
cumulative dosing experiments” was then performed
using consecutive doses of 10, 10, 20, 40 and 80 ng of
baclofen (or equal volumes of normal saline) dissolved in
10 μl of normal saline followed by a 10 μl normal saline
flush through the IT catheter. Graded stimulus–response
measures were determined 15 min following each
baclofen/saline injection.
Protocol for assessing effects on hemodynamic responses
to UBD
In these rats, a single 40 ng dose of IT baclofen (10 μl
injection; 10 μl normal saline flush) or equal volume of
IT normal saline was administered and responses to
repeated UBDs (60 mm Hg, 20 s, 3 min intervals) measures,
allowing for assessment of the time course of the
baclofen effect. In this case, responses included both
VMRs and hemodynamic responses measured using a
carotid arterial catheter. The IT saline-treated rats served
as a control for repeated measures.
Protocol for assessing actions of baclofen via GABA‑B
receptors
To verify that baclofen was acting through GABAB
receptor
mechanisms, an antagonist was administered IT
prior to administration of baclofen. Specifically, these
rats received repeated UBDs (60 mm Hg, 20 s 3 min ITI).
After VMRs to UBD were stable (± 20%), responses to
graded UBD (10–60 mm Hg, 20 s) were obtained. Rats
then received a single IT injection of either CGP35348
(30 μg; Tocris Biosciences, Minneapolis, MN, USA; Cat.
No. 1245) or an equal volume of normal saline (10 μl)
followed by a 10 μl normal saline flush. Fifteen minutes
after the injection repeat graded UBD stimulus–response
measures were obtained. Rats then received an IT injection
of baclofen (40 ng) in normal saline or an equal volume
of normal saline (10 μl) followed by a 10 μl normal
saline flush. Fifteen minutes after this injection, repeat
graded UBD stimulus–response measures were obtained.
These dosing combinations resulted in three separate
measures in four separate groups.
Protocol for assessing tolerance to spinal baclofen
Thirteen rats which had received neonatal bladder
inflammation (section “Reflex responses to urinary bladder
distension (UBD)”) had IT catheters placed (section
“Intrathecal catheters”) and attached to seven day
minipumps that were then secured in the subcutaneous
tissues between the rats’ scapulae. Incisions were closed
with sutures and the rats allowed to recover. Half of the
rats received an infusion of baclofen at a rate of 1 μl/h or
20 ng/h for 7 days. The other half of the rats received a
normal saline infusion at the same rate. The day before
testing, all rats were re-anesthetized with isoflurane,
adult bladder inflammation induced (section “Adult bladder
inflammation (ABI)”) and their IT catheters externalized
and minipumps removed. They were allowed to
recover overnight and then underwent cumulative dosing
of IT baclofen in a fashion identical to that noted in
section “Protocol for spinal baclofen cumulative dosing
experiments”.
Dorsal horn spinal neuronal responses to UBD
Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane (5%) and a
tracheal cannula placed allowing for mechanical ventilation.
The cervical spinal cord was exposed surgically,
injected with 50 μl of 1% lidocaine solution and subsequently
transected using a sharp scalpel. The brain was
then pithed mechanically, anesthesia discontinued and
the rats allowed to recover until demonstrating robust
hindlimb flexion reflexes in response to paw pinching
(typically 1–2 h). A laminectomy was then performed
and the dura incised exposing the L6-S2 spinal segments
since these are known sites for spinal processing of afferent
information from the bladder [40]. The vertebral
column was clamped both rostrally and caudally to the
laminectomy for stabilization. Skin flaps were arranged
to form a protective coating for exposed tissue except
for the site of recording which was covered with warmed
mineral oil. A PE10 catheter was secured at the edge of
the exposed spinal dorsal horn for future use in the topical
administration of drugs. Tungsten microelectrodes
(MicroProbe, Clarksburg, MD; 1.2–1.8 MOhm) were
used for conventional extracellular single-unit recording.
The dorsal horn 0–1.0 mm from midline and 0–1.2 mm
below cord dorsum was searched using microelectrodes
positioned using a stereotaxic apparatus. All units
responded in a consistent excitatory fashion to UBD. To
quantify neuronal responses, units were displayed oscillographically
for continuous monitoring, discriminated
conventionally from background, converted into uniform
pulses and counted and saved by computer. The
total number of unit action potentials (discharges) were
counted in 10 s epochs before, during and after the UBD
stimulus. Evoked Activity of the dorsal horn neurons was
defined as the number of unit discharges during UBD
minus the level of activity immediately preceding the
onset of UBD. Because responses of different neurons to
the same distending stimulus naturally vary in maximal
response and total number of unit discharges, each unit’s
response was normalized to that produced by the 60 mm
Hg response for purposes of within- and between-group
comparisons. Noxious and non-noxious somatic stimuli
were also presented to each neuron and excitatory/inhibitory
responses determined in a fashion similar to that
which we have previously published [39]. Following characterization,
the effect of the spinal application of 160 ng
baclofen or an equal volume of normal saline (20 μl) on
spinal dorsal horn neuronal responses to repeated UBD
(60 mm Hg, 20 s; 3 min intervals) was determined by
measuring multiple responses prior to and following
drug administration. All of the rats studied in this protocol
had also experienced neonatal bladder inflammation
and adult bladder inflammation as per sections “Adult
bladder inflammation (ABI)” and “Reflex responses to
urinary bladder distension (UBD)”.
Statistical analyses
Statistics are presented as the mean ± S.E.M in the
graphs. Area-Under-the-Curve (AUC) statistics were
generated as measures of global responses to graded
UBD and reported as a percentage of mean pre-drug
measures. In some studies, repeated measures ANOVAs
were performed followed by post-hoc analyses of means
when appropriate. Paired t-tests of pre/post measures
were used for comparisons when appropriate.
Results
IP baclofen produced dose‑dependent inhibition of VMRs
to UBD
The upper portion of Table 1 presents mean Area-Underthe-
Curve (AUC) measures normalized as a percentage
of the pre-drug measures. These values were obtained
following cumulative IP dosing of baclofen (1, 2, 4, and
8 mg/kg) or repeated doses of saline in otherwise healthy
adult rats which had not experienced any neonatal bladder
inflammation (NBI) or adult bladder inflammation
(ABI) and so designated the “No NBI, No ABI Groups”
and in adult groups which had received both NBI and
ABI pretreatments, the “NBI—ABI Groups.”. Notably, the
predrug VMRs were more robust in the NBI-ABI Groups
compared with the No NBI-No ABI Groups: predrug
AUCs were 115 ± 14 V*mmHg versus 78+6 V*mmHg
respectively (p = 0.0188 for unpaired t-test, n = 16/
group). Baclofen dosing, as compared with repeated
saline dosing, produced statistically significant, dosedependent
suppression of the normalized AUC measures.
This suppression was similar in both pretreatment
groups.
IT baclofen produced dose‑dependent inhibition of VMRs
to UBD
Figure 1 and the lower portion of Table 1 present the
results of the cumulative IT dosing of baclofen (10, 20,
40, 80 and 160 ng) or repeated doses of normal saline.
There were no significant differences between-groups
in baseline AUC measures prior to dosing with baclofen
(NBI-ABI predrup AUC 184+28 V*mmHg versus the No
NBI-NoABI predrug AUC of 128+43 V*mmHg (n = 12/
group) although this lack of difference may have represented
a smaller sample size and greater variability of
VMRs in rats which had IT catheters placed. Similar
to the IP-treated rats described in section “IP baclofen
produced dose-dependent inhibition of VMRs to UBD”,
IT baclofen-treated groups, when compared with their
corresponding IT saline-treated groups manifested significant
dose-dependent suppression of their VMRs as
quantified by the AUC when normalized to their predrug
measures.
Baclofen inhibited cardiovascular responses to UAB
UBD (60 mm Hg, 20 s) produced a reliable pressor
response that averaged 22.5 ± 1.3 mm Hg in the 12 rats
studied. Figure 2A shows the analgesic effect of 40 ng of
IT baclofen on pressor responses evoked by a 60 mmHg
UBD stimulus presented every 3 min when compared
with IT saline-treated controls. In these same rats the
mean VMR also significantly decreased as a function of
time after baclofen administration (Fig. 2B).
Blockade by the receptor antagonist CGP 35348
Table 2 reports the effects of sequential IT administration
of saline or 30 μg of the GABAB
receptor antagonist
CGP35348 followed by the IT administration of 40 ng
of baclofen or saline in the relevant comparison groups.
In Sequence 1—40 ng of baclofen produced significant
suppression of the AUC response to UBD when it followed
an IT saline administration. In Sequence 2—IT
CGP35348 significantly attenuated the suppressive action
of baclofen. However in Sequence 3, when administered
by itself, CGP35348 did not produce significant effects.
Likewise in Sequence 4—repeated measures of the VMRs
were unaffected when only saline was administered IT.
There was no significant quantitative or qualitative difference
in the effects of the different drugs on different rat
bladder inflammation pretreatment groups (i.e., NBI Plus
ABI Group vs. No NBI Plus ABI Group vs. No NBI-No
ABI Group).
IT baclofen still effective after chronic infusion
Baclofen or saline were infused continuously for 7 days
via implanted osmotic minipumps to evaluate whether
tolerance to the effects of baclofen would be apparent. As
noted in Table 3, the dose-dependent inhibition of VMRs
by cumulative doses of IT baclofen in rats which had
previously received 7 day infusions of IT baclofen, when
compared with similar measures in those rats which
had received a 7 day infusion of IT saline demonstrated
no statistically significant quantitative or qualitative
differences.
IT baclofen inhibits UBD‑evoked activity of spinal dorsal
horn neurons
As evidenced by Fig. 3, a single 160 ng dose of baclofen
applied topically to the dorsal surface of the exposed
spinal cord produced consistent, statistically significant
inhibition of neuronal responses evoked by UBD when
compared with responses following topical saline administration.
Effects on Spontaneous Activity were more
variable; changes in Spontaneous Activity due to baclofen
administration failed to reach statistical significance. The
neurons studied were located 0.515 ± 0.09 mm deep to
the cord dorsum: all had convergent cutaneous receptive
fields demonstrating either excitation by both noxious
and non-noxious cutaneous stimuli (Class 2) or excitation
only by noxious stimuli (Class 3). Specifically, the
Baclofen-treated Group consisted of eight Class 2 and
two Class 3 neurons and the Saline-treated Group consisted
of seven Class 2 and three Class 3 neurons. The
two treatment groups also consisted of neurons that were
equally distributed according to previous classifications
of UBD-excited neurons which used heterosegmental
noxious stimuli as a discriminating factor [39]. In that
classification scheme, Type I neurons are those which are
inhibited by heterosegmental noxious stimuli whereas
Type II neurons are neurons which are not inhibited by
such stimuli. Using this classification scheme, both the
Baclofen-treated Group and the Saline-treated Group
consisted of five Type I and five Type II neurons. Baclofen
had similar inhibitory effects on both the Type I and Type
II neuronal subgroups with no statistically significant differences
noted. None of the rats studied had experienced
bladder inflammation. A more complete characterization
of spinal neurons responsive to UBD has been presented
elsewhere [39].
Discussion
The most important finding of the present study was that
the non-opioid agent, baclofen, inhibited responses to
UBD in a variety of models of bladder nociception. These
actions included spinal sites of action and the activation
of GABAB
receptors. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first report of such a finding in bladder nociceptive
systems. We studied these effects in multiple models
(e.g., reflex responses, neuronal responses, inflammatory
and noninflammatory conditions) of bladder nociception
and observed similar effects in all models suggesting this
pharmacology may be generalized to many different etiologies
of bladder pain and is not just a model-specific
antihyperalgesic therapy. Given its long history of clinical
use and low toxicity, a trial in humans for the treatment
of bladder pain would seem an appropriate next step [41].
The models studied here included one in which rats
experience neonatal bladder inflammation and then
receive a second bladder inflammatory challenge as
adults [37]. It is thought that this model may be particularly
relevant to the disorder interstitial cystitis/bladder
pain syndrome [34] in that it is associated with multiple
features of IC/BPS including the presence of increased
micturition rates, a functionally small capacity hypersensitive
bladder, altered bladder neurochemistry, the presence
of vascular fragility of submuscosal tissues following
prolonged hydrodistension, the presence of increased
pelvic floor muscular tone, increased responsiveness to
acute stress and increased responsiveness to intravesical
cold and potassium-containing fluids [37, 42]. One
would think that the pelvic floor spasm noted in these
patient populations should be justification enough (as an
antispastic agent) for the clinical assessment of baclofen.
Indeed, targeting pelvic floor hypertonicity associated
with chronic pelvic pain syndromes has been the strategy
of mainstay therapies such as myofascial physical therapy
[46–49] and new clinical research involving local injections
of botulinum toxin with and without physical therapy
[50–52].
Effects of baclofen on urodynamic measures that are
independent of pain has been extensively investigated
in non-humans [53–61] and humans [60, 61] most commonly
in the context of neurological injury [62–71] or
for symptoms of overactive bladder [59, 60, 72]. Inhibitory
effects of baclofen, administered either systemically
or spinally, on urodynamic measures was the consistent
observation. Given that all dorsal horn neurons excited
by UBD were robustly inhibited, this result should not be
surprising as these neurons are likely important in both
nociceptive and non-nociceptive bladder sensory functions.
Despite all of the above listed studies, the present
report is the first to specifically use models of bladder
nociception in the characterization of baclofen effects
and therefore establish a relevance to clinical pain.
As noted previously, baclofen has been demonstrated
to have significant benefits in association with reduction
of addictive behaviors. The presumed mechanisms for
its actions on addictive behaviors is an interaction with
dopaminergic neurons of the ventral tegmental area [77]
with a subsequent reduction in dopamine release in the
nucleus accumbens. As such, it is notable that Fadda et al
[78] observed that baclofen blocked morphine-induced
dopamine release at the nucleus accumbens. Baclofen
also reduced nicotine- and morphine self-administration
in rats [79] whereas a GABAB
receptor antagonist
increased morphine administration [80]. Baclofen
administered into the locus coeruleus attenuated
morphine withdrawal signs [81] and in a randomized,
double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial Assadi
et al [82] used baclofen for the maintenance treatment
of opioid dependence and found baclofen to be superior
over placebo in terms of opiate withdrawal syndrome
and depressive symptoms. In that study, trends towards
reductions in opioid craving and self-reported opioid
and alcohol use were also noted but not proven. Given
the clinical literature demonstrating that baclofen may
potentiate opioid antinociceptive effects [25, 26] one can
imagine co-administration of baclofen with opioid analgesics
[83] so that one might optimize analgesia and minimize
reward system activation. DeFeudis [84] suggested
that GABAergic drugs might have a role in both analgesia
and drug addictions, particularly related to opioids but
did not go so far as to suggest co-administration. Future
studies would be needed to test this supposition. Studies
in opioid-tolerant rats could also assess whether there
could be particular clinical benefits in subjects already
treated with opioids prior to a trial of baclofen.
In determining the potential analgesic benefit of
baclofen for human use, it is important to consider the
most efficacious route of administration that produces
strong analgesia with the fewest side effects or toxicities.
For example, odd reactions to systemic baclofen include
things such as the induction of hiccup-like respirations
[85] or diabetes insipidus [86]. In rats, intraventricular
baclofen impaired memory [87]. Toxicity has been
reported in some studies with CNS effects (loss of consciousness,
delirium, hypertension) but these have been
predominantly related to withdrawal [88] or excessive
dosing (e.g. [89]). Oral baclofen may be dose-limited
by side effects (e.g. drowsiness, dizziness, or weakness)
when treating patients with spasticity. When administered
by IT infusion baclofen has been demonstrated to
be an effective therapy for severe spasticity associated
with multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy
and traumatic/ischemic brain injury [90–92]. As baclofen
is zwitterionic at physiologic pH, by bypassing the blood–
brain barrier and directly targeting the central nervous
system, when administered IT, efficacy can be maximized
and side effects can be minimized significantly in
many patients. For this reason, the present study examined
the effects of the IT administration of baclofen. A
comparison of the potency of baclofen needed to inhibit
UBD-evoked responses demonstrated that IT dosing
was approximately 20,000 times as potent as IP administration.
This suggests that the most beneficial route of
administration in humans may be spinal delivery because
it is primarily restricted to the spinal segment to which it
is administered and could potentially avoid issues related
to CNS effects and toxicity due to high dosing. One
option for a proof-of-concept clinical trial would be to
administer a single IT dose of baclofen (versus placebo)
in a fashion similar to what is described in the product
insert for the drug [92].
It is clear that baclofen produces spinal antinociception
given its inhibitory effects on spinal dorsal horn
neurons as well as the fact that the IT baclofen inhibited
cardiovascular responses evoked by UBD. That said, a
limitation of the present study is that the main endpoints
in most of the study were VMRs, a motor reflex. As a
consequence, it must be considered whether baclofen,
administered spinally, may have also been acting on
motoneurons thereby increasing its potency in that assay.
Spinal administration would also likely miss some of the
potential behavioral benefits (e.g. addiction prevention)
associated with systemic baclofen use. As in all analgesic
regimens, particularly opioids, one must be concerned
with the development of tolerance to the administered
agent. It is therefore fortunate that tolerance did not
appear to be a problem after a seven day continuous
infusion of “chronic” IT baclofen prior to assessing the
potency and efficacy of acutely administered IT baclofen.
Longer infusions would be necessary to fully assess this,
but these results are consistent with the clinical observations
by others [93, 94] that tolerance to the continuous
infusion of baclofen does not appear to be a problem.
The precise mechanisms of baclofen’s antinociceptive
actions are not known. The present study gave evidence
that it is through spinal GABAB
receptor activation since
the IT preadministration of the antagonist CGP36348
blocked subsequent IT baclofen effects, but the precise
sites of action are not well defined. There is some suggestion
in the literature that GABAB
receptors may interact
with spinal Substance P and its receptors [95, 96] but
numerous other neurotransmitters have also been implicated.
Baclofen’s analgesic effects may be acting via the
same mechanism by which segmental and heterosegmenal
noxious stimuli produce inhibition (e.g. [97]), a
phenomenon referred to as nocigenic inhibition [98] or
Noxious Stimulus Induced Analgesia, since such inhibition
has been demonstrated to act via GABAB
and mu
opioid mechanisms [17]. In the spinal substantia gelatinosa
activation of GABAB
receptors presynaptically
block neurotransmitter release [99] and NK1 receptor
expression [96]. Other supraspinal sites of action related
to pain include the rostral agranular insular cortex [12]
and lateral preoptic area [21]. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging using continuous arterial spin labelling
of the brain in humans before and after 21 days of systemic
baclofen treatment (20 p.o. QID) demonstrated
reduced regional cerebral bloodflow (rCBF) in the ventral
striatum and medial prefrontal cortex and increased
rCBF in the lateral orbital frontal cortex, (a region
involved in suppressing previously rewarded behavior)
and cerebellum. rCBF was also blunted in the insula
bilaterally, a site commonly activated in painful conditions
[100]. The supraspinal analgesic effects of baclofen
appear to act via adrenergic and opioidergic spinal mechanisms
[12, 87, 101] with potentially a cholinergic and
GABAA
receptor contribution [16, 20]. Intrathecal nociceptin
antagonized baclofen-induced analgesia in a mouse
tail flick assay [10] and baclofen-induced analgesia was
absent in GIRK2 knockout mice [102] all suggesting the
potential for a complex pharmacology.
Conclusions
In summary, the compound baclofen, a drug currently
approved for clinical use, which can be administered
systemically or spinally, was demonstrated to have
antinociceptive effects in animal models of bladder
pain. This supports the assertion that a clinical trial for
the treatment of bladder pain should be undertaken.