Background
Radiculopathy is a clinical symptom that has its origin in
irritation of the spinal nerve. In patients with a bulging
or herniating disc, compression of the nerve is considered
the main cause. In more recent studies on radiculopathy,
inflammatory processes appear to have a bigger
role than originally thought. It is hypothesized that the
disruptive process in the area of the spinal nerve starts
with micro traumata in the vertebral endplate or disruption
of the annulus fibrosus. Disruption of the annulus
or micro breakage of the endplate at the location where
the annulus is attached, leads to exposure of the nucleus
pulposus to the epidural space [1]. In the epidural space,
the nucleus pulposus may not only cause compression
of the nerve, but is also exposed to the systemic circulation.
This makes the disc prone to neovascularisation
and macrophage infiltration, which is often seen in
cervical and lumbar discs [2, 3]. Macrophage infiltration
of the extruded material could promote a foreign body
response and thereby worsen the symptoms [4]. However,
they can also help to resorb the herniated material
and thus alleviate the symptoms. This discrepancy could
be explained by alternative macrophage differentiation:
Macrophages can differentiate in many distinctive
phenotypes with diverse functions [5], but they are often
dichotomized in M1 and M2 macrophages [6]. Proinflammatory
M1 macrophages are characterized by expression
of CD40, CD192 and CD86 [6–8], and produce
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1β,
IL-6, IL-8, Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, [5], all of
which have been associated with and exacerbation of
pain symptoms [9]. In contrast, M2 macrophages
express markers such as CD163 and CD206 [6, 7], produce
cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-10, and are believed
to initiate resorption of the herniated disc material,
which results in an amelioration of radicular pain and
improvement of clinical outcomes [5, 9].
In our previous work, we found that the impact of the
presence of macrophages on clinical outcomes was
dependent on the presence of Modic changes (MC),
which are considered inflammatory vertebral endplate
signal changes that occur frequently on cervical and
lumbar endplates [10, 11]. We found that in patients
with MC, a higher degree of macrophage infiltration,
was accompanied by more radicular pain symptoms and
less favourable clinical outcomes [4]. In addition, we also
showed that in patients without MC, a higher degree of
macrophage infiltration was associated with less radicular
pain and a better clinical outcome [4]. Based on these
findings, it is to be expected that patients with MC have
a higher degree of M1 macrophages, which would be in
line with their slower recovery, while in patients without
MC, larger numbers of M2 are to be expected, thereby
explaining their faster recovery.
A different possible scenario is that the exposure to
the systemic circulation is accompanied by infiltration of
Propionibacterium acnes or Staphylococcus epidermidis,
both of which are opportunistic bacteria that were demonstrated
in lumbar and cervical herniated disc material
[12], and have been associated with MC [13]. In the herniated
disc, they could induce a host immune response
which increases inflammation and could aggravate
radicular symptoms [14, 15].
For future perspectives, it is important to understand
the interconnectivity and clinical relevance of inflammation,
infection and MC. Until now, no studies have
sought to explore the relationship of these three together
and how their interconnectivity affects clinical outcomes.
Therefore, we would like to investigate the interactions
between MC, bacterial infection, inflammation, and their
impact on the clinical symptoms of both sciatica and
cervical radiculopathy patients. Explicating these mechanisms
may lead to characterization of certain subgroups,
of which some may benefit from antibiotic treatment,
some from anti-inflammatory treatment, some from a
conservative approach and some from (early) surgery.
Hence, identifying these subgroups will allow future
studies to focus on specific treatments for each
subgroup. If this is accomplished, we could significantly
decrease the disease burden of patients that suffer from
herniated discs.
Methods
Objectives
Primary objective(s)
1. In a group of lumbar and cervical radiculopathy
patients undergoing disc surgery, this study will
determine the impact of bacterial infiltration of the
disc on patient reported pain scores, in the
presence or absence of MC on MRI and histological
defined disc inflammation.
Secondary objective(s)
1. A secondary aim of this study is to assess whether
patients that suffer from disc inflammation benefit
more from anti-inflammatory drugs than those
without inflammation.
2. Another secondary aim of this study is to further
explore the inflammation process by characterizing
different types of macrophages (M1 and M2).
3. At last this study aims to associate the presence of
bacterial infection to the presence and type of MC.
Figure 1 illustration of the hypothesis:
After the disc is herniated, neovascularisation can be
formed, which could lead to a couple of scenario’s.
Firstly, in healthy discs, macrophages can enter and
likely predominantly differentiate towards M2, which
will help with disc resorption and reduce radicular pain.
Secondly, likely in a degenerated disc, neovascularisation
can be accompanied by infiltrating bacteria. By
itself, this may irritate the nerve and cause pain
symptoms, but it can also stimulate the disc to excrete
pro inflammatory factors which worsen pain and may
stimulate macrophages to differentiate towards M1.
This could result in more M1 and less M2 macrophages
and lead to more radicular pain symptoms. In addition,
the adjacent endplate might also get involved, which
could lead to more irritation of the adjacent nerve.
Animations in the figure originate from cliparts.zone
and are free to use, MRI picture is our own.
Study design
This prospective-(longitudinal) observational cohort
study is an imaging, histological, immunological and
clinical study. Both the MRI scan and surgery are part of
the usual care, in addition to these procedures, this
study will draw 3 blood samples, use the rest material
from surgery and ask the patient to fill in short pain related
questionnaires.
The total duration of the study is approximately 2.5
years, of which 1.5 years for inclusion and 1 additional
year for the follow up. Because Lumbar disc herniations
occur more often than cervical ones, the inclusion of
lumbar patients might be finished after 1 year, while the
inclusion of the cervical patients will likely take 1.5 years.
Patients will be recruited from one of the three inclusion
centers in which they are planned for surgery: the
Spaarne Gasthuis Haarlem Zuid, Alrijne Hospital Leiderdorp,
HMC the Hague and Haga Hospital the Hague.
The analyses and coordination of the study will be done
from the Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC).
Patient recruitment will take place during the first
(pre-operative) visit with the neurosurgeon, where the
patient will be informed about the study. Patients that
want to participate will be asked to sign an Informed
Consent Form (ICF) in the week prior to the surgery.
Afterwards, the participant will fill in a set of online
questionnaires in Castor EDC. This set will contain
questionnaires that assess demographic data, pain scores
(NRS back/leg pain for lumbar patients and NRS neck/
arm pain for cervical patients), disability scores (ODI for
lumbar patients and NDI for cervical patients), Osteoarthritis
(Womac) and medication status. Furthermore,
the patient will receive an MRI scan in the weeks before
surgery which is part of the usual care. In addition, during
surgery, the herniated part of the disc will be dissected
and transferred to the LUMC for further analyses.
The dissected material will be used for three different
purposes: One part of the dissected material will be used
for bacterial culture, one part for histological analyses,
and one part will be snap frozen for later defined analyses..
In addition to the frozen disc samples, this study
will also collect blood samples for two purposes: the first
is to assess the general inflammation (BSE, leukocyte
differentiation) and vascular status (lipid and apolipoprotein
profile) and the second purpose is for future analysis,
for which a sample will be stored in the freezer.
Only if our hypotheses turn out to be true, the stored
blood samples will be used to search for a predictive biomarker
for a bacterial infection and/or inflammation of
the disc. The exact analysis that will be used to identify
the biomarker will be defined in a later stage and will be
based on our results from the histological analysis and
bacterial cultures. Blood will be drawn in the waiting
room for surgery from the canula that is placed for the
purpose of the surgery. This means that only the donated
blood is an additional aspect of the study, injecting
the canula is part of the usual care.
All participants will be asked to co-operate during the
entire follow-up. During follow-up patients will be asked
to fill in questionnaires regarding clinical outcome (NRS,
ODI/NDI & GPE) and medication status at 8 weeks, 16
weeks, 26 weeks and 52 weeks post-surgery. Patients will
receive emails with a link to the follow-up questionnaires
at the above mentioned time points. A timeline of
the study is provided in Fig. 2.
Study population
Population (base)
For this study, all patients (18–75 yr.) with 8 or more
weeks of radicular pain symptoms, that are eligible for
surgery according to a neurosurgeon in the participating
hospital, will be asked to participate. Eligibility criteria
for surgery in participating hospitals are persisting pain
symptoms after 8–12 weeks of conservative therapy with
an MRI verified HNP that compresses the nerve root
corresponding to the radicular pain symptoms. Patients
are eligible for the study if they already planned to
undergo surgery for herniated disc and meet the following
in and exclusion criteria:
Inclusion criteria
Lumbar patients
– Age 18–75
– a unilateral lumbosacral radicular syndrome, with at
least the following criteria:
o Radicular incitement: radiating pain from
(a part of the) dermatome L4, L5 and/or S1
o Present for at least 8 weeks
– MRI verified lumbosacral disc herniation that is
corresponding to the side of the symptoms
– Indication for surgery
– Informed consent
Cervical patients
– Age 18–75
– a unilateral cervical radicular syndrome, with at least
the following criteria:
o Radicular incitement: radiating pain from
(a part of the) dermatome C45, C56, C67
and/or C7T1
o Present for at least 8 weeks
– MRI verified cervical disc herniation that is
corresponding to the side of the symptoms
– Indication for surgery
– Informed consent
Exclusion criteria
Lumbar
– Previous lumbar spinal surgery or chemonucleolysis
– Paresis of MRC < 4
– History of spinal inflammatory disease
– Instability that requires surgical fixation
– Active infection at the time of surgery
– Usage of Anti-biotics in the past six months
– Epidural steroid injection in the past six months
– Pregnancy
– Inadequate knowledge of the Dutch language
Cervical
– Previous cervical spinal surgery chemonucleolysis
– Paresis of MRC < 4
– Myelopathy as major complaint
– History of spinal inflammatory disease
– Instability that requires surgical fixation
– Active infection at the time of surgery
– Usage of Anti-biotics in the past six months
– Epidural steroid injection in the past six months
– Pregnancy
– Inadequate knowledge of the Dutch language
Study parameters/endpoints
Main study parameter/endpoint
The main study parameter will be the NRS leg pain for
lumbar patients and NRS arm pain for cervical patients.
A description of these endpoints and all other parameters
used during the study are described below.
NRS pain scores
– The pain experienced by the patients will be
measured by questionnaires that assess leg pain for
lumbar patients and arm pain for cervical patients:
NRS leg pain, and NRS arm pain. In these validated
questionnaires, the patients will display the amount
of pain they have experienced in respective locations
during the week previously to the visit. The pain
intensity will be determined on a scale of 0–10. 0
represents ‘no pain’ and 10 represents ‘worst pain
imaginable’ [16]. NRS will be focusing on multiple
aspects of pain: Maximum/average intensity,
frequency and maximum interference. All NRS pain
scores will be measured during baseline (in the week
before surgery) and at every follow-up moment (8,
16, 26, 52 weeks). Follow-up intervals 8, 26 and 52
were choosen based on our previous studies and 16
weeks was added as an extra time point in between
[4]. Previous test results will not be visible for the
patient. In addition to the NRS leg pain, NRS back
pain will also be used as an additional outcome
measure. Also, the NRS arm pain will be accompanies
by the NRS neck pain as an additional outcome
measure.
Other patient reported outcome parameters
– Functionality
For estimating functionality of the lumbar patient, the
Oswestry Disability index (ODI) will be used. This validated
questionnaire contains 10 topics related to the impact
of the pain on the patient’s life, with 5 grading’s for
each topic. The total will give a score between 0 (no disability)
and 50 (maximum disability possible), which will
be calculated to a 1–100% score [16]. For estimating
functionality of the cervical patient, the Neck disability
index (NDI) will be used, which is an adjusted version of
the ODI focused on neck pain instead of back pain and
is also a validated questionnaire. All functionality scores
will be measured during baseline (in the week before
surgery) and at every follow-up moment (8, 16, 26, 52
weeks,). Previous test results will not be visible for the
patient.
– Recovery
In order to estimate the perceived recovery of the patients,
the Global Perceived Effect (GPE) questionnaire
will be used. The GPE is a widely validated questionnaire
in which patients can express their perceived recovery
on a 7 point Likert scale. On this scale the numbers 1–7
are accompanied by an expression of a state such as
‘Fully recovered’ = 7, ‘Same as before’= 4 or ‘Very bad’ =
1. All recovery scores will be measured at every followup
moment (8, 16, 26, 52 weeks,). Previous test results
will not be visible for the patient.
Predictive parameters
– Bacterial infection of the disc
Bacterial infection in the disc will be verified by a bacterial
culture protocol. Tissue necessary for the bacterial
culture will be harvested from herniated disc tissue that
was taken out during surgery. The bacterial culture will
be accompanied by a gram stain and methyl blue stain.
Infection can be distinguished from a contamination by
the quantity of colonies on the culture (0–10 is considered
as contamination). Nevertheless, since it cannot be
ruled out that the presence of 0–10 colonies is an infection
instead of contamination, additional analysis with
0–10 regarded as infection will also be performed.
– Disc inflammation
Disc material harvested during surgery will be stained
for the presence of macrophages, for M1 and M2 macrophages
separately. Evaluation will be done through
counting cells and subsequently categorizing them.
– Modic Changes
Type (1,2 or 3) and severity (< 50% & > 50%) of MC
will be scored at baseline on MRI. Type 1 shows an
hypointense endplate on T1 MRI and a hyperintense
endplate on T2 MRI, Type 2 shows an hyperintense endplate
on both T1 and T2 MRI and Type 3 shows a
hypointense endplate on both T1 and T2 MRI.
Secondary study parameters/endpoints
A possible mediator in this study is the amount and type
of pain medication that patients take, either in self-care
or on prescription from the neurosurgeon or GP as part
of the usual care. This could potentially alter the inflammation
profile (in the case of NSAID’s) or could lead to
lower perceived pain scores. In addition, it could be that
patients with severe inflammation benefit more from
anti-inflammatory drugs. Therefore this study will measure
participants usage of pain medication as follows:
Pharmacological data participants will be asked to fill
in a form regarding the frequency, type and dosage of
pain medication and anti-inflammatory drug usage. This
form will be given to the participant at baseline (in week
before surgery) and will also be given during the oneyear
follow-up at 8, 16, 26 and 52 weeks.
Osteoarthritis In order to investigate to what extent
MC are related to clinical features of osteoarthritis, participants
will be asked to fill in the Womac questionnaire.
The Western Ontario and McMaster Universities
Osteoarthritis (Womac) index questionnaire evaluates
pain and physical function, containing 24 questions
about daily functioning and stiffness. The questionnaire
will be given to participants at baseline and after 1 year
follow-up.
Other study parameters
Furthermore, some additional study parameters that
may cause confounding will be measured:
Demographic data From all patients, general information
will be collected: age, sex, BMI, ASA, smoking
habits, duration of radiating pain symptoms and comorbidity
including: hypercholesteremia, hypertension,
chronic heart failure, myocardial infarction, angina pectoris,
COPD, stroke and diabetes (not only as comorbidity,
but also due to possible polyneuropathy symptoms).
Furthermore, work-related risk factors will be assessed
(professional driver, physical labour and/or heavy lifting
during work).
MRI data nerve root compression (no or mild, moderate,
severe) will be scored on MRI (compression is
believed to lead to more severe pain symptoms)
Study procedures
Surgery techniques lumbar surgery
A unilateral transflaval discectomy will be performed
according to usual care. Patients are placed in the kneeelbow
position. Using anatomical landmarks and
fluoroscopy the level of incision is determined. A small
midline incision in the lumbosacral region is made.
Muscles are unilateral detached from the spinous
process. After spreading the wound a very small partial
resection of the rostral lamen is executed, followed by a
flavectomy with unilateral opening of the lateral recess.
The nerve root is identified as well as the bulging disc. A
discectomy is performed and the tissue taken out is
assembled in a jar, identified with patient name and
study number. If the nerve root is compressed by a sequester,
only a sequesterectomy is performed if deemed
necessary by the surgeon. After decompressing the nerve
and performing a discectomy, the wound is closed in
layers.
Surgery will be performed by a qualified neurosurgeon.
Postoperative care will consist of an admission period of
2 days (day of surgery and day after) and one postoperative
visit to the physiotherapist. From there on, the general
practitioner will take care of the postoperative care.
Surgery techniques cervical surgery
For anterior discectomy, the level of surgery is verified
by fluoroscopy. The operation will be carried out by a
qualified neurosurgeon. Most surgeons operate using
loupe magnification. The platysma muscle is separated
or cleaved at the right side of the midline (less frequently
on the left side), and the prevertebral space is reached
by an approach medial to the sternocleidomastoid
muscle and the carotid artery, and lateral to the trachea
and oesophagus. The disc is incised and the corpora are
distracted. Discectomy is performed as thorough as possible.
Regularly the posterior ligament is cut and the
spinal root is decompressed. If necessary, spondylarthrotic
rims are removed. To the preference of the surgeon
bone graft or an intervertebral fusion device is left
behind.
MRI protocol
The MRI imaging process, which are part of the usual
care, will be done according to the standard protocol of
each participating hospital. Every patient will receive a
series of images performed by a 9.0 Tesla scanner:
– Sagittal T1SE (turbo spin echo)
– Sagittal T2TSE
– Transversal T1-TSE
– Transversal T2-TSE
Evaluation of the MRI’s will be done by two independent
researchers, both experienced in evaluating spine
MRI scans, by using two evaluators, this study can perform
a intra agreement analyses and provide a kappa
value to put the accuracy of the evaluators in perspective.
The evaluators will describe the disc characteristics
(bulging, herniated or sequestrate) and the severity of
nerve root compression. In addition, the images will be
scored on the presence, severity and type of MC. The
Type will be scored according to criteria from Modic
et al. [17, 18]. Type 1 shows an hypointense endplate on
T1 MRI and a hyperintense endplate on T2 MRI, Type 2
shows an hyperintense endplate on both T1 and T2 MRI
and Type 3 shows a hypointense endplate on both T1
and T2 MRI. Severity of MC will be categorized as > 50
and < 50%.
Disc sample
During surgery, the neurosurgeon will collect a sample
of the herniated disc tissue that was removed during the
procedure, which will be used for further histological
analysis.
All harvested discs will be fixed in a 4% formaldehyde
solution for 3–7 days. Tissue will subsequently embedded
in paraffin blocks and 5-μm thick slices shall be
taken from the middle of the block for haematoxylin
staining. Stained coupes will be evaluated under the
microscope for clear signs of infiltrating inflammatory
cells, if tissue from one sample exceeded the capacity of
1 paraffin block, multiple blocks will be formed and a
slide of each block will be evaluated. One slide of each
disc that contained inflammatory cells was submitted to
further analysis using immunohistochemistry:
Presence of M1 macrophages will be characterized by
the co-presence of CD68 (DAKO, Denmark), with
CD192 (Thermofisher,U.S.A) [6]. Presence of M2 macrophages
on the other hand, will be verified by copresence
CD68 and CD163 (Abcam, Netherlands). In
order to be certain that the selected anti-bodies are a
valid tool to assess the presence of M1 and M2 macrophages,
the panel has been tested in a pilot study In this
pilot study, T-cells (CD3) and Neutrophils (CD15) were
present in very low quantities and hence not included in
the study protocol.
For the staining procedure, 5-μm paraffin slices will be
rinsed in ethanol and methanol solutions and prepared for
the expression of CD68, CD192, CD163. Immunohistochemistry
will be performed using a three-step indirect
method. Antibodies will be cooked in EDTA pH 9.0 buffer
as a pre-treatment. Subsequently, an avidin-biotin complex
technique will be performed with the Vectastain
ABC-Elite Kit (Vector Lab. USA) and the appropriate biotinylated
antibodies. Visualization of the peroxidase reaction
will be done with DAB solution (Sigma). Moreover,
samples will be counterstained with Harris haematoxylin.
All of these samples will be accompanied by a positive
control. In control samples, primary antibodies will be
omitted, which results in the expected absence of any cellular
labelling. In order to standardize the evaluation of
the samples, all samples were photographed under the
microscope before they were evaluated. Since our pilot
study showed that CD68 and CD192 was also expressed
by nucleus pulposus cells/chondrocytes, cells were
analysed based on morphological features and only
macrophages were photographed and evaluated. The same
approach was used for CD163.
In order to assess and characterize the bacterial infiltration
of the herniated discs, additional samples will be
extracted from the resected tissues. Disc samples will be
used for anaerobic and aerobic bacterial cultivation,
gram staining and methyl blue staining, to verify and
characterize a bacterial infection according to standard
clinical protocol. Samples with > 10 colonies per species
per culture will be scored as infection, In contrast, samples
with 0–10 colonies per species will be scored as
contamination. At last, a third disc sample will be collected
from the herniated excised tissue, and will be snap
frozen for future analysis.
Blood samples
Blood samples will be collected from the canula directly
after it has been inserted on the holding (OR preparation
room). By doing so, the blood sample for the study will
be drawn before the patient receives prophylactic antibiotic
treatment according to the usual care. A total of 3
blood samples will be collected: the first sample (4 ml
EDTA) will be used for a general blood count, the second
(3 ml Heparin) for lipid and apolipoprotein profiling,
these samples will be send directly to the laboratory
in respective hospitals, the 3th and 4th samples will be
collected in a 4 ml EDTA for future purposes and will be
transferred to the LUMC at the end of the day. At the
LUMC, the 3th sample will be deposited at the microbiology
department where the plasma will be subtracted
according to standard protocol and stored in the freezer.
Since the plasma samples will only be analyzed if the hypotheses
turn out to be true, the exact analysis protocol
will be defined at a later stage.
Statistical analysis
Sample size calculation
Distinguishing between the presence of MC (yes/no),
bacterial infection (yes/no) and inflammation (yes/no)
we have 2x2x2 = 8 groups. We expect the mean during
follow-up of the primary outcome (NRS pain score) and
the distribution of patients among the 8 groups to be as
in Fig. 3. The standard deviation of the NRS is expected
to be 1. These expectations were based on findings from
our earlier study that described the interaction effect between
MC and inflammation on the clinical outcomes
[4], the impact of the presence of bacteria was estimated
based on findings from Dudli et al. 2018, which showed
that the pro inflammatory reaction to bacteria in the disc
depends on the presence of MC [15]. We will primarily
test for any effect of bacterial infection by comparing
the full factorial model to a model without bacterial
infection by means of an F-test on 4 degrees of freedom.
We implemented a Monte-Carlo simulation in the statistical
software R to compute the appropriate sample size.
We found that a total of 160 patients suffices to have
about 90% power to detect any effect of bacterial infection
(Supplementary Figure S1). Since these numbers
will also suffice for the secondary goals of the study, we
intend to include 160 lumbar and 160 cervical subjects.
Since the study burden is low for the participants, we expect
a low drop-out rate of + − 10%.
For the statistical analysis, a linear mixed model will
be used in which bacterial infection, Modic Changes and
disc inflammation are used as a fixed factor and the
NRS-scores of all time points (baseline, 8, 16, 26, 52
weeks) are used as an outcome measure. The model will
be full factorial (assess all main and interaction effects).
In addition, age, sex, nerve root compression and pain
medication will be considered as a covariate.
All secondary study parameters will be analysed by
multiple tests including a Pearson/Spearman correlation
test, linear mixed model and a Chi-square test for categorical
variables.
Discussion
At present, the guideline for radiculopathy is the same
for all patients: a wait and see approach, and surgery is
only offered to those with persevering symptoms. Even
after surgery, for some patients the symptoms persist or
return after a short period of relief. The great variety in
how radiculopathy patients recover indicates that our
‘one size fits all’ model for treating radiculopathy
requires refinement. Previous research has already indicated
that inflammatory cells such as macrophages play
a crucial role in recovery and that the extend of this inflammation
response varies from patient to patient [2].
Moreover, the presence of inflammation is not always a
beneficial sign, as recent studies have indicated that
presence of MC seem to indicate a chronically irritating
inflammation response [4], and others have found bacteria
in herniated discs [14]. Such findings strongly indicate that
refinement of our current treatment approach is needed
and that radiculopathy patients should be further sub characterized
based on their inflammation status. Up till now,
the evidence for inflammation subgroups within radiculopathy
is not convincing and most studies focus on only one
aspect without incorporating the rest of the inflammation
status. For example, many recent studies have focussed on
proving bacterial presence in herniated discs, but none have
assessed whether this has any impact on clinical outcomes
[14]. Other studies have tried to treat patients with antiinflammatory
drugs but failed to assess whether inflammation
was present in these patients [19, 20]. Some studies
have associated presence of MC with poor clinical outcome
but failed to incorporate inflammation status [21]. Further,
many studies required information regarding the inflammation
status from analysing the disc material from surgery
and don’t look for biomarkers in blood [22–25]. Others
focus on drawing blood without verifying whether the
blood results correspond to the status of the disc [26–28].
In order to create a more personalized treatment approach
it is first essential to understand which patients are affected
by what kind of inflammation and how this affects clinical
outcomes. Moreover, it is important to explore biomarkers
in blood that reliably resemble these different inflammation
statuses, so personalized clinical decisions can be taken in
an early disease stage without invasive and costly diagnostic
procedures. Therefore, the EIMICOR will be the first study
to incorporate all various types of data on tissue and blood
level and assess their relevance concerning clinical outcome.
By doing so we aim to connect the dots and elucidate
the complex role of inflammation in sciatica.
Possible operational issues
The design of the present study is aimed at reducing
the amount of time and effort that is required from
the participants and surgeons as much as possible. At
the same time we focus on saving unnecessary costs
by postponing additional analyses until our initial hypothesis
is confirmed and additional analysis are more
likely to reveal critical information. Unfortunately, this
design comes with some practical issues that have to
be dealt with. For instance, transferring the samples
to the LUMC takes time and if surgery is scheduled
late in the afternoon, it could mean that the samples
cannot be processed in the LUMC the same day
which may impact the quality of the data. Therefore
it is crucial for the quality of our data that the inclusions
are tailored to the OR schedules.
Moreover, as participants fill in the follow-up questionnaires
through an email link, it makes it harder to
control if they fill in the questionnaires, which may lead
to missing data. In order to manage this issue, the status
of the questionnaire will be monitored frequently and
participants that forgot to fill in the questionnaires will
be reminded to do so by email and phone.