Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is a rare
autoimmune neuromuscular junction dysfunction resulting
from antibodies that are generated against voltagegated
calcium channels (VGCC) on presynaptic nerve
terminals, thereby suppressing the release of neurotransmitters
such as acetylcholine [1–3]. The onset age of
LEMS patients mainly ranges from 20 to 50 years [4], although
cases in childhood and infancy have been
reported [5, 6]. It is estimated that about 60 % of LEMS
patients are tumor-related [7]. Among LEMS patients,
small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) is the most common type,
but other types of tumors, including non-small cell lung
cancer, mixed lung cancer, thymoma, and prostate cancer,
have also been reported [7, 8]. Based on the prevalence
of SCLC, the prevalence of LEMS is estimated to
be 1 in 100,000 in the United States [4]. LEMS is characterized
by limb girdle muscle weakness, easy fatigability,
absence of deep tendon reflexes with post-tetanic potentiation,
and autonomic alterations, such as dry mouth
and erectile dysfunction. Activities related to daily functions,
such as rising from a chair, climbing stairs, and
self-care management, are also involved [9]. It has been
extensively documented in biopsied intercostal muscles
that reducing the quantitative release of ACh plays a
vital role in the pathophysiology of LEMS [10].
LEMS is initially diagnosed on the basis of typical clinical
characteristics, including the classic triad of proximal
muscle weakness, autonomic nerve dysfunction and
decreased tendon reflexes [11]. A confirmation diagnosis
of LEMS also requires a combination of specific VGCC
antibody detection and characteristic electrophysiological
results. The detection of positive VGCC antibody
provides reliable evidence for the diagnosis of LEMS.
VGCC-antibody-positivity has been observed in 100 % of
LEMS patients with SCLC and 90 % of LEMS cases without
potential malignancy [12]. Lambert and Eaton [13]
first proposed the classic electrophysiological triad of
LEMS, including low resting compound muscle action
potentials (CMAP) amplitude, decreased response of
low-frequency repetitive nerve stimulation, and increased
response after high frequency stimulation or
short exercise.
Over the past few decades, many symptomatic drug
treatments have been tried, including guanidine, pyridazine,
4-aminopyridine and 3,4-diaminopyridine (3,4-
DAP, amifampridine), the last of which has proven to be
the most effective [14]. With the exception of 3,4-DAP,
these drugs have not been studied in clinical trials, but
only in small case series. In December 2009, 3,4-DAP
was approved for the first time in Europe and was subsequently
recommended as a first-line treatment for LEMS
in 2010 [15]. Amifampridine phosphate (a salt form of
3,4-DAP) was found to be more stable than the base
form, as it can be stored at room temperature [16].
In recent years, the efficacy of 3, 4-DAP in the treatment
of LEMS has been widely discussed, but the results
of the available studies remain uncertain. No reliable
conclusions have been drawn and it is unclear whether
the potential advantages outweigh the disadvantages.
Therefore, we performed a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) to evaluate the efficacy and
safety of 3,4-DAP in the treatment of LEMS in adults.
Methods
Literature search
A comprehensive search of electronic databases including
the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Specialized
Register, the Cochrane Central Register of
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Pubmed, Web of Science,
MEDLINE and EMBASE was performed for all years up
to January 2020. The following terms were used to
search for pertinent studies: ‘Lambert-Eaton (myasthenic
syndrome)’ or ‘Eaton-Lambert’ or ‘LEMS’ combined with
‘3, 4-Diaminopyridine’ or ‘3,4 Diaminopyridine’ or ‘Firdapse’
or ‘Amifampridine Phosphate’ or ‘3,4-DAP’.
Bibliographies of the randomized trial reports were consulted
and the study authors were contacted to determine
other published or unpublished data. By searching
these databases, a total of 122 articles were retrieved and
99 articles were deleted by title and abstract. Of the
remaining 23 articles, 15 articles were deleted for reasons
including no case-control studys, different interventions
or insufficient data. Of the remaining 8 studies,
two were also deleted because they did not use uniform
indicators to evaluate the results. In the end, six articles
were included in this meta-analysis. The search and select
process is shown in Fig. 1.
Inclusion criteria
All randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials of
adult patients diagnosed with LEMS, with or without
SCLC, and who received 3, 4-DAP treatment were included.
The primary outcome indicator was change in
muscle strength score (quantitative myasthenia gravis,
QMG), or limb muscle strength measured by myometry.
The secondary outcome indicator was change in average
CMAP amplitude at rest.
Data extraction
Two reviewers (D.H. and W.M.) independently examined
all titles and abstracts retrieved from the literature
search of various databases, and evaluated the full text of
all potentially related studies. Each reviewer independently
assessed the study eligibility and disagreements
were resolved by group discussion. Two authors (J.H.
and M.L.) independently performed the data extraction.
Baseline data were collected using standardized tables,
including author, year of publication, number of cases,
patient age, sex, presence of cancer, and outcome measures
(mean, standard deviation). Whenever possible, insufficient
data was obtained from the study authors.
Quality assessment
The methodological quality of each included article was
independently assessed by two authors using the
Cochrane Collaboration’s tool to determine the risk of
bias (Fig. 2). The risk of bias process includes sequence
generation, blinding, allocation concealment, selective
reporting, processing of incomplete results data, or any
other form of bias [17]. The items were rated as “Yes”,
“No” or “Unclear” per the established Cochrane scale,
with “Yes” representing a low risk of bias, and “No”
representing a high risk of bias. ‘Unclear’ was used when
there was inappropriate information to make a judgment,
or when the project was not relevant to the research.
The review authors reached agreement by
consensus.
Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analysis was performed on the basis of methodological
quality, testing for heterogeneity of results,
and adjusting confidence limits as appropriate.
Statistical analysis
Due to cross-over studies included in this meta analysis,
we pooled data with the generic inverse variance (GIV)
method, which uses the mean differences (MD) and
standard error (SE) of the mean for the diference between
treatment and control. Wherever possible, published
SE was used;When this was not available, we
estimated SE with published P-values or raw data obtained
by the authors.MD and 95 % CIs were output to
perform the test of combined statistics. All P values were
2-sided, with P < 0.05 indicating statistical significance.
The heterogeneity of these studies was tested by inconcistency
index (I2) statistics. An I2 > 50 % indicated the
existence of substantial heterogeneity, in which case a
random effects model was adopted, otherwise, a fixed effects
model was used for a pooled analysis [18]. All the
statistical analysis was conducted with RevMan (version
5.3, the Cochrane Collaboration, London).
Results
Description of studies
The results of the literature search found 8 RCTs that
used 3, 4-DAP to treat LEMS. However, in two of these
RCTs, 3TUG was used to evaluate the outcome of treatment
without the use of QMG or CMAP, therefore the
two RCTs had to be excluded as they did not meet the
inclusion criteria. Finally, only six RCTs were eligible for
inclusion in this meta-analysis. The six eligible RCTs included
115 patients with LEMS treated with oral or
intrevenous 3,4-DAP or placebo, without any healthy
participants.The characteristics of all included studies
are shown in Table 1.
The first RCT was a cross-sectional trial of 12 patients
with LEMS, which compared the efficacy of the maximum
oral dose of 3, 4-DAP (100 mg/ day) with the placebo
for 6 days, using muscle strength score and CMAP
at days 3 and 6 [19].
The second RCT, a parallel group design, compared
an oral dose of 3, 4-DAP (60 mg/day) for 12 participants
with placebo for 14 participants. QMG muscle strength
score and CMAP were performed on days 5 and 6 [20].
The third RCT was a double-blind, cross-over study of
6 participants. Three patients in the first group received
an initial dose of 15 mg per day, that was gradually increased
up to a daily dose of 80 mg at the end of the 8-
day course.The second group increased their daily intake
of 30 mg to 75 mg during the 3-day study because of
time constraints. QMG score and CMAP were recorded
as the outcomes [21].
The fourth RCT was a double blind, double dummy,
cross-over study of 9 participants. It compared intravenous
3,4-DAP against placebo, intravenous pyridostigmine,
and a combination infusion of 3,4-DAP and
pyridostigmine. Muscle strength and CMAP between 10
and 170 min after infusion were taken as endpoints [14].
The fifth RCT was a double-blind, parallel study. It
compared 3,4-DAP for 16 patients with placebo for 20
participants. In part 1, patients received a total dose of 3,4-
DAP 15–80 mg/day in 3–4 subdoses, with a maximum single
dose of 20 mg. Patients received a dose of at least
30 mg/day to enter the second part of the study.QMG
score and CMAP were performed on day 14 [22].
The sixth RCT was a double-blind, parallel study. It
compared 3, 4-DAP for 13 patients with placebo for 13
participants. These 13 patients received 3, 4-DAP (30–
80 mg/d, 3 or 4 times daily). QMG score was recorded
on day 4 [23].
Data synthesis
Primary outcome measure: the score on a muscle strength
scale
The six included RCTs used a muscle strength score or
myometric limb measurement as an outcome indicator,
and reported significant improvements in muscle strength
score, or myometric limb measurement after treatment.
However, a meta-analysis of all the studies was impossible
on account of the obvious differences in the primary outcome
of these studies. QMG score was used as the primary
outcome to assess muscle strength in four of the RCTs
[20–23]. The muscle strength scoring system used by McEvoy
et al. [19] and the isometric muscle strength scoring
system used by Wirtz et al. [14] were different from the
QMG scoring system. The muscle strength scoring systems
from McEvoy [19] or Wirtz [14] could not be converted
into an equivalent QMG score. Therefore, we only compared
the overall therapeutic effects of the four RCTs that
reported a QMG score by observing the change in QMG
score from baseline to 3, 4-DAP or placebo treatment. As
these four RCTs included one cross-over study and three
parallel studies, it is necessary to conduct GIV analysis. A
GIV analysis of the four RCTs showed that QMG scores
decreased (improved) by 2.76 points (95 % CI, − 4.08 to
-1.45 points) after treatment with 3,4-DAP (Fig. 3).
Secondary outcome measure: changes in the amplitude of
resting CMAP
Changes in resting CMAP amplitude after 3,4-DAP or
placebo treatment were recorded in five of the six trials
[14, 19–22]. Moreover, all five trials showed significant
improvements in CMAP after administration of 3, 4-
DAP compared to placebo. As three cross-over studies
and two parallel studies were included in the five trials,
we conducted a GIV analysis. A meta-analysis of the secondary
outcome CMAP showed that the overall CMAP
amplitude increased significantly in LEMS patients with
3, 4-DAP treatment, compared with placebo treatment.
The overall mean improvement in CMAP of the GIV
analysis was 1.34 mV (95 % CI, 0.98 to 1.70), favouring
the 3, 4-DAP treatment (Fig. 4). All trials assessed
CMAPs at one specific time point during their trial, with
only the study of McEvoy and colleagues [19] providing
a 3-month follow up of results.
Publication bias
In this meta-analysis, an evaluation of funnel plots
showed that the two outcomes QMG and CMAP were
basically symmetrical, indicating that the risk of publication
bias was small. The funnel plots of the primary outcome
QMG and the secondary outcome CMAP are
shown in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively. In addition, in order
to further accurately assess publication bias, we also performed
Begg’s test using StatsDirect statistical software
(Version 14.0, StatsDirect Ltd, Cheshire, England). The
results of Begg’s test for QMG (P = 0.329 [> 0.05]) and
CMAP (P = 0.760 [> 0.05]) indicated the absence of publication
bias.
Heterogeneity analysis
The heterogeneity tests for both QMG and CMAP
showed I2 < 50 % (I2 = 26 % for QMG and I2 = 0 % for
CMAP). These results indicate a lack of heterogeneity in
these groups and can be considered as coming from a
homogeneous group. Thus, combined statistics could be
used in fixed effects models.
Discussion
Efficacy of 3, 4-DAP treatment for LEMS
In LEMS, 3,4-DAP blocks VGCCs, prolongs the action
potential depolarization of motor nerve endings, and increases
the opening time of VGCC [24]. This process
leads to an increase in presynaptic calcium influx and an
improvement in acetylcholine release, manifested as
enhancement in muscle function.
In 1989, McEvoy and colleagues studied the effect of
oral 3, 4-DAP on 12 LEMS patients, 7 of whom were cancer
patients, in a double-blind RCT [19]. This trial showed
distinct improvements in neurological dysfunction scores,
isometric muscle strength tests, limb strength measurements,
autonomic function, and CMAP amplitude after
oral 3,4-DAP of up to 100 mg compared to placebo. Oh
and colleagues published a cross-over RCT of oral 3,4-
DAP of up to 80 mg daily, which indicated a significant effect
over the placebo in patients with LEMS [21]. Similarly,
another randomized, parallel group trial of 26
patients demonstrated significant enhancement of both
QMG score and CMAP amplitude with an oral dosage of
60 mg of 3,4-DAP daily [20].Similar results of intravenous
administration of 3,4-DAP were also reported by Wirtz
and colleagues [14].
All primary outcome indicators of isometric muscle
strength [14], neurological disability score [19] and
QMG score [20–23] showed significant improvements
after the administration of oral or intravenous 3,4-DAP.
We conducted a meta-analysis of QMG score according
to the results provided in the studies by Sanders
et al.[20], Oh, Claussenet al., Oh, Shcherbakova et al.
[21, 22], and Shieh et al. [23]. The QMG rating system,
with a score from 0 to 39, is a physician-rated assessment,
including assessments of speech, swallowing, external
ocular muscles, facial muscle strength, and all
limb muscles. The QMG score is a quantitative evaluation,
in which a lower score indicates better muscle
function [25]. The current meta-analysis showed a significant
overall benefit (a decrease of 2.76 points, 95 %
CI, -4.08to-1.45) in QMG for LEMS patients with 3, 4-
DAP compared to placebo. According to Barohn et al.
[26], only a QMG change of more than 2.6 indicates a
clinically significant improvement on the basis of 5 myasthenia
gravis patients and 4 controls. If Barohn’s criterion
is used, this meta-analysis confirmed a significant
clinical improvement using 3, 4-DAP, whereas the study
by Sanders and colleagues [20] did not show the similar
results. As Sanders pointed out, it may be due to the fact
that bulbar, ocular, and distal limb items of the QMG
score are less common in LEMS than in myasthenia
gravis. However, studies by both Oh et al. and Shieh
et al. demonstrated that QMG score is an effective
method to assess clinical enhancement in muscle
strength, provided the QMG scoring system is followed
[21–23]. Similarly,Keogh M et al. [27] and Maddison P
et al. [28, 29] concurred that the QMG score should still
remain the preferred outcome indicator of muscle
strength in future LEMS treatment trials. The use of
uniform primary outcome measurements and data from
further tests will help to describe more specific effects of
3, 4-DAP treatment. We also recommend that in keeping
with previous studies, it is appropriate to continue to
evaluate the effect of 3,4-DAP treatment by performing
a QMG assessment 3–4 days after the initiation of
treatment.
Sanders et al. [20] reported that in a RCT of 26 participants
with LEMS, the median resting CMAP amplitude
improved by 1.3 mV (+ 64 %) in 12 cases receiving
3, 4-DAP 60 mg daily, compared with a decrease of 0.1
mV(-3 %) in the placebo group (P < 0.001). This metaanalysis
also showed an average improvement in the secondary
outcome measure, with a resting CMAP amplitude
of 1.34 mV (95 % CI, 0.98 to 1.70). Therefore, the
change of mean amplitude of CMAP appears to be a
repeatable and objective secondary outcome for any
LEMS treatment trial. The authors of this study suggest
that since the duration of action of 3, 4-DAP is relatively
short, the duration of action should be recorded 3 to 6 h
after taking 3, 4-DAP, and recommend that future studies
record the CMAP assessment time related to the dose of
the drug.
Results from the six RCTs of 3, 4-DAP in the treatment
of LEMS showed significant efficacy, consistent
with earlier reports of beneficial efficacy. The application
of 3, 4-DAP reflects the current practice of first-line
symptomatic treatment for patients with LEMS.
Adverse events
Adverse events associated with 3, 4-DAP treatment reported
from the included trials [14, 19–23] included
temporary perioral tingling and digital paraesthesiae,
back pain, headache, and epigastric discomfort. In
addition, Wirtz et al [14] described one participant with
cellulitis after 3,4-DAP infusion and McEvoy et al. reported
a participant who suffered from epilepsy while
taking 100 mg of 3.4-dap daily [19]. Of these included
trials, there were no other major adverse events.
Limitations
Although these RCTs and the pooled results showed a
significant improvement in the treatment of LEMS with
3,4-DAP, the number of RCTs studied was relatively
small, thus limiting the total number of cases in this
meta-analysis. In addition, not all RCTs used the same
primary outcome (QMG) and secondary outcome
(CMAP) measures. Finally, the follow-up time for these
RCTs was limited. In future studies, large sample sizes,
consistent outcome measures, and long-term follow-up
RCTs are needed to further confirm the therapeutic
efficacy and safety of 3,4-DAP on LEMS.
Conclusions
The pooled results of randomized controlled trials
demonsrated with moderate to high evidence that 3,4-
DAP has a significant effect on LEMS treatment, with
improvements in muscle strength score and CMAP
amplitude.