For acute ischaemic stroke within the time windows,
IV thrombolysis (intravenous thrombolysis) is a clinically
effective and guideline-recommended therapeutic
method [1]. After intravenous thrombolysis, statins are
regularly used as medicine for ischaemic stroke patients
during hospitalization [2].
However, several studies have shown different conclusions
regarding whether intravenous thrombolysis combined
with statins is related to functional outcomes in
ischaemic stroke patients [3–5]. Several meta-analyses
have suggested that using statins in combination with
thrombolysis had no significant effects on the prognosis
of ischaemic stroke patients or that the combination
increased the rate of haemorrhage [6–8]. Therefore, it is
uncertain whether intravenous thrombolysis combined
with statins is effective for ischaemic stroke patients.
A study showed that high-dose statins could increase
the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage in ischaemic stroke
patients [9]. Other studies have suggested that highintensity
statins after thrombolysis may increase the risk
of bleeding in ischaemic stroke patients [10, 11]. These
findings further raise doubts about the safety of intravenous
thrombolysis combined with statins. In these studies,
the patients were mainly from Europe and America,
and these stroke patients mainly took high-dose statins.
However, Asian stroke patients often take low-dose
statins. Therefore, the conclusions may not be suitable for
Asian patients. Therefore, it is speculated that reducing
the dose of statins may improve the risk of bleeding in
stroke patients undergoing thrombolysis.
The present prospective observational cohort study
aimed to further explore the relationship between using
low-dose statins combined with intravenous thrombolysis
and the effects and safety outcomes of Asian ischaemic
stroke patients.
Methods
Participants
We consecutively recruited patients with acute ischaemic
stroke who received IV thrombolysis in the Neurology
Department of West China Hospital, Sichuan University.
The stroke diagnosis of the patients met the WHO
stroke diagnostic criteria. All patients had a stroke pack
(head CT: CTA + CTP) examination. The patients were
enrolled from November 1, 2018, to September 30, 2020
and followed up to December 31, 2020. The study is a
prospective observational cohort design.
The patients receiving statins after onset were assigned
to the low-dose statin group, and the other patients who
did not receive statins after onset were assigned to the
control group. Low-dose statins were defined as atorvastatin
20 mg, simvastatin 10 mg and rosuvastatin 10 mg
daily after onset [12]. A total of 220 patients were needed
to show a significant difference [5].
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) age over
18 years; (2) the diagnosis of stroke with evidence of neuroimaging
(CT or MRI); (3) The patients did not receive
statins before onset; (4) The patients in the statin group
started statins after onset for 7 days or more and (5) IV
thrombolysis therapy administration within 4.5 h after
stroke onset.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) mRS was ≥ 2
before onset; (2) the time between admission and onset
was more than 4.5 h; (3) treatment with other doses of
statins after the onset of the disease or the use of statins
for less than 7 days; (4) stroke associated with trauma or
surgery; and (5) intracerebral haemorrhage, subarachnoid
haemorrhage, coagulopathy, cancer, cardiac failure, or
severe hepatic or renal dysfunction.
The study was performed in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and the ethical standards of the institutional
and/or national research committee. The study
was approved by the Ethics Committee of West China
Hospital, Sichuan University with approval number 2019
(319).
Definition of risk factors
Cardioembolic stroke was proven by definite history,
electrocardiography, and cardiac colour ultrasound. The
haemorrhage events included intracerebral haemorrhage
and gastrointestinal haemorrhage. ICH (intracerebral
haemorrhage) was proven by CT in the hospital regardless
of whether the condition of the patient changed.
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage included haematemesis
and haematochezia. An mRS score of 0–2 was defined
as a favourable functional outcome (FFO) at 90 days. A
difference in NIHSS score greater than 4 was defined
as an improvement. A NIHSS score of 0–4 was defined
as a mild stroke, a NIHSS score of 5–15 was defined
as a moderate stroke, and a NIHSS score of 16–40 was
defined as a severe stroke.
Data collection and outcome
The baseline data were collected from electronic clinical
records, and structured questionnaires were completed
by patients or their relatives at the patients’ admission to
the hospital. The data included age, sex, blood pressure,
history of smoking and drinking, NIHSS score and mRS
score at admission, history of diseases and history of drug
use. Types of strokes and types of statins were also collected.
We recorded laboratory data, including TC (total
cholesterol), TG (triglyceride), HDL-C (high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol), and LDL-C. at the time of hospital
admission.
The efficacy outcome was the difference in the NIHSS
score between admission and 7 days after admission and
FFO (mRS < = 2) at 90 days after onset. The safety outcomes
were intracerebral haemorrhage and gastrointestinal
haemorrhage in the hospital and death events at
90 days after onset. We collected the NIHSS scores and
in the hospital via face-to-face interviews. We collected
the haemorrhage in the hospital via electronic clinical
records. We collected the mRS scores and death events at
90 days stroke onset within 2 years via telephone (more
than two different numbers of patients or relatives),
WeChat (an instant messaging application) or e-mail.
The two experienced neurologists who evaluated events
and outcomes were blind to the patients’ condition and
grouping.
Statistical analysis
To describe the baseline characteristics, the continuous
variables were expressed as the mean and SD (standard
deviation) or median and frequencies. Categorized data
and ranked data are expressed as numbers and percentages.
To compare the group differences, variance analysis
was conducted for continuous data following the normal
distribution. A nonparametric test (Mann–Whitney
U test) was conducted for continuous data that did not
follow a normal distribution. A chi-square test was conducted
for categorical data and ranked data.
To analyse the outcome events, we compared the group
differences using the chi-square test. We analysed the
effects of risk factors on the outcome events using univariable
and multivariable logistic regression methods.
The eligible factors of multivariable logistic regression
included (1) P of univariable logistic regression less than
0.1 and (2) a factor with clinical significance. We calculated
the odds ratios (ORs), 95% CIs and p values using
logistic regression methods. We compared the death
events at different times with a Kaplan–Meier curve.
We performed subgroup analysis via univariable logistic
regression by differences in NIHSS scores at admission
and differences in stroke type (cardioembolic stroke and
noncardioembolic stroke). The threshold for statistical
significance was set as P < 0.05. SPSS 23.0 for Windows
was used to process the data.
Results
Patients
The study recruited 236 patients. We lost 21 patients’
data for no follow-up or withdrew the study, and finally,
the data of 215 patients were acquired.
Among the 215 patients (mean age:
70.92 ± 12.458 years), 113 (52.6%) were female. The
median and interquartile ranges of the NIHSS at admission
were 8 (5–14). Comparing the baseline data of the
different groups, the low-dose statin groups had a higher
percentage of antiplatelet drug use in the hospital, a
lower percentage of cardioembolic in the hospital, and
lower NIHSS scores at admission than the control group.
No significant difference in other baseline data was found
between the two groups (Table 1).
Efficacy outcome
We found that the low-dose (p < 0.001) statin groups had
a higher percentage of NIHSS improvement at 7 days
than the control group. The low-dose (p < 0.001) statin
groups had a higher percentage of FFOs at 90 days than
the control group (Table 1).
In the univariate logistic regression analysis, we found
that the use of statins (OR = 5.524, P < 0.001) and the
use of antiplatelet drugs in the hospital (OR = 1.455,
P = 0.032) were related to a higher percentage of NIHSS
score improvement at 7 days after admission, and the
history of hypertension (OR = 0.468, P = 0.018) and ICH
in the hospital (OR = 0.266, P = 0.001) were inversely
related to a higher percentage of NIHSS score improvement
at 7 days after admission (Supplementary Table 1).
Using statins (OR = 2.734, P = 0.008) and the use of antiplatelet
drugs in hospitals (OR = 1.512, P = 0.008) were
associated with FFO at 90 days. Higher NIHSS at admission
(OR = 0.948, P = 0.011), higher NIHSS at 7 days after
admission (OR = 0.938, P < 0.001), older age (OR = 0.975,
P = 0.039), and higher systolic were inversely related to
pressure (OR = 0.985, P = 0.007), and ICH in the hospital
(OR = 0.452, P = 0.036) was inversely related to FFO at
90 days (Supplementary Table 2).
In the multivariable logistic regression analysis, after
adjusting for risk factors, we found that the use of statins
(OR = 4.697, P = 0.001) was still related to a higher percentage
of NIHSS score improvement at 7 days after
admission, and the history of hypertension (OR = 0.430,
P = 0.015) and ICH in the hospital (OR = 0.367,
P = 0.024) were still inversely related to a higher percentage
of NIHSS score improvement at 7 days after admission
(Table 2). Higher NIHSS at 7 days after admission
(OR = 0.955, P = 0.022) and higher systolic pressure
(OR = 0.986, P = 0.026) were still significantly inversely
related to FFO at 90 days (Table 2).
Safety outcome
When we evaluated haemorrhage events in the hospital,
we found that the low-dose statin groups had a lower
percentage of ICH events (p < 0.001) and gastrointestinal
haemorrhage(p = 0.003) than the control group (Table 1).
Regarding death events at the 2-year follow-up, we found
that the low-dose (p < 0.001) statin groups had a lower
percentage than the control group (Table 1).
In the univariate logistic regression analysis, we found
that the use of statins (OR = 0.157, P < 0.001), use of antiplatelet
drugs in the hospital (OR = 0.287, P < 0.001) and
higher value of platelets (OR = 0.988, P = 0.008) were
inversely related to a higher percentage of ICH in the
hospital (Supplementary Table 2). Cardioembolic stroke
(OR = 2.676, P = 0.010) was related to a higher percentage
of ICH in the hospital (Supplementary Table 2).
Using statins (OR = 0.043, P = 0.006) and a higher value
of TC (OR = 0.379, P = 0.048) were inversely related
to a higher percentage of gastrointestinal haemorrhage
in the hospital (Supplementary Table 2). Older
age (OR = 1.192, P = 0.019), a higher value of platelets
(OR = 1.014, P = 0.048) and a higher value of blood glucose
(OR = 1.217, P = 0.020) were positively related to a
higher percentage of gastrointestinal haemorrhage in the
hospital (Supplementary Table 2). We also found that the
use of statins (OR = 0.042, P < 0.001) and the use of antiplatelet
drugs in hospitals (OR = 0.302, P < 0.001) were
inversely related to a higher percentage of death events
within 2 years. Older age (OR = 1.061, P = 0.002), higher
NIHSS at admission (OR = 1.122, P < 0.001), higher
NIHSS at 7 days after admission (OR = 1.130, P < 0.001)
and cardioembolic status (OR = 2.779, P = 0.005) were
positively related to a higher percentage of death events
within 2 years (Supplementary Table 2).
In the multivariable logistic regression analysis,
after adjusting for risk factors, we found that the use of
statins (OR = 0.372, P = 0.049), use of antiplatelet drugs
in the hospital (OR = 0.414, P = 0.006) and higher value
of platelets (OR = 0.988, P = 0.010) were still inversely
related to a higher percentage of intracerebral haemorrhage
in the hospital (Table 3). Using statins (OR = 0.023,
P = 0.016) was still inversely related to a higher percentage
of gastrointestinal haemorrhage in the hospital.
Older age (OR = 1.429, P = 0.022) and a higher value of
blood glucose (OR = 1.407, P = 0.026) were still positively
related to a higher percentage of gastrointestinal haemorrhage
in the hospital (Table 3). Using statins (OR = 0.072,
P < 0.001) was still inversely associated with a higher
percentage of death events within 2 years. Older age
(OR = 1.061, P = 0.009) and higher NIHSS at 7 days after
admission (OR = 1.075, P = 0.006) were still positively
related to a higher percentage of death events at 2 years
(Table 4).
When we analysed death events in the different groups
at different times with Kaplan–Meier curves, we found
that the low-dose statin groups had a significantly higher
survival rate than the control group at different times
(Fig. 1).
Subgroup analysis
In the subgroup analysis, in mild stroke patients, statin
use was only significantly inversely related to ICH
(OR = 0.01) in the hospital and death event rates
(OR = 0.01) at 2 years. Using statins were not related
to other outcomes. In moderate stroke patients, using
statins was significantly related to NIHSS improvement
(OR = 7.222), ICH (OR = 0.201) and gastrointestinal
haemorrhage (OR = 0.074) in the hospital and death
event rates (OR = 0.047) at 2 years. Using statins was
not related to FFO at 90 days. In severe stroke patients,
statin use was significantly related to NIHSS improvement
(OR = 4.833) and death event rates (OR = 0.083) at
2 years. Using statins was not related to ICH or gastrointestinal
haemorrhage in the hospital or FFO at 90 days
(Fig. 2). In the cardioembolic stroke subgroup, statin
use was significantly related to NIHSS improvement
(OR = 3.5) and death event rates (OR = 0.102) at 2 years.
Using statins was not related to ICH in the hospital or
FFO at 90 days. In the noncardioembolic stroke subgroup,
statin use was not related to NIHSS improvement
(OR = 9.143) or FFO at 90 days (OR = 3.514). Statin use
was significantly inversely related to ICH (OR = 0.353) in
the hospital and death event rates (OR = 0.102) at 2 years.
Using statins was not related to gastrointestinal haemorrhage
in the hospital (Fig. 3).
Discussion
We found that the low-dose statin groups had a higher
percentage of NIHSS improvement at 7 days after admission
and FFO at 90 days. The low-dose statin groups had
a lower percentage of intracerebral haemorrhage and
gastrointestinal haemorrhage in the hospital and a lower
percentage of death events within 2 years than the control
group. When we analysed risk factors through logistic
regression, statins were significantly related to NIHSS
improvement, fewer haemorrhage events in the hospital
and death events within 2 years. When we evaluated
death events through the K-M curve, we found that the
low-dose statin groups had a higher survival rate than the
control group in both 2 years. The effect of statins was
more significant for moderate stroke patients or noncardioembolic
stroke patients.
When the efficacy outcomes in the hospital were evaluated,
our results were similar to those of Manuel Cappellari’s
study [5]. The effect was significant in the different
subgroups. Acute ischaemic patients after intravenous
thrombolysis taking statins might have a short-term benefit
for patients. When evaluating functional outcomes
at 90 days, our results showed that using statins was not
significantly related to FFO. The relationship in the difference
subgroup had a similar result. The results were
consistent with those of the low-dose statin subgroup of
Manuel Cappellari’s study for 3 months of FFO [5]. However,
the noncardioembolic stroke subgroup showed a
significant difference. Therefore, low-dose statins might
improve FFO at 90 days in noncardioembolic stroke
patients after intravenous thrombolysis. We found that
a higher value of SBP at admission was a risk factor for
higher mRS at 90 days, and the results were not entirely
consistent with Anderson’s study [13]. Anderson’s intervention
was intensive blood pressure reduction, and
our data were SBP. The different data types could partly
explain the different conclusions. The results suggest that
blood pressure management at admission plays a role in
the prognosis of ischaemic stroke patients with intravenous
thrombolysis.
When we evaluated safety outcomes, we found that
low-dose statins were related to fewer intracerebral
haemorrhage and gastrointestinal haemorrhage events
through the chi-square test and logistic regression.
In the mild and moderate stroke subgroups and noncardioembolic
subgroups, statin use was significantly
inversely related to ICH. It suggested the results had
a statistic power. Our results showed that antiplatelet
drug use and higher platelet counts were also related
to fewer intracerebral haemorrhage events. The relationship
between statin use and antiplatelet therapy
was not consistent with that found in other studies [14,
15]. Patients not taking these drugs when they have
an intracerebral haemorrhage might partly explain the
inconsistent results. It is easy to understand the effect
of platelets on intracerebral haemorrhage. The results
of reduced gastrointestinal haemorrhage were consistent
with a study that included myocardial infarction
patients [16]. This finding suggested that statins
might be a protective factor against gastrointestinal
haemorrhage in acute ischaemic stroke patients with
intravenous thrombolysis. However, for the different
subgroups, the relationship was not statistically significant.
Therefore, further study is needed to confirm
this conclusion. In addition, our results suggested that
increasing age and higher blood glucose levels were
related to more gastrointestinal haemorrhage. This suggests
that we should consider these factors when evaluating
the risk of intravenous thrombolysis for acute
ischaemic stroke patients.
When evaluating death outcomes, we found that using
statins resulted in fewer deaths for acute ischaemic stroke
patients with intravenous thrombolysis. The effect was
significant for different subgroups of patients. The results
were similar to Manuel Cappellari’s study about the
effect of statins on the chance of death in acute ischaemic
stroke patients with intravenous thrombolysis over
3 months [5]. Our results suggested that using statins to
decrease death events had a longer-term effect. Within
2 years, the low-dose statin groups had significantly fewer
deaths than the control group. This result suggested that
low-dose statins might decrease long-term mortality for
acute ischaemic stroke patients with intravenous thrombolysis.
Nonetheless, more research is needed to confirm
this conclusion.
Our study has several limitations. First, the study
could not identify a causal relationship given the observational
cohort design. However, the conditions of the
prospective observational cohort were consistent with
those of the real world, and the conclusions might be
suitable for use in clinical practice. Second, we did
not compare the specific doses of statins in our study
because high-intensity statins are rarely used in Asian
clinical practice, so it is difficult to obtain relevant
data. Finally, the smaller number of patients in the control
groups might have affected the statistical power
of the results. Although we used logistic regression
to increase the statistical power of the results, a study
including more control group patients could further
support the conclusions of the present study.
In conclusion, for acute ischaemic patients after
intravenous thrombolysis, the use of low-dose statins
was significantly related to NIHSS improvement, fewer
haemorrhage events in the hospital and death events
within 2 years. These relationships were significant,
especially for moderate stroke patients and noncardioembolic
stroke patients.