Background
Anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (anti-NMDAR)
encephalitis is an autoimmune disease associated with
serum and/or cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) antibodies
against functional NMDAR [1, 2]. Patients develop
acute or subacute psychiatric symptoms, memory loss,
movement disorders, seizures, speech dysfunction and
disturbance of consciousness [3].
Electroencephalography (EEG) can be useful for diagnosing
anti-NMDAR encephalitis [4–9]. Extreme delta
brush (EDB) is a characteristic EEG pattern of anti-
NMDAR encephalitis [4]. EDB is consists of rhythmic
delta activity at 1–3 Hz with superimposed bursts of
rhythmic beta frequency activity “riding” on each delta
wave. The beta/delta power ratio and rhythmic alpha
sinusoidal waves in the frontotemporal regions can provide
indications of anti-NMDAR encephalitis [5–9].
Here, we report EEG and magnetoencephalography
(MEG) data on EDB from a female patient with psychosis
and reduced responsiveness. We address two questions:
Does EDB in patients vary with open or closed
eyes or with sleep-wake cycles? Do delta waves and beta
activity originate in the same brain regions? The EEG
data were used to elucidate the relationship between
EDB and open or closed eyes and between EDB and
occipital alpha rhythms. The MEG data were collected
and evaluated using time-frequency analysis and magnetic
source location to analyze the delta wave and beta
activity.
Case presentation
The patient was a 16-year-old woman with no significant
medical history. She presented at the Nanjing
Brain Hospital with a fever of 37.5 °C, new-onset visual
hallucinations and indifference. On day 2, the first
video EEG recording showed EDB in the right brain
regions, and normal occipital alpha rhythms were not
observed (Fig. 1a). The patient was diagnosed with
anti-NMDAR encephalitis according to EDB and
received immunotherapy (glucocorticoid and immunoglobulin)
immediately.
The beta activity within the EDB weakened when
the patient closed her eyes (Fig. 1a; blue arrow), and
the occipital alpha rhythms occasionally reappeared
(Fig. 1b; blue box). Conversely, the beta activity was
enhanced when the patient opened her eyes (Fig. 1a;
red arrow). During sleep, EDB markedly weakened
during stage II non-rapid eye movement (NREM)
sleep (Fig. 1c) and was enhanced during slow-wave
sleep periods (Fig. 1d).
On day 3 in the hospital, the patient experienced two
seizures. Fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR)-
weighted and T2 images were normal (Fig. 1g, h). Arterial
spin labeling showed high blood flow in the right
frontal and temporal regions (Fig. 1i). On day 4, indirect
immunofluorescence technique (IIFT) results revealed
NMDAR antibody titers of 1:100 in the CSF and 1:1000
in the serum. Gynecological sonography was normal.
The patient’s MEG data were recorded using a wholehead
CTF 275-channel MEG system. MEG data were
analyzed by time-frequency analysis, which was performed
in each 5-s time window. Delta wave activity and
beta activity were localized using magnetic source
imaging. Detailed method involved in time-frequency
analysis and magnetic source imaging has been
described in our previous study [10–12].
On day 7 the MEG results showed EDB evolving from
the right brain regions to bilateral brain regions (Fig. 2a).
Time-frequency analysis showed the beta activity varying
from 25 to 35 Hz (Fig. 2c). The magnetic source location
showed the beta activity originating from bilateral superior
parietal lobes (Fig. 2e). However, the delta wave originated
from the bilateral superior temporal gyri, the
right middle temporal gyrus, the right inferior frontal
gyrus, and the left inferior parietal lobe (Fig. 2d). On day
11, the background activity in the second EEG recording
was worse than that on day 7 (Fig. 1e), and EDB was
observed in bilateral brain regions (Fig. 1e).
After immunosuppression (immunoglobin, methylprednisolone
and mycophenolate mofetil) and antiepileptic
treatment (oxcarbazepine), the woman improved.
On day 30, the background activity in the third EEG
recording was better than that on day 11 (Fig. 1f). Compared
to the first signs of EDB on day 2, the EDB indications
in the right brain regions were obviously decreased
(Fig. 1f). On day 38, the second serum antibody titer was
1:100. On day 40, the patient was discharged.
Discussion and conclusion
EDB is regarded as a potential marker for anti-NMDAR
encephalitis [4, 6–9], and contributed to the diagnosis of
anti-NMDAR encephalitis in this patient. In previous
studies, EDB has been observed primarily in women with
CSF anti-NMDAR antibody titers at least 1:10 [7, 8].
The CSF antibody titer of this female patient was 1:100.
Five days after disease onset, the first EEG recording
showed EDB in the right brain regions (Fig. 1a-d). The
increasing beta/delta power ratio might be an indication
of anti-NMDAR encephalitis [5].
With deterioration due to the disease, EDB progressed
from occurring only in right brain regions to occurring
in bilateral brain regions (Fig. 2a and e). After immune
and antiepileptic treatment, the woman improved. Signs
of EDB in the right brain regions obviously decreased
(Fig. 2f). EDB was observed only in the peak disease
stage and continued to be a useful marker of disease
activity and a tool for monitoring treatment response
and relapses, through EDB resolution with clinical
improvement [4, 7, 9].
We observed that the beta activity weakened when the
patient closed her eyes (Fig. 1a; blue arrow). Why can
the occipital rhythms inhibit beta activity in EDB (Fig. 1b;
blue box)? The beta activity was located in the bilateral
superior parietal lobe (Fig. 2d), which is adjacent to the
occipital lobe. Thus, the occipital rhythms might propagate
forward and weaken the beta activity in the superior
parietal lobe. In a previous study, epileptic discharges
that arose in the parietal cortex were observed to propagate
forward widely via multiple fascicular pathways
resulting in clinical features [13]. Therefore, the beta
activity could be transmitted forward to the frontotemporal
lobes (Fig. 2d) and superimposed with delta activity
to form EDB on EEG.
EDB appears to be modulated by sleep. EDB weakened
markedly during stage II NREM sleep and was enhanced
during slow wave sleep. Unfortunately, rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep was not observed during the EEG
recordings. Dhruv et al. described a case of NMDAR
encephalitis in which the patient entered REM sleep
with an absence of EDB, which suggested that the antiepileptic
effect of REM sleep could also affect EDB in
NMDAR encephalitis [14].
In conclusion, EDB is useful as a marker of disease
activity and as a tool for monitoring treatment response,
and the pattern can be disturbed by eye opening and
closing, by occipital alpha rhythms and by sleep-wake
cycles.