Background
Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the most common malignancies
and causes of cancer death among men worldwide
[1], with an estimated 78,500 new cases in 2019 in
Japan. The widespread use of the prostate-specific antigen
(PSA) test is thought to be responsible for the rapid
increase in PC diagnoses between 1988 and 1992 in the
United States [2, 3].
Both the high prevalence of PC and availability of
PSA tests capable of detecting PC at an early stage are
important criteria required to support mass screening.
The significant increase in the diagnosis of organconfined
PC—which means a reduction in metastatic
disease—justifies PC screening [4–6]. Moreover, recent
randomized clinical trials (RCTs) demonstrated a 21 to
44% decline in PC mortality rates due to PSA screening
[7, 8], which could represent one of the most persuasive
arguments in support of PC screening.
However, PC screening is still controversial, as the
potential benefits and harms continue to be debated
among health professionals. Major controversies regarding
PC screening center on the possibilities of over-diagnosis
and over-treatment. Some patients might suffer
from complications associated with the treatment of clinically
insignificant PCs that would probably never lead
to death. Another issue involves the economics of PC
screening, including the costs associated with detection,
treatment, and treatment-related complications. Optenberg
and Thompson estimated that the cost of screening
could be as high as $25 billion annually if all men
50–70 years of age in the United States participated in a
screening program [9].
In this study, we evaluated a rapid, one-step, qualitative
PSA test, called the PSA SPOT test, as a possible way
to enhance the convenience and reduce the cost of PC
screening in a large population.
Methods
PSA SPOT test
The PSA SPOT test was performed according to the
instructions provided by Prof. Rajvir Dahiya, PhD,
Department of Urology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center
and University of California, San Francisco, California.
The format of the PSA SPOT test is a double-antibody
sandwich. Antibodies specific to PSA are conjugated to
colloidal gold and incorporated into a strip pad, and these
antibodies capture any PSA after the sample is added
to the test strip. The antigen-antibody-gold complexes
migrate along the nitrocellulose membrane via capillary
action and are then captured by marker-specific antibodies
immobilized on the membrane. A red-colored band
will appear in the test zone (T) if PSA protein is present
in the specimen (Fig. 1). Antibody-gold complexes are
captured in the control zone (C), where goat anti-mouse
IgG is immobilized. To serve as an internal process control,
a red-colored control band was designed to appear
as an indication that the test was performed properly and
should always be seen after the test is completed. The
absence of a red control band in the control region is an
indication of an invalid result.
The PSA SPOT test kit is designed for the rapid detection
of human PSA in serum or plasma at or above a
cutoff level of 4 ng/mL. In the present study, two independent
observers interpreted the test results at 15 and
30 min. The remaining serum samples were subsequently
tested using a conventional quantitative assay (Access
Hybritech PSA, Beckman Coulter, Inc.). The tests were
interpreted as negative if no band appeared in the test
region; if a band developed, the test was judged as either
weakly positive (+) or strongly positive (++) according
to the intensity of the color reaction.
Validation of the PSA SPOT test
To validate the PSA SPOT test, serum samples obtained
from 53 consecutive patients suspected of having or followed
up for PC were tested using the PSA SPOT test
and quantitative PSA test (Access Hybritech PSA). The
sensitivity and specificity of the PSA SPOT test were
determined using the cut-off value of 4.0 ng/mL.
PC screening using the PSA SPOT test
PC screening using the PSA SPOT test kit was offered to
male participants in educational public lectures that we
conducted in various cities from June 2005 to July 2016.
Blood samples from 1429 men (mean age, 70.8 years;
range, 30–93 years) were evaluated. The blood samples
were obtained before the lectures, serum was separated
from blood by centrifugation, and the PSA SPOT test
was immediately performed. The results of the tests were
reported to the participants at the end of the lectures.
We then enclosed and passed referral letters if the results
were judged as positive.
This study was approved by the ethical review board
of Kochi Medical School (ethical approval no. 16–12).
Written informed consent was obtained regarding PC
screening using the PSA SPOT test. All methods were
carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and
regulations.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using JMP® software
(SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). A P value < 0.05
was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value
(PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy of
the PSA SPOT test were calculated. A box-and-whisker
plot was used to show the correlation between the PSA
quantitative value and intensity of the color reaction
band on the PSA SPOT test. Pearson’s correlation test
was used to correlate the two variables described above.
Results
In the validation series using serum samples from 54
patients suspected of having or followed up for PC, the
sensitivity and specificity of the PSA SPOT test were 9.1
and 96.8%, respectively, at a reading time of 15 min and
90.9 and 93.5%, respectively, at 30 min.
Of 1429 participants, 1223 (85.6%) had a PSA value
of less than 4 ng/mL (median PSA, 1.270 ng/mL; range,
0.001–3.972 ng/mL), and 206 (14.4%) presented a PSA
value higher than 4 ng/mL (median PSA, 6.304 ng/mL;
range, 4.018–237.518 ng/mL). A total of 164 (11.5%) participants
had a PSA value between 4 and 10 ng/mL.
The results of the test were affected by variations in
the reading time. The sensitivity was very low at a reading
time of 15 min (41.7%) but increased at a reading
time of 30 min (79.9%), whereas the specificity of the
test was similar (98.7% at 15 min, 93.0% at 30 min). Thus,
we chose 30 min as the optimal reading time for further
analyses.
The sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy
of the test were 79.9, 93.0, 65.4, 96.6, and 91.2%,
respectively. Among the 1151 participants with a PSA
value < 4 ng/mL, 1071 were correctly interpreted as negative
using the PSA SPOT test, whereas 80 were interpreted
as positive, resulting in a test specificity of 93.0%.
Of the 80 false-positive results, 39 (48.8%) were in the
PSA range of 3–4 ng/mL (Table 1). The specificity of the
test in the PSA range of 3–4 ng/mL was 63.9% (69/108).
Of 151 true positive results, 112 exhibited a PSA value
between 4 and 10 ng/mL; 34/112 (30.4%) were interpreted
as weakly positive by the PSA SPOT test, whereas
78/112 (69.6%) were judged as strongly positive (Table 1).
A total of 40 participants presented a PSA value > 10 ng/
mL; 1/40 (2.5%) was judged as weakly positive, whereas
38/40 (95.0%) were judged as strongly positive. As shown
in Fig. 2, the intensity of the color reaction was correlated
with the PSA quantitative value (Pearson’s correlation
test: r = 0.39, P < 0.0001).
Discussion
Since Catalona et al. first demonstrated in 1991 that
determination of PSA could be used as a first-line screening
test for PC in men without suspicious digital rectal
examination findings [10], PSA testing has been widely
applied. This has resulted in a spike in PC incidence rates,
as previously undetectable cases of PC were unmasked.
Although mass screening for PC remains one of
the most controversial issues in oncology, two large,
high-quality RCTs were carried out to evaluate PSA
screening. The Swedish Göteborg trial demonstrated a
44% lower PC mortality rate in the screening arm among
men aged 55 to 69 years over approximately 14 years [7].
The European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate
Cancer (ERSPC) reported a 21% reduction in PC
mortality in the screening arm during 13 years of followup
[8].
The controversy over PSA screening includes the possibilities
of detecting insignificant PCs that would never
lead to death (over-diagnosis) and then treating these
PCs (over-treatment). Other issues include cost and convenience,
which are possible reasons why the rate of PSA
screening is low in Japan. To overcome these issues, we
conducted educational public lectures in Japanese cities
and offered a one-step PSA test for free.
Several reports have described rapid, one-step, qualitative
PSA tests, as summarized in Table 2 [11–16]. However,
the sample sizes of these studies have been limited,
with the exception of the study of Berg et al., which
reported a specificity (81%) that appears to be unacceptable.
Therefore, we evaluated a one-step PSA test in a
large population of Japanese males to potentially enhance
the convenience and reduce the cost of PC screening. The
one-step PSA test we describe is very easy to administer
and can be performed without costly additional equipment,
although centrifuge is needed to separate serum
from blood. The low cost and speed of the test make it
useful and convenient as a tool for primary PC screening,
even in general practitioner or urologist office settings.
The economic drawbacks to PSA mass screening could
be overcome using this one-step PSA test. In general, a
rapid test can be priced much lower because it utilizes a
simple method [16]. Therefore, the use of this test could
spare a significant number of costly quantitative PSA
determinations in screening populations due to the high
percentage of negative PSA results in PC mass screening,
although we could not show expected cost savings
because the PSA SPOT test kit is not commercially available
and not priced.
Although the overall specificity was 93.0% in our study,
it was lower in the PSA range 3–4 ng/mL, within which
false-positive results were quite common (36.1%). The
results of the PSA SPOT test were comparable to those
of other one-step PSA tests described in the literature
(Table 2). The primary limitations of this test appear to
be poor accuracy in the PSA range 3–4 ng/mL. As such,
greater precision is needed to minimize the number of
false-positive results. The secondary limitations might be
poor accuracy in the PSA range 4–5 ng/mL. The overall
sensitivity will increase to 89.1% if the PSA cut-off value
of 5.0 ng/mL is used. Nonetheless, the one-step PSA
SPOT test could be useful in the general practitioner or
urologist office setting as well as in mass screening. If the
test could be modified to allow administration at home,
PSA testing might be reassessed as a means of mass
screening for PC.
Conclusions
The PSA SPOT test is a simple, feasible, and reproducible
tool for PC screening. The lower cost, ease of handling,
and rapid procedure could make this test useful
in the general practitioner or urologist office setting as
well as for mass primary PC screening.