Background
Patient-centeredness defined as ‘providing care that is
respectful of and responsive to, individual patient preferences,
needs and values, and ensuring that patient values
guide all clinical decisions’ by the Institute of Medicine
has lately been acknowledged as an essence to best quality
services [1]. The implementation of patientcenteredness
also requires direct interaction and a
strong relation with the patient which mostly happens
through nurses. Owing to the characteristic frequency of
nurse-patient interactions, they naturally emerge as a
gateway for improving patient experience. The nursepatient
relation is strong to such an extent that the practice
nurses become a central point in shaping and improving
patients’ experience [2]. Hence, apart from
possessing the knowledge and technical skills, demonstrating
compassionate behaviors is essential to tackle
circumstances [3], fulfill patients’ needs, and improve
not just the patients’ but also their own well-being [4]. A
pilot intervention study with nurses utilizing selfcompassion
training showed reduced burn-out scores
while improving scores on resilience and compassion fatigue
with an effect size of 1.23 [5], Another study utilizing
a similar training for self-compassion working with
64 nurses in three university hospitals in Ireland found
significant reduction in perceived stress after a 6-week
training [6]. Further, nurses’ well-being has been indicated
to be mediating the relationship between health
services and patients’ experience of care (indirect effect =
0.014; 95% Confidence Intervals = 0.002–0.036) in a
study with a sample of 173 nurses and 3525 patients [7].
A review focusing on training meant to enhance compassion
linked greater healing and health outcomes to
improved patient-centered communication by the providers
[8, 9].
Bearing such significant responsibility and engaging
compassionately is surely rewarding but exhausting as
well [10]. It comes with certain consequences, one of
which is compassion fatigue. However, it is not only
caused by the prior but also from regular and prolonged
encounters with clients [11] and situations in work
where nurses feel helpless [12]. The fundamental urgency
‘to do something’ [13] and to eliminate others’
suffering contributes to the distress, enabling selfdehumanizing
tendencies, which commonly strain one’s
relationship with close ones.
Another effect faced by these nurses is burnout, which
descends from compassion fatigue [14], but it occurs
when a person is unable to achieve his/ her targets causing
frustration, loss of control [15] subsequently effecting
patient safety, clinicians’ health and workforce
retention [14]. The top two reasons for compassion fatigue
are less administrative support and lack of satisfaction
with colleagues [16]. In order to avoid
compromising on patient experience, nurses should be
trained to be compassion literates [15] by focusing on
internal motivation, nurturing self-compassion, increasing
staff engagement, and promoting compassionate culture
and leadership [17]. However, few programs (e.g.,
precepting and internships) with aims to enhance compassion
literacy among nurses [18], have unfortunately
been ineffective due to certain disadvantages i.e., time
and administrative constraints, occasional absences of
preceptors, interrupted continuity and discrepancies,
and lack of evidence for cost effectiveness thus adding to
sustainability concerns [19]. Since compassion is a virtuous
cycle that extends from assistance of superiors to
care delivery of patients in healthcare [20], leadership by
the superiors, precisely through on-job mentorship, is
considered as a means for generating sustainable benefits
in the field of nursing [21].
Mentoring is an interpersonal phenomenon [22] that
aims to nurture the well-being of the novice through
both informal and formal encounters [23–25]. Such encounters
can be in the form of supporting, guiding,
teaching, role modeling, counseling and sharing [26].
Even though the formal nursing mentorship programs
started in the late 1970s [25]; however, there has been a
lack of focus on building nursing mentorship models
[23] and insufficient documentation has been done on
mentorship environments present for them [26]. Organizing
mentorship programs is crucial as they improve
retention rates, enhance job satisfaction [27, 28] and
reduce compassion fatigue [29]. Moreover, confidence,
competence, and growth also improve due to the
mentoring relationship [30].
It is not just the nurses but patients who have also advocated
the need for a support system to sustain compassion
in the nursing practice [31]. The managers have
been identified to be well-placed in this role of mentors
given the nature of their relationship with frontline staff.
Embedding compassion in the system to be adopted by
nurse managers as mentors can be a promising undertaking
to teach nurses compassion or as cogently coined
by Burridge et al. [32], ‘compassion literacy’. A compassionate
nursing leader plays a critical role here in filling
the void and creating a compassionate culture for
nurses, who experience compassion vacuum on the job
[33].
A recent study in a private hospital in Pakistan reported
an increase on nursing indicators 18–27 months
post-intervention as part of their patient experience initiative
[34]. The improvement was attributed to implementation
of an on-job mentorship programme. Since
little has been written on how to develop, implement,
and sustain nursing compassion for improved patient experience
outcomes in low- and middle - income countries
(LMICs), the current study aims s to describe the
development of the on-job mentorship programme designed
to provide compassionate experience to frontline
nursing at a systemic level subsequently leading to enhance
patient experience of care. The paper specifically
aims to propose mentoring as an efficient technique to
develop compassion focused approaches among on-job
nurses. However, it is not just this, but the study also
highlights mentoring being a type of micromanagement
that can empower nursing staff.
Methods
Setting
Established in 1985, Aga Khan University Hospital
(AKUH, K) is located in Karachi, the largest city of
Pakistan and serves two provinces, Sindh and Balochistan,
with populations of 47.89 million and 12.34 million,
respectively. It is a tertiary care hospital with
consultant doctors specialized to provide optimal care
and treatment to patients with a full range and severity
of specialty diseases and conditions. Recently, Patient
Experience is one of the six approaches among others,
including Community and Family Health and Patient
Safety and Quality adopted by AKUH, K to facilitate collaborative
operations where physicians, nurses, researchers,
and teachers work in unison to give patients
the best access to care. AKUH, K is also Joint Commission
International accredited which focuses on patient
safety. Through its advanced resources, trained faculty,
and technological aid, the institute is creating models for
research projects rendering short and long-term impact
in the provinces. Paediatric service is the largest service
line of the hospital having 122 inpatient beds and has
the largest number of the nursing services employees
(n = 413) providing high quality, multi-specialty care. All
major medical and surgical specialties are present to deliver
excellent pediatric care for complex health problems.
The nursing management team in the service line
consisted of a nurse manager as the senior position
followed by a specialist, head nurse and then frontline
nursing staff (Supplementary Figure 1). The study was
approved for an exemption as Quality Improvement
(QI) study by the Ethics Review Committee of the Aga
Khan University and as per institutional requirements
consent was waived (being an exemption).
Design of the intervention
Designed as an intervention development study [35], this
current programme was part of a larger quality improvement
initiative to improve patient experience and was
conducted between January 2018 to December 2020
[34]. The Theory of Change (ToC) model was utilized to
develop a solution to nurture engagement among nurses,
facilitate relationship building and impart soft skills thus
instilling a satisfactory employee experience for subsequent
improved patient experience. ToC has been widely
used and it is considered to be the basis of monitoring
and [36] theory-based evaluations [37–40]. According to
Weiss [41], ToC is, “a theory of how and why an initiative
works”. A robust ToC embodies several elements
that makes the model more systematic [36].
The nursing mentorship ToC comprised preconditions,
interventions, outcomes and the final goal. The
final impact was to achieve improved compassionate experience
of patients through refined skills of compassion
in nurses. The preconditions are a necessary requirement,
condition or element that should be acknowledged
for achieving the desired outcome while to fulfill
these preconditions or remove dodges, it is important to
have efficient interventions that create a positive difference
in outcomes and impact of interest [36].
Development of the intervention ToC model
The development of the model took several steps as described
below (Table 1).
Conceptualization
As the service leadership and director of patient experience
of care sought to work on improving patient experience
in the service line, a survey was conducted
between July–August 2017 with families in the paediatric
ward to determine the issues that affected their experience
using the Child Health Consumer Assessment of
Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) [42]. The form also
included items on care from nurses. The survey was
completed with 221 families admitted for at least 24 h
and age between both to 6 years. The overall results have
been reported in another manuscript [34]. Findings
around care from nursing items indicated that 75% of
patients reported that nurses always communicated with
courtesy and respect, 71% said nurses listened to them
carefully and 77% felt nurses explained things in a way
they could understand. Also, only 27% reported getting
help from staff when they pressed the call bell. There
was also an open-ended item requesting families to list
down the top three factors that affected their experience
during stay. About 38% indicated lack of responsiveness
from nurses followed by 29% stating ineffective communication.
This led to conceptualization of the problem
that the staff was disengaged and an intervention to improve
patient experience meant engaging the staff via
improving their own experience through a ‘compassionate
mentorship package’ integrated into their existing
supervision system.
Identification of a framework
After a literature review, the core team identified the
Caring Mentorship Model [43] as a conceptual framework
to address the phenomenon of building relationships
through mentorship of nursing staff. This model
has developed from two other models of the Development
of Caring Nurse-Self [44, 45]. It depicts three
phases: relationship with no connection, surface connection,
and shared connection with each containing three
levels that a person reflects at: cognitive (task-oriented
mentoring), affective (interactive mentoring), and transformative
(transformative mentoring). The programme
intended to work on encouraging supervisors to become
attuned to mentorship roles. The goal of the programme
was to enable the head nurses to form a meaningful and
reflective relationship with the nurses beyond the cognitive
and interactive understanding to improve employee
experience leading to enhanced patient experience.
Table 2 states all the questions addressed in accordance
with identified model [43] and the activities incorporated
by the nursing mentorship programme in each phase.
The team was unable to formally evaluate where the
nursing staff stands in terms of mentorship phases. The
informal team reflections about the baseline assumption
suggests the connection was at the cognitive level with
surface connection. There was no human connection
and mentorship being limited to only monitoring and
completing checklists. Hence, the aim was to create opportunities
and provide a safe place for the connection
to evolve at an ‘affective’ and later ‘transformative’ level.
It was important to create a humane culture for nurses
to reciprocate a similar habitat for patients.
Creation of a working group
The next step was identifying a well-organized team with
the right skills that was designated to work on this task.
The service leadership identified the working group to
lead the change effort (Supplementary Table 1). Along
with the Service Line Chief and Director Patient Experience,
members included Nurse Manager, three Nursing
specialists, and a Research Specialist. While the internal
group developed technical solutions, external expertise
was needed to solidify the compassion angle. Therefore,
the team reached out to Charter for Compassion
Pakistan (henceforth, CfC Pakistan – a local initiative inspired
by the Charter for Compassion International) and
through shared learning of organizational behavior
change and nine skill- based compassionate package, respectively,
set in motion a mutually beneficial partnership.
The team members from CfC Pakistan included a
project lead and an associate.
Meetings of the working group
A regular schedule for meetings was carried out to codesign
the package. The team members met once a week
for the initial 4 months moving to once every 15 days in
the next 2 months. The meeting was conducted during
working hours every Friday and typically lasted for an
hour. Each meeting held discussions on how to achieve
the month’s agenda and meeting minutes were recorded
by the nursing lead. Certain ground rules were set for
these meetings which involved application of an empathetic
approach, clarity of roles and responsibilities, valuing
inputs from all based on their strengths and focus
on outcomes and feasibility.
The tasks of the meeting group for design of the implementation
of the interventions (frequency, dosage,
timing) specifically were divided according to the RACI
matrix (Responsible, Accountable, Consulted and Informed).
This matrix proves to be beneficial in
organizational context as it allows to identify the roles
anticipated for each person and any missing roles for
early corrections [46]. The explanation of each component
is as follows:
1. Responsible: The member under this section had
the responsibility of completing the task. In the
current study, e.g., the tasks of designing
supervisory checklists and Nursing Education
Services (NES) pediatric modules were assigned to a
nursing specialist (NS) who was already performing
such duties. She was responsible and owned the
whole course of action.
2. Accountable: The nursing manager (NL) was
accountable to have the final approving authority
for the work around supervisory checklists and
designing of NES paediatric modules completed by
the respective members. Contrary to the
‘responsible’ team, the accountable one was
answerable for the task.
3. Consulted: The consultants i.e., director patient
experience of care, (MR), chief of Service Line (BH)
and compassion specialist (AZ), provided valuable
input on the relevant tasks by engaging in two-way
communication. They brought in different perspectives
regarding pre-conditions and designing
modules.
4. Informed: The higher leadership roles i.e., the Chief
Nursing Officer, Dean of School of Nursing and
Midwifery, CEO and others belonged to this group.
They did not provide any input, rather kept a track
of needs, preconditions and assessments and
developments of interventions.
A systematic process was adopted to design the model.
The first step was understanding the contextual needs
and then framing the pre-conditions followed by developing
indicators to assess the effectiveness of the model.
Feasibility was the key consideration of designing the interventions
[47]. A few principles around different components
of feasibility were agreed upon by the working
team to guide the process (Table 3).
Needs assessment
Pain points survey A brief survey was conducted to
understand the factors that affected the engagement of
the nurses. It included 3 items around factors that affected
them personally, the patients and overall service
delivery. The survey was meant to be shared by the
nursing supervisors with all the nurses as a paper-form
and to be completed anonymously. However, only 173
(42%) forms were returned. One reason was that the
managers were not able to share the form with staff on
night duties. Moreover, the staff was spread across 11
different locations and not all of them would have received
on time. Gathering nurses, distributing the form,
and then collecting it was a considerable effort. Given
the urgency of the matter, the team utilized the forms
received for the analysis. The working team also did not
want to push harder for additional forms lest the staff
should feel coerced.
A compiled list of 329 pain points was received from
the nursing service coordinator. A thematic analysis following
an inductive approach [48] was completed by a
behaviour implementation scientist (MR) and a psychology
graduate (AAH). The pain points were independently
coded followed by agreement of the codes in a
face-to-face meeting. The analysis revealed three main
themes: perception of being overburdened, lack of connection
with work, and lack of growth opportunities.
Perception of being overburdened meant that the nurses
viewed their work as being excessive with prolonged
procedure, night shifts, call on off days, high expectations
or pressure from management, excessive documentation
etc. While lack of connection with work holds
two main themes: accountability and lack of facilities.
Lack of facilities included low salary, breaktime issues,
one washroom for 30 staff, no medical benefits for their
parents, unavailability of instruments, etc. However, accountability
catered to different issues that according to
the nurses were ethically inappropriate. These involved
over criticism from seniors, revenge seeking behaviors of
co-workers, work environment, and many more. The last
pain point i.e., lack of growth opportunities comprised
concerns like insecurity of jobs, no promotion of registered
nurses (RNs) and no future for the more senior,
older staff. As per the answers, ‘Perception of being
overburdened’ was found to be the most common theme
among the responses. The findings from the thematic
analysis were shared with the nursing manager and supervisors
as a means to establish trustworthiness of the
findings.
Review of existing documents Like NES modules,
nursing competency checklists led to the realization that
few shortcomings had to be addressed to work on
patient-centeredness and achieve the final outcome. The
existing supervision or performance management system
aimed to assess nurses every 6 months based on a checklist
for hard skills only. There was also no training for
head nurses (supervisors of frontline nurses) to enhance
their supervision skills. The NES modules were designed
for adults only with no integration of pediatric skills
which meant the newly hired nurses had to be retrained
once they joined Pediatric service.
Work shadow After the discovery of pain points faced
by the nursing staff, it was necessary to identify the
workload of nurses during their shift leading to devise
appropriate strategies to increase satisfaction and boosting
effective service. Catering to this purpose, it was important
to implement an in-depth direct observation to
gain a comprehensive understanding of the current settings.
Hence, the research team used ‘shadowing’, which
is a technique that involves a researcher following a
member of the organization meticulously, over a length
of time [49].
In February 2018, a bed-side nurse, a head nurse (administrative
supervisor) and an instructor head nurse
(clinical supervisor) were shadowed, during his/ her
work shift by a research associate. According to the observations,
the bed-side nurse spent most i.e. 25% of her
time, caring for patients and addressing their complaints,
while patient shifting took the least time. The instructor
head nurse spent most of her time on nurses’ education
planning (23%, 71 min), and the administrative head
nurse spent most time in rounds i.e., 36% (111 min).
Challenges faced by the nursing staff were identified,
which were categorized as inter service coordination.
These included, difficulties in getting their needs fulfilled
like lack of lunch facilitation or unavailability of medicines
in pharmacy during night. Furthermore, it was revealed
that the staff-supervisor ratio was too high, each
supervisor (administrative and clinical) had to oversee
more than 64 nurses. Both the supervisors were looking
after the same staff but for different reasons (clinical
skills and administration). In order to overcome some of
these issues it was suggested to promote equality in
terms of providing meals and being treated with respect
like other cadres e.g., trainee physicians or provision of
equal facilities e.g., having a shared restroom. Another
recommendation was to make one supervisor (head
nurse) responsible for both academic and clinical responsibilities
for 30 nurses reducing the burden given
both roles required similar credentials. So, one head
nurse is whole sole responsible for the academic and
clinical growth of their nursing staff. The mantra was to
be vigilant and responsive to the workforce i.e., nurses’
needs. Once they feel that they are being taken care of,
they will resonate a similar attitude towards patients and
bring in the best patient care to the healthcare
organizations.
Results
The results section describes the ToC model created including
the goal, the pathways to change and the interventions
to enable the processes leading to the
pathways. The model helped to first identify the desired
long-term goals and the members worked backwards
from these to identify all conditions (outcomes) that
must be in place for the goal to occur. Later, all of these
were mapped out in an outcome framework (Table 4
and Fig. 1). Correspondingly, the model for nursing
mentorship program was developed incorporating the
following:
Impact
The analysis of patient feedback forms had shown an inadequate
responsiveness to patients’ needs, due to less
engaged workforce. Hence, the impact of all the interventions
was agreed to be an improved compassionate
experience of patients, provided by the nurses. The indicator
for measuring impact was N (%) patients rating experience
with nursing staff as excellent as measured by
Child HCAHPS.
Intermediate outcomes
A better employee experience will ultimately enhance
patient experience therefore, hence it was ensured to include
mentorship of nurses as a core intervention strategy.
The intermediate goal included improvement in
compassionate skills of nursing staff as indexed by supervisors’
(head nurses) rating N (%) nurses on performance
(good, average and poor) using the checklists. The
interventions will be measured using separate indicators
and based on this, necessary changes will be proposed.
The success of the NES orientation program will be
measured depending on the number (%) of nurses
trained for pediatric specific compassionate skills per
batch. In order to ensure widespread compassionate experience
in every unit, attendance rates in the workshops,
attrition rates were taken into consideration. It is
also planned to use a number (%) of nurses trained annually
and observed during formal on-job observation
during patient care activities, for the said purpose however,
it has not been initiated as of yet. Moreover, the
outcomes of supervisors’ revised career ladder would be
measured by reviewing the number (%) of supervisors
who attended a professional growth activity and number
(%) of scholarly outputs every quarter.
After training and providing tools to supervisors, its
outcome was planned to be measured by observing the
number (%) of supervisors being trained annually, checklists
completed and times the dashboard was accessed by
a supervisor on a monthly basis. Moreover, the effects of
creating groups on communication platforms to increase
social engagement was measured through the number
(%) of total appreciation for nurses from peers and other
health care professionals and posts from nursing staff
per month. Lastly, the performance appraisals will be
provided based on receiving ‘excellent’ ratings on patient
feedback form and soft skills checklist.
Pre-conditions
Several pre-conditions were identified in the paediatric
service line to achieve the goal of improved patient experience.
These were categorized as:
1. Recruit staff with the right skills to achieve the
ultimate pediatric care. According to many
employers, the issue arises when the required skills
are short in supply [50, 51]. Since the patient needs
are evolving, it is necessary for the workforce to be
less rigid and adopt new directions to fulfill the
needs through ‘broad-based’ training and skills [52].
2. Build a compassionate experience to address
employee pain points to enhance their engagement
as defined by the nursing staff on the survey: feeling
of emotional connectedness with work, formal and
informal on-job training for compassion and fair
growth opportunities. These pre-conditions also
serve to address the perception of being overburdened.
3. Maintain or increase competency of head
nurses as supervisors by training them as
compassionate mentors and making supervisory
tools accessible. Mentoring itself is a convoluted
process that requires the supervisors to provide
constructive feedback and counselling, reflect
and encourage and model good teaching
practice [53].
4. Create a culture of compassionate experience
through instant communication, emulation of
compassionate principles and acknowledgment of
the staff’s vigorous efforts in providing adequate
care. The team employed multiple platforms
including social media to impart the head nurses
(both administrative and clinical supervisors) with a
sense of meaning and promote organizational
citizenship behavior. Association of public social
communication with risk and ethical issues
(privacy, productivity, training and education) has
made organizations and the healthcare industry
reluctant to adopt social media as a means of
communication [54], however, recent evidence
states otherwise, especially when work is majorly
virtual in the face of pandemic [55].
Interventions
This section explains the specific interventions designed
for the corresponding precondition. The completed or
ongoing interventions were around revising requirements
to hire staff for the right skills, preparing the head
nurses (nurse supervisors) through training and
provision of supervisory tools and promoting culture
change which were part of the larger initiative. The rollout
with the frontline staff was delayed due to the
pandemic crisis.
Hiring with the right skills
At AKUH, the NES department conducts basic orientation
for all newly hired nurses, at the time of induction.
The focus is on basic theoretical and skill competencies
required at entry level for safe care provision to adult
patients. The core team collaborated with the NES department
to revise orientation and included paediatric
specific modules along with an introduction to principles
of compassion. Orientation to compassionate skills ensured
that the nurses were not only trained for hard
skills pertaining to the pediatric population but were
also encouraged to learn soft skills as well, so that compassionate
skill set was imparted to the new nurses before
they started patient care. Following the initial roll
out, refresher sessions were also planned. The intervention
was proposed to lead to two main outcomes: improvement
in nurses’ knowledge and skills regarding
care of pediatric patients and skills and compassionate
interactions with the patients and their families.
Experiencing compassion at workplace
It was also aimed to create a compassionate experience
for the staff through various ways i.e., creating a safe
space where nurses could share their vulnerabilities as
staff and also as individuals, providing opportunities of
growth through formal and informal training and clarity
of growth trajectory while revising the career ladder.
However, only the last aspect could be initiated due to
the pandemic crisis in the hospital.
Feelings of emotional connectedness with work As
part of the on-job training, one-hour teaching sessions
were conducted regularly for the nursing staff by their
academic supervisor. The sessions were usually designed
for at least 5 days a week and a monthly planner was developed
by 22nd of each month. These sessions were
planned for fulfilling nurses’ academic needs or building
their clinical skills. As part of the programme, one session
per week was designated for compassionate skills to
be discussed each week. The presentations and materials
were prepared by the head nurses (Supplementary
Table 2) through an extensive exercise with support
from CfC.
Formal and informal on-job training for
compassionate skills Feng et al. [56] found that out of
10 items, 2 (child comfort and nurse-parent communication)
were consistently and strongly associated with
willingness-to-recommend scores. Hence, it was important
to have these skills integrated into on-going on-job
coaching and supervision interactions to identify teaching
moments. On-job coaching was conducted with the
bedside nurses during daily rounds. The head nurse observed
nurses at work and were now required to provide
feedback based on the principles of mentorship. The
principles were being available for the staff, listening to
them, taking responsibility and giving credit to their
mentees, inspiring and build a transparent relationship
with them with a focus on personal and professional
development.
Growth opportunities The career ladder and promotion
criteria for head nurses and their supervisors i.e.,
nursing specialists was revised to address the nurses’ and
their own needs for professional growth and development
opportunities. This implied that promotion of the
supervisors and compensation would now be based on
the outcome achieved for the supervisees i.e., prime patient
care, nurse’s experience and credentialing. The
minimum requirements for senior positions such as
‘Head Nurse’ or ‘Nursing Specialist’ (supervisors of head
nurses) were updated to 4–5 and 6–8 years of experience
respectively (Supplementary Figures 2 and 3). Moreover,
receiving compassion skills training and experience in
research and publication along with specific certifications
such as ‘Basic Life Support’, ‘Safe Medication Administration’,
‘Conscious Sedation’ etc. were made
compulsory for supervisory roles. With respect to mentoring,
these positions were also required to serve as a
role model for other staff, to conduct needs analysis of
unit nurse instructors and to identify staff learning
needs, to develop and implement appropriate teaching
interventions and other duties that would ensure cost effective
patient care outcome.
Strengthened supervision system
Trainings of senior nursing team (nursing specialists)
A training workshop was planned and conducted by
Compassion in Healthcare (CiH) lead from CfC
Pakistan, for the senior nursing team including nursing
specialists (supervisors of head nurses) and head nurses
(supervisors of the bedside nurses) during June and July
2018. These workshops aimed to create opportunities
for self-reflection by cultivating an understanding of the
principles of compassion, namely: self-compassion,
mindfulness, empathy, gratitude, forgiveness, courage,
integrity, and altruism-which formed the building blocks
of mentorship. This training workshop was created by
CfC Pakistan after several visits in all the wards where
discussions about the challenges and adversities took
place with the on-call nurses and doctors. Supplementing
the training workshop on soft skills, i.e., compassion
and communication with supervisees (mentees), another
workshop was piloted with a focus on hard skills, i.e.,
the effective supervision tools i.e., learning to observe,
providing feedback, problem-solving and analyzing data
(Supplementary Table 3). Following this, a final session
was conducted to summarize the overall content
through quiz and team discussions. Post training feedback
was taken from the participants to ensure they
understood the practices that should be implemented
for the betterment of nursing experience. A few participants
stated in their training evaluation that the training
helped them to realize the significance of compassionate
skills for their supervisees: “It made me realize to focus
on small things in life by showing gratitude, empathy
and self-compassion and so on. I think this training will
help to ripple the magic of kindness in the whole institution.”
Another head nurses felt the training was engaging
and allowed them to reflect. “Very engaging and gave a platform
for self-reflection … helped us to reflect on ourselves.”
Mentorship of the head nurses by the senior nursing
team To ensure the sustainability of the mentorship
skills demonstrated by the head nurses (supervisors of
nursing staff), another layer of mentorship was included
specifically designed to be received from their own supervisors
i.e., nursing specialists (supervisors of head
nurses). A standard operating manual was developed for
them stated that the specific goals for the head nurses
should be created in alignment of skills building of the
frontline nurses. The main dimension of supervisory
roles and responsibilities included leadership skills with
intended outcome of talent retention and transfer of key
knowledge to the head nurses and nurses and improving
and strengthening culture of compassion. Other responsibilities
when mentoring head nurses included measuring
and categorizing reflections on a scale of absolute to
independent reasoning, ensuring that the reflections
were progressing according to the month’s plan, evaluating
head nurses on the basis of competency or value,
assessing the skills practices in a day, respecting their
personal details and vulnerabilities, finding solutions to
eradicate the stress points, and sharing their views about
what they think of their own mentees (bedside nurses).
The reflections were not limited to work life; they aimed
to gather variables from both personal and professional
lives to assess correlations that create both meaningful
and toxic results.
A supervisory checklist was designed to observe and
rate the performance of the head nurses to facilitate
skills-building for mentorship (Supplementary Table 4).
The head nurses were observed (by nurse specialist) on
the basis of five skills with each comprising different responsibilities
upon which they were rated; organizational
(e.g. punctuality and regularity), technical (observes the
staff and provides on job coaching effectively), education
(maintains pace during sessions and encourages participation),
communication (encourages, praises the staff
and also maintains privacy of their performance), and
coordination (teamwork and positive attitude). The
checklist consisted of a three-point Likert scale: 0 being
‘no skill’ to 3 being ‘performance with excellency’. The
skills were rated, and a total score was calculated by
adding all the ratings.
Training of head nurses The head nurses also attended
a similar 5-day workshop as their supervisors (nurse specialists)
(Fig. 2). In the months to follow, special
attention was dedicated to preparing the head nurses for
training of their mentees (nurses). The Master Trainer
and CiH lead from CfC Pakistan instated personal visits
to the nursing specialists and head nurses and advised
them on training styles and content. Mock presentations
were then scheduled for meticulous feedback to
strengthen the delivery of skills to the floor nurses. The
mentorship trainings were envisioned to result in improved
skills which will be beneficial in leading compassion
trainings for the nursing staff. The expected
outcomes of the training would be a number of head
nurses certified by CfC to deliver trainings for compassionate
skills.
Supervisory tools Supervisor-nurse ratio: The new organogram
(Fig. 3) was more organized with a
supervisor-nurse ratio decreased to 1:6. Each unit had its
own nursing staff and supervisor. The nursing staff including
registered nurse, registered midwife, healthcare
assistant, patient care attendant, critical care tech and
ward assistant, would report to ‘Assistant Manager’, who
would further report to the Nurse Specialist (Associate
Manager) of their respective units. Moreover, the new
model implied that one Head Nurse (Assistant Manager)
would observe the assigned nurse mentees on all skills
(i.e., academic and administrative) while practicing
compassionate mentorship. This would help the nurse
mentee as he/she only would have to refer to one manager/
mentor for help for his/her matters. It had also
been decided that head nurses would also be given
supervisory checklists to establish a structured feedback
mechanism.
Manual: A manual was developed for the supervisors
(head nurses) to provide an overview of the pediatric
nursing mentorship process with all techniques and
strategies for supervisors to mentor the floor nurses and
standardize the process. The manual also outlined the
two modes of mentorship communication: individual
and group mentorship. The step-by-step guide suggested
forming a flexible work plan with their supervisors
(Nursing specialists’) consent and reviewing previous records.
The manual was designed to respond to such improvements
by providing practical situations and steps on
how to apply mentorship in the most sustainable way.
Supervision checklist: As a part of implementing individual
mentorship, it was envisioned that the nurses will
be observed (sometimes unannounced as well), which
will be followed by a collaborative discussion and constructive
feedback on skills to improve (up to 3) and the
ways to do it. To facilitate the process, a supervisory
checklist was created which incorporated all the components
related to their performance (Table 5). The checklist contained various elements that were objectified
around the nine skills of compassion: for instance,
nurses’ duties, such as regularity and punctuality were
counted under ‘Integrity’, in the checklist. Each nurse
was rated on a three-point Likert scale: with 0 being ‘no
skill’ to 3 being ‘skill performance with excellency’. The
checklist is available as supplementary material (Supplementary
Table 5). Moving forward, nurses will be
assessed by their respective head nurses using the checklist
at least once every month. Following an observation,
the total score for each section would be calculated and
the nurse’s performance was allotted an overall rate.
Once performance data for all nurses will be collected, it
will be analyzed on a monthly basis and compared on
various aspects: improvement in monthly performances
of one mentee, comparative performance of mentees
working under one mentor, and performance by different
skills. Subsequently, a component named, ‘effective
stress management’ was added in the checklist,
to account for psychological health needs of the
mentee.
Dashboard for data visualization: An electronic dashboard
for head nurses was created and piloted in November
2019 to track each nurse’s progress visually to
serve as a real-time supervision tool (Fig. 4). Thirty
nurses and one head nurse participated in the pilot
phase. Majority of the findings revolved around the need
to simplify the electronic dashboard and data entry
mechanism to make it more user-friendly. Observations
were recorded by the head nurses using a tablet and data
were synchronized to be displayed in the form of a nursing
mentorship dashboard. On the dashboard, every
nurse was color coded as red (overall performance
score ≤ 39%), yellow (overall score 40–79%), or green
(overall score ≥ 80%). The working team believed that
the dashboard would be helpful for head nurses to compare
performance of his/her nurses and was also to track
their growth over a period of time (Fig. 5). Additional
plans were to run a machine learning algorithm on the
collected data to predict a nurses’ progress and skills
that need to be augmented even before that nurse demonstrates
any weakness in a component.
Promoting a culture of compassion
The call for sustainability and continued engagement resulted
in another intervention for the head nurses (nurse
supervisors); social media engagement. Numerous communication
forums were utilized as pathways to create a
culture of compassionate experience. This included recognition
in town hall meetings, WhatsApp groups,
morning huddles and a closed Facebook group. Moreover,
appraisals were also planned as another approach
to recognize the workforce performance. The nurse appraisal
serves several purposes such as determining professional
competence, enhancing staff development and
motivating them toward higher achievement [57].
WhatsApp group WhatsApp is known to be a famous
application for smartphones that allows both one-to-one
and group communication and is often used as a replacement
to text messaging [58]. The WhatsApp accounts
are based on an individual’s cell phone number
and automatically generates the list of contacts. A WhatsApp
group named ‘Nursing Mentorship Group’ was
created to promote engagement among mentors through
communication, coordination, feedback, and responsiveness.
It was envisioned that when the head nurses are
emotionally engaged through this continual knowledge
sharing in the form of research, engaging content, real
time examples of nurse-patient and mentor-mentee
interaction and insightful discussions on the elements of
compassion, they will successfully lead compassionate
mentorship programme with the 413 nurses of the hospital.
Social psychologists predict a link between social
group and emotional connection, which may lead to cooperation
and positive feelings [59]. To this end, the
group was also an optimistic attempt to promote openness
between nurse mentors and thus, strengthen peer
relationships that have encompassing benefits for care
providers and ultimately service recipients, i.e., the
patients.
Promotion on the department Facebook Group Compassionate
values were further promoted through a
closed Facebook group for the department [60]. This
group was used among the service line team members
and also served as one of the platforms to appreciate
high performers among the team. The selection of ‘high
performers’ was based on the appreciation received from
patients on the institutional feedback form. Every member
shared various informative messages regarding numerous
topics that connected them to the organization
and its patients for example, newsletters, insights from
recent articles and useful tips that can be applied professionally
etc. Moreover, achievements of units were also
shared. This included the initiative named ‘Person of the
Week’, where the employee was selected on the basis of
nomination. Anyone on the Facebook group could suggest
a nomination with the page administration team
under a criterion shared on the group which included
good performance and also showing compassionate behaviors.
The name was announced on every Friday with
a picture and paragraph written about the person’s
strength. Out of 82 posts, a total of 18 were dedicated to
the nursing team.
Discussion
This paper presents a mentorship model hinged on compassion
as an applied tool for growth and advancement
of on-job nurses at a tertiary care hospital in Pakistan.
Utilizing the theory of change model, interventions were
designed across four broad domains: hiring staff with the
right skills, strengthening supervision, providing nurses
with on-job compassionate experience, and creating a
culture that values human experience of compassion. An
on-job mentorship programme was implemented with
35 nurses in the critical care department in a hospital in
the USA for 6 months resulting in greater staff satisfaction
and reduced turnover. The investigators followed a
similar methodology to develop the programme but the
mentors were external experts from universities and
hospitals who were invited to share their experiences
[61]. Another quasi-experimental study with the nurses
and midwives in a Kenyan hospital found that targeted
clinical mentorship improved their competencies contributing
to a reduction in intrapartum fetal deaths. In
this study too, the mentors were external experts working
in their capacity as volunteers [62]. Issues with sustainability
of an initiative is a concern especially when
mentors are personnel from outside the organization.
The needs assessment with the patient survey indicated
that the unique positioning of nurses caring for
patients and collaborating with physicians made them
extremely valuable stakeholders who must be placed at
the epicenter of a compassionate healthcare movement.
This is an observation from the health systems in highincome
countries too where compassionate care has
largely been associated with nursing among the healthcare
providers [63]. In a system that assigned (almost
unapologetically) compassion as a default virtue of all
nurses, it was quite a proposition not only to create a
programme implementing compassionate mentorship
for the frontline staff but to predicate that compassionate
experience can be created through formal and informal
interactions.
While theoretically managers have been identified to
have a key role in facilitating a compassionate environment,
there are not enough implementation studies in
the medical literature recognizing this role and thus laying
the burden of the responsibility on the individual
[64, 65]. It is in this ambition that we believe the value
of our initiative lies i.e., a focus on enabling factors to
ensure sustainability from the outset. The programme
was postulated on the vision that care attributes begin
reflecting in the attitude and actions of the novice nurses
when supervisors as mentors become the role model of
compassionate values, thus, creating better human experience
spiraling into improved patient experience.
The majority of nurses had issues of being overburdened
due to workload, in comparison to attaining a
lower salary. Hartzband and Groopman indicate a similar
circumstance and further reveal that monetary incentives
are not a solution for burnout [66]. In fact,
according to a recent survey, half of the doctors including
millennials who have the lowest salaries, were willing
to give up at least minimum $20,000 of their annual incomes,
in exchange for reduced working hours [67].
Burnout can be eliminated from the caregivers’ routine
through incorporating three main pillars: autonomy,
competence and relatedness, in the healthcare profession
[66]. The current study, at some level, utilizes these pillars
in the on-job mentorship program to promote a
conducive mentor-mentee relation, however its primary
focus is to apply a compassionate framework to reduce
burnout and compassion fatigue.
The study addresses not only the need of eliminating
negative perceptions related to work but also for improvements
in the existing supervision and mentoring
process. The amalgamation of compassion literacy in the
guided framework of the intervention model along with
a basic training for mentorship can have a positive effect
on mentor-mentee relationships through enhanced engagement
which ultimately improves employee experience
in the healthcare organizations. The study
emphasizes immense importance on the role of managers
as mentors who are crucial for the professional
growth and advancement of on-job nurses in clinical
roles- an important factor to ensure employee engagement.
Hence, training should be provided to enable
them to learn new skills that align with their supervisory
roles i.e., being objective, concise, skill driven and being
able to utilize systemic analyses to overcome any ongoing
nursing practice challenges with their mentee
team.
Preliminary evidence from participant feedback, both
from the first set of workshop trainings for mentors and
subsequent mentee trainings, concurs that a compassionate
mindset can be cultivated by learning about
compassion. However, the programme is in its infancy
stage and the impact can be assessed a few years later.
For the required impact to occur, a focus on shaping the
culture for compassionate care with multiple interventions
has to continue besides training for skills including
communication of the value placed on these skills and
measurement of the skills in the organization to keeo
the staff motivated [68].
Having a balanced team with the right skills and expertise
emerging from a conceptual framework is vital to
effective intervention design [35]. The AKUH team
hence made an effort to find a partner with experience
of implementing programmes around compassion. CfC
Pakistan’s Compassionate Skills programme afforded the
much-needed objective to form compassion – a deceptively
simple concept, often disregarded for difficult
measurability and skill transference. The skills were
broken down into nine different but interconnected elements,
combined with the Master Trainer’s expansive
repertoire of engagement activities and exercises, invoked
relativity and emotionality in the participants who
later wrote testimonials for the notable impact on their
self-views, both as care-providers and supervisors. The
discourse on compassion was strengthened and reinforced,
complimenting the changing culture at children’s
hospital, with subsequent visits by the CiH lead who
prepared routine supervisors/managers as nurse mentors
for the next rollout of trainings. The partnership also
yielded the opportunity to engage nurses (rather informally)
on WhatsApp wherein a compassionate skill was
discussed each week with an emphasis on lived work
experiences around it. Expression of gratitude and
acknowledgment of colleagues improved on this informal
forum.
The collaboration held merit because it favored a
shared learning experience for stakeholders at both organizations.
A solid evidence for the efficacy of this partnership
is the Nurse Performance Checklist – technical
evaluation protocols for nurses fused with elements of
compassion. Success of the partnership is also attributed
to the well-informed progression planning by the Theory
of Change team that created a guided step-by-step
framework. Improved wellness, emotional security, interpersonal
and intrapersonal connectedness, engagement,
and eventually better patient experience are few of the
many encouraging outcomes of compassionate mentorship,
serving the vision of both partners, i.e., compassionate
healthcare. An overwhelming caseload on the
nurses and encountering massive deaths, due to the
prevalence of global pandemic have caused a decline in
mental well-being. Moreover, staff from a high-income
countries like publicly funded healthcare system in
Wales, have raised concerns due to bullying stating that
they (nurses) were not allowed time off for appointments
and to use annual leaves as they had wished. Along with
this, completion of tasks was seen as more important for
managers than the nurses’ well-being [69].
According to a global study in 2020, almost 40% of
employees from more than ten industries, complained
that their companies have not asked them how they
were doing since the pandemic [70]. Such instances demand
for instigating a compassionate framework in organizations
to sustain workers’ mental health. Moreover,
when asked to indicate their preferences for sharing
mental health concerns with the participants chose peers
and managers. Hence, a recommendation for future research
could be to focus on the application of managers
as mentorship guides in other organizations.
Absence of Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for
partnership was a potential limitation in the study.
While learnings were shared, and collaboration transpired
consultatively, it may be important to develop
SOPs as partnership deepens and more actors are involved
to achieve the set vision. Lack of planned activities
over time, including refresher trainings for the
nurse mentors due to their prolonged on-job hours,
could also be a potential limitation. However, the likely
effects were reconciled through follow-up preparatory
sessions and mock presentations with the master trainer.
WhatsApp group also served to reinforce learnings from
the workshops. Furthermore, there was no checklist to
evaluate the performance of the nurse managers (supervisor
of the nurse specialists). The current intervention
model study does not state their accountability despite
their appraisal being done by SLC and the CEO. This
aspect is a consideration for the future.
Conclusion
Nursing communication is known to be a primary driver
of family experience in pediatric healthcare. Enhancing
their abilities by imparting a compassionate experience
using on-job mentorship, enables them to reciprocate
compassionate care to their patients. The current study
identified and trained supervisors as a feasible and effective
strategy to provide compassionate experience to
nursing staff as a strategy to deal with their pain points
at a systemic level in a tertiary care center in a low-to
middle -income country. The goal of sustainability can
be achieved by aligning mentorship responsibilities as a
part of job description and institutional performance
management system, when designing mentorship
programmes.
