Background
Nurse and Midwifery Unit Managers (NMUMs) play
pivotal roles in quality patient care, nurse and midwife
satisfaction and retention [1]. The NMUMs’ role includes
change agent; coach; mentor; finance and human
resource manager; clinical expert; educator; quality
manager and patient advocate [2, 3]. Nurses who appraise
their practice environments positively, are less
likely to report burnout and leave their position, compared
to nurses with a negative appraisal of their practice
environments [4, 5]. Furthermore, higher level
nurse-reported quality of care, has been associated with
work environments where nurses have reported a feeling
of being empowered to carry out their work [6].
Irrespective of the position title or experience that
nurses and midwives may possess, leadership is a role
that all are expected to fulfil [7, 8]. A leader inspires and
influences others to act while at the same time directing
the way that others act. Thus, leadership requires qualities
that extend beyond management skills [9]. Conversely,
a manager seeks to meet goals while following
organisation rules [9].
NMUMs are expected to carry the responsibilities and
exhibit the functions of a leader and a manager simultaneously
[10, 11]. This involves NMUMs developing a
vision and operationalising nurses and midwives towards
this vision. However, being both a leader and a manager
can create tensions in the NMUMs’ role [11]. Leadership
has been viewed as one of the many functions of a manager,
despite the fact that others might view management
as a role of leadership [11]. Nevertheless, there is
the contention that both management and leadership
may not come together in one individual. This is because
of the diverse factors in a workplace environment
that make it challenging for one individual to be true to
both, and that attempting to do so can result in internal
conflict [12]. Hence, because of the diverse motivators
and objectives in a dynamic workplace environment,
there is a need for leadership training and organisational
support to enhance NMUMs’ performance.
In 2016, Western Health, Victoria, Australia, initiated
a review of the Unit Manager role including interviews
with NMUMs to inform an organisation wide professional
development of this staff group. Western Health
includes several hospitals and a wide range of community
based services. These services are provided mainly
for the western region of Melbourne, which has a catchment
population of about 800,000 people [13]. One of
several information sources to inform this initiative was
the NMUMs themselves. It was considered vital to the
success of the overall program that NMUMs were able
to describe their experiences of management and leadership
within their roles and relate areas of strength and
areas requiring development, for the program to be relevant
and responsive. The objectives of this study were:
to explore the understanding and experience of NMUMs
regarding their role; to explore what barriers and facilitators
NMUMs identified to achieving the goals of their
clinical area; and to explore NMUMs’ career plans.
Methods
Research design
The study was guided by naturalistic inquiry using a
qualitative descriptive approach [14]. There are three
main tenets that underpin naturalistic inquiry: the
phenomenon should be studied in context; the object of
interest should be examined without reference to a
priori theoretical frameworks and the researchers’ preconceived
assumptions should be explicit; and the research
is interpretive [14]. In this study, naturalistic
inquiry provided an ideal method to explore NMUMs’
leadership perspectives. In order to ensure
trustworthiness of qualitative data the four criteria proposed
by Guba (1981) were applied in this study [15].
These four criteria are credibility, transferability, dependability
and confirmability.
Setting and participants
This study was conducted in four hospitals: Sunshine
Hospital; Footscray Hospital; Sunbury Day Hospital; and
Williamstown Hospital, all under the management of
Western Health, Victoria, Australia. Selection criteria included
all NMUMs employed during the data collection
period.
Sunshine Hospital is an acute and subacute teaching
hospital with approximately 600 beds. The hospital provides:
elective and emergency services with a range of inpatient
and outpatient services including intensive care
and coronary care; acute medical and surgical services;
sub-specialty medicine and surgical services; rehabilitation;
aged care and palliative care services; and women’s
and children’s services. Footscray Hospital is an acute
and subacute teaching hospital with approximately 300
beds and provides elective and emergency services, with
a range of inpatient and outpatient services including:
acute general medical and surgical; intensive and coronary
care; sub-specialty medicine; surgical services; rehabilitation
and aged care. Williamstown Hospital is a
90-bed facility providing emergency services, surgical
services, rehabilitation and geriatric evaluation and management
services, renal dialysis services and community
rehabilitation and transition care services. At the Sunbury
Day Hospital the services provided include day
medical, day surgical, day chemotherapy and haemodialysis
treatment, and several specialist clinics.
Sampling approach and recruitment of participants
A population based sampling [16] approach was used
and all NMUMs were invited to participate in a face-toface,
semi-structured interview. This sampling approach
was selected to ensure that all NMUMs had the opportunity
to inform the professional development intervention
and engaged early in the process. A distribution list
of the names and contact details of NMUMs was provided
to staff independent of the research team.
NMUMs were sent an email describing the study with
an invitation to participate in an interview from a
person independent of line management. The initial
email contact was followed by a phone call from a research
team member to provide clarification and respond
to any questions. An interview was scheduled
at a mutually convenient time for those interested in
participating. Participants received a hard copy of the
plain language statement and consent form before
providing written consent.
Data collection
Interviews were scheduled at a site convenient to the
NMUM and in a private, neutral environment. A semistructured
interview schedule was used to guide discussion.
During the interviews, participants were asked
open-ended questions about their role and perspectives
of leadership (Fig. 1). In addition, details were sought
about their understanding of the barriers and facilitators
to the NMUM’s role and their career plans. Data were
collected using individual interviews rather than focus
groups with the rationale that some individual participants
may be more comfortable to share their insights in
a one to one discussion. All interviews were digitally recorded
with consent of the NMUMs and professionally
transcribed. Transcripts were coded numerically 001–
039.
Data analysis
An inductive inference method underpinned the methodological
approach that guided this study. This approach
allowed new knowledge to be generated based
on data that was collected [17]. Data collected from the
transcripts was systematically analysed using a thematic
analysis framework. Thematic analysis is also used to
systematically develop core themes based on an inductive
approach which allows the motivations, experience
and meanings underlying the data to be elaborated upon
in a straightforward manner [18]. Thematic analysis
of the transcribed data was conducted using Braun
and Clarke’s (2006) Framework. Initially, familiarisation
of the data occurred by reading through the verbatim
transcribed files. Initial themes were identified,
and synthesis of collated themes was undertaken independently
by members of the research team (CN &
OO). Identified themes were reviewed and refined by
the research team.
Ethical considerations
Organisational ethics approval for this study was
granted by Western Health Low Risk Ethics Panel (LNR/
15/WH/123). The study was conducted in accordance
with the principles of the Helsinki Declaration. Written
informed consent was obtained from all participants before
the start of each interview. No identifying details
were collected.
Results
A total of 39 of the health services’ 51 NMUMs participated
in interviews conducted between November 2015
and April 2016; NMUMs from all four sites of the health
service participated. Many of the NMUMs had been employees
at Western Health for many years and few had
previously held senior roles in other health services. Almost
all participants were female (n = 37, 94.9 %). The
median years as an NMUM was 4 (IQR = 5.5). However,
of note ten NMUM had been in the position for less
than one year. The median duration of interviews was
48.5 min, ranging from minimum of 37 min to a maximum
of 66 min.
Two overarching themes were identified from the data;
system challenges and influences on people (Table 1)
and each theme had three sub-themes.
System Challenges
The NMUMs related that their managerial position had
increased in scope over time with wider responsibilities
for patient care and management, leadership of staff, administration
and management of resources. In a bid to
operationalise these multidimensional roles and functions,
NMUMs encountered diverse system challenges.
Three sub-themes emerged that demonstrated impediments
that NMUMs faced in the day to day running of
their units and made it difficult for them to achieve their
goals as a NMUM (Table 1). These three sub-themes
are: Structural challenges, role preparation, managerial
and administrative functions of role.
Structural challenges
Participants talked about the structural challenges that
they encountered in the form of institutional deficits, financial
and physical infrastructure that made their work
onerous. As one participant remarked:
It makes it a very difficult task and [a] very time
-consuming task when all I want is a medication
fridge. [023].
Participants commented on the indignation they felt
seeing patients in undignified conditions because of infrastructural
inadequacies in the hospital:
Having patients paraded through the cafeteria area
on their beds while they’re going from one ward to
another or going to have a scan is the most awful
thing to see. [009]
Participants echoed the challenges of working with
hospital management and the associated stress that
comes with this working relationship:
The other thing I find when I did have conversation
with my manager is sometimes if I need
something I have to go through 10, 15 questions -
so why do I need - explain, provide rationale for
that. So last time I said to him, well, if you really
don’t trust my judgment, I don’t think I should be
in the position [009].
Inadequate support from other systems and departments
within the hospital was also uppermost in the minds of
most of the participants. As one participant remarked:
….I struggle with my operations manager because <
identifier removed > doesn’t get it. [014]
Participants wanted to have some form of validation of
the work they were doing and had hoped that their managers
would be there for them to support their leadership
efforts. Some participants expressed the feeling of not been
supported by managers and/or hospital management.
The other thing that I’ve found is … the Director of
Nursing, I used to see them at least once a week. I’ve
been here eight months; I haven’t seen the Director
of Nursing on my ward as yet. [009]
However, some participants expressed that they felt
supported by their service group director. As a participant
remarked:
…my ops manager is very good in actually guiding
me - this is my first year actually with … and I’ve
learned so much from him. [010]
Participants also talked about their frustration of not
being included in important decision-making processes
within the hospital:
I find that frustrating because there isn’t that overall
understanding of the workforce and it seems to me
that the NEAT targets drive everything. [014]
NEAT refers to National Emergency Access Targets.
These are Australian federal government performance
indicators for hospitals measuring the time from emergency
presentation to discharge from the emergency department
or to admission.
Despite the structural challenges that confronted the
participants in their day to day running of their units,
they were still focused on adhering to the policies and
procedures of their organisations:
Policies, adherence to policy, adherence to procedures,
adherence to guidelines, adherence to the …
values… you need to be able to communicate to
people as to why those things are important and expect
them to carry out those roles. [012]
Role Preparation
Most participants felt they were unprepared for the
NMUM role and had had limited support in their preparation
for the role.
There’s no orientation to a NUM role, you just sort of -
here’s roster on, here’s - you need to use recruit, you need
to do this, you need to - there’s no structure in how you
learn these tools that you’re supposed to use. There’s no
formal education in how you use these tools. [007]
In the few instances where there was orientation, participants
were not satisfied with orientation process. As
a result of lack of preparation and capacity building before
taking on the role of NMUM position some participants
struggled with self-confidence.
Many of the participants identified that professional
development and mentorship would assist them in their
NMUM role. As this participant explained:
I think if there’s going to be more expectations of the
Nurse Unit Managers, then there needs to be some
more education …Project management, change management,
how to write a business case. [007]
Participants were asked about their career plans and
most did not envisage a career beyond that of Unit Manager
or they were unsure.
… it doesn’t seem like there’s a great future for me to
go anywhere else or develop anymore or help develop
anyone else. So it’s very much now just being here
and doing what I’ve been doing… [022].
Few participants identified an intent to undertake further
study or a change of career.
Just working in public health, maybe being an epidemiologist
or working in epidemiology or doing research.
[028]
I’ve thought about maybe doing some more study at
some point. …Well probably just in the management
side of - something that’s relevant to my role at the
moment. [026]
Managerial and administrative functions of role
Participants revealed that they were concerned that their
administrative responsibilities were taking more time
away from clinical time.
… I think I would be very sad if I would have to give
up my clinical time, because I really enjoy my clinical
time. But then I’m finding that my admin days -
two admin days is just not adequate for me to do
everything that I need to do. [009]
Participants identified staffing and skill mix issues and
dealing with difficult staff as critical managerial function
that they had to confront in order to run their units
successfully.
So obviously it’s incredibly difficult to recruit staff.
It’s not just staff, it’s … trained staff……….The skill
mix… high reliance and you know just for the senior
staff on the unit, helping support new staff, making
sure everyone is safe, making sure patients are safe,
it’s been a huge workload for everyone. [012]
To effectively run their units, few participants demonstrated
the ability to delegate aspects of their NMUM
role to their staff. One NMUM who did delegate responsibilities
related:
It is important to set up portfolios. So I have an infection
control portfolio… I have the rostering portfolio.
We have the ordering portfolio. Very important
stuff… There’s an admission portfolio…. So those
people all have responsibilities in their areas…. I
find if you have those portfolios and those structures
really early and you get the right people in them,
your place runs really well. So I’ve been fairly successful
as a manager [013].
Influences on people
The second overarching theme was influences on people.
Participants described their NMUM role in terms of
investing and supporting their staff, leading and influencing
their teams and being accountable and responsible for the
care provided. In this theme there were three sub-themes:
Leadership; putting patients first; and personal sacrifices.
Leadership
In describing how they provided leadership in their
everyday practice several key elements were described by
the participants. Being an accessible leader was stated as
very important.
I’ve got an open-door policy. …there are managers in
the past who have not allowed the staff to talk to
them. I tell them where I’m going. I’m off-floor today,
I’ll be - if you need, see me by 12. If it’s urgent email
me and I’ll get back to you tonight after work.[013].
Another attribute that the participants described as an
example of their leadership was leading by example and
taking responsibility to influence the behaviour of staff.
I want to lead the team actually in a cohesive and a
united team. So that’s really my aim and that’s why I
still deliver quality care, standard of care and you
know good teamwork and it’s easy for everyone. [009]
For some participants, leadership was evidenced by
building a functional team that can deliver effectively on
team goals by the complementary use of skill sets.
Finding out where staff want to work, what they
don’t want to do. Trying to put people in and move
them around to best suit the needs of the unit, the
needs of the organisation and the staff’s needs. [012]
The participants also identified their interactions with
staff as a demonstration of their leadership. Treating others
with respect and in an equitable and transparent manner
were examples of leadership in their NMUM roles.
I make it very clear that whether you’re the CEO or
you’re the cleaner, I speak exactly the same. I might
change my vernacular, but I do not treat them any
differently basically. So everyone is treated exactly
the same… [013].
Participants demonstrated their leadership acumen by
developing succession plans. This contrasted with the
abrupt manner many participants experienced at the
commencement of their role as NMUM. As this participant
explained:
Also developing my staff, so also going through succession
planning. At the moment I have one of my
nurses acting up as an ANUM, so coaching her,
showing her how to do things or things like that.
[009]
Putting patients first
In describing their NMUM role, participants related a
wide diversity of responsibilities. Participants described
clinical responsibilities as a main feature of their role,
particularly in terms of working with staff ‘on the floor’,
to ensure that a high standard of care was provided. Participants
demonstrated their mission of putting the patient
first regardless of the constraining situation that
they might be facing.
Again, I need to provide care to the patients, so I’m
not going to compromise patients’ care just because I
have to explain at the end of the month - why did I
spend more? [009]
So I say to my staff that they’re - they come second
to the patient. At the end of the day the patient is
number one. Without them I don’t have a job. So
they’re a very close second, but they’re second. [013]
For some participants multidisciplinary interaction
based on communication and co-operation with other
team members was crucial to ensure that patients’ interests
were upheld.
I guess in my current role a lot of my responsibility
is around, I guess, communicating and negotiating
with other groups of people to make sure that the
patient has a good journey through the system,
really. [006]
Participants also saw patient safety as their number
one priority. As this participant remarked:
My role is first and foremost to protect the patients’
safety and to - my other part of my role is to provide
leadership and direction to the unit… [014].
Personal sacrifices
Some participants described the NMUM role in terms of
the personal sacrifices that they had to undertake to ensure
the optimal functioning of their unit. For example,
participants worked long hours as a routine to ensure
positive outcomes for their units. As this participant
explained:
I work longer hours, it’s for me actually to finish my
own work but because I want myself to be visible on
the floor to make sure that they’re all supported. I
want myself to be involved in whatever they do because
I always wanted them to come to me and feel
free so that I know where they’re at the level of understanding,
the level of - their coping
mechanism.[010].
Participants talked about how their family life was being
affected because of the extra-commitment that they
are putting into their job.
I guess I’ll be honest, recently this year my partner
said to me that I need to really take a long hard look
at what I’m doing because I’m not home before 7pm.
I’ve got a three-year-old who is starting to ignore me
because I’m not there. I’m gone sometimes before he
wakes up. [012]
Despite the huge burden of responsibilities on the
shoulders of the NMUMs, they were able to listen to
and accommodate problems that their staff were facing
in their personal lives. As this participant stated:
…when they’ve got depression or they’re having family
issues or divorces. They need to find someone -
they’re very confident that I’m not going to tell anyone
about their problems. I treat them exactly the
same. [008]
Discussion
This study aimed to understand: the experience of the
NMUMs’ role; the barriers to, and facilitators of, achieving
their unit’s goals; and the NMUMs’ career perspectives.
The findings from this study showed that many
NMUMs were nurses and midwives who were appointed
to their positions without an orientation or the provision
of a mentor. In addition to a lack of preparation for the
role, some NMUMs experienced a lack of role clarity
that led to low self-confidence and feeling ill-equipped
to carry out the requirements of the position. Low selfconfidence
on the part of the NMUMs may have cascading
effects on the system [19] which may lead to reduced
patient satisfaction and staff productivity [1, 19] as well
as staff retention [1, 19]. Our findings suggest a need to
address the NMUM preparation as a priority to contribute
to staff and patient satisfaction.
Our study further revealed that targeted professional
development programs on subjects such as project management,
change management and business case development
can enhance the capacity of NMUM to deliver
effectively on their multifaceted responsibilities. Consistent
with our findings, previous studies have identified
confusion among NMUMs concerning the boundaries
and expectations of their role, worsened by inadequate
professional development opportunities relating to
leadership and management in Australia [6, 20, 21], New
Zealand [22], Ireland [23] and South Africa [24].
The contemporary role of NMUMs requires managerial,
leadership and clinical skills [25]. Our study revealed
that NMUMs were worried that their administrative responsibilities
were taking more time away from their
clinical leadership responsibilities. This reported drift of
NMUMs from one of their core responsibilities because
of increased administrative workload has the potential to
compromise patient safety unless there is a restructure
of roles and responsibilities. In line with our finding, evidence
shows that about 65 % of a NMUM’s role is
largely related to general management activities such as
staff management and budgeting, with only 16 % of tasks
being clinically related to patient care [25]. Therefore, it
is not surprising that because of this shift in responsibilities,
some have advocated that the position of the
NMUM may be occupied by someone who is not a
nurse [26]. This view has been espoused based on public
management literature [27, 28] which alludes to the idea
that any manager can manage any business [26, 27].
However, this view overlooks the everyday clinical realities
that NMUMs face daily and the associated complex
decisions they make relating to patient and staffing issues
such as staff turnover, high part-time employment,
skill mix of staff, high bed occupancy and unplanned admissions
which can impact on patients’ morbidity and
mortality [29]. However, if the clinical time of NMUM
continues to decrease as a result of increased administrative
responsibilities, the voices advocating for nonnurses
to occupy the position of unit managers may become
louder and even become legitimate. A recent
qualitative evaluation of an intervention to reduce the
administrative burden of NMUMs in Australia via the
introduction of a clerical Nurse Unit Manager Support
Officer position, showed that administrative support for
NMUMs improved the capacities of NMUMs to undertake
clinical leadership and to be strategic leaders [30].
Of note in this study was the self-sacrifices of the
NMUMs. NMUMs exemplified their personal sacrifices
through long hours of work and shouldering some of
the personal burdens of nurses and midwives. Our study
revealed that these extra commitments to their positions
by NMUMs was also affecting their family life in a negative
way. This culture of self-sacrifice among NMUMs is
historically embedded within the nursing profession and
may lead to burnout, job dissatisfaction and presenteeism
[31]. A self-sacrificing image of NMUMs may also
discourage prospective recruits from taking up the role
of NMUMs. Thus, the detrimental over-exertion and the
lack of self-care within the ranks of NMUMs needs to
be addressed to reduce retention challenges. Previous
studies have linked personal factors such as burnout
with intent to leave [32, 33]. Both theoretical and
empirical works support the use of nurses’ intention to
leave as a proxy construct for actual turnover [34–36].
Strengths and limitations
A strength of the study is the richness of the data available
for analysis and the rigour of the data collection
and analysis processes. Credibility, confirmability, dependability,
and transferability ensure the rigour of a
study [37] and in this study credibility was demonstrated
through reflexivity, maintaining an audit trail, and the
use of detailed descriptions in interpreting the data.
Methods used in this study to establish confirmability
included reflexive journaling, and a clearly identified
audit trail. The transparent audit trail detailed the rationale
for decisions made throughout the research
process to assist establish dependability. Transferability
was promoted by the large sample size and the description
of the context of the study. A limitation of this
study is that while it involved NMUM from four hospitals,
all were from one health service which may limit
transferability of findings.
Conclusions
This study of contemporary NMUMs reveals that there
continues to be a lack of investment in the orientation,
professional development and support of this critical
leadership and management role. Effective leadership is
critical to the performance of a well-functioning hospital
unit and to patient safety. Many NMUMs report feeling
ill-equipped, unsure of the expectations of their role,
and often overwhelmed with the demands of the position
with minimal or no support from systems within
the hospital. With an increasing trend to administrative
and budgetary requirements within the NMUM role, the
way forward is targeted interventions to support and develop
capabilities of NMUMs or to introduce another
model of management.