Background
Morality is an indispensable part of human life and a
subset of practical philosophy looking for the right
and wrong and determining good and bad in a collection
of behaviors under certain conditions [1]. The
nursing profession is one of the sciences with abundant
illustrative ethical aspects in the past, present,
and future [2, 3]. Since distinguishing the good and
bad is in the body of ethics, the moral competency of
the nursing profession may be rendered as equal to
professional competency [3].
Indeed, nurses face some moral problems in their daily
work that need to be resolved [4, 5]. Identification of
ethical problems requires moral sensitivity [6], and also
an awareness of ethical principles [7]. Nonetheless, mere
moral sensitivity and knowledge will not suffice. Nurses
ought to possess moral courage to perform on the basis
of what is considered ethically right provided personal
values and criteria correspond to the accepted healthcare
values [4].
When a person is not able to act according to the correct
ethical performance, moral courage helps them to
try their best to achieve their ultimate goal regardless of
its consequences. To do so, they consider moral principles
and perform a correct act that is not easy to do [8].
Some studies have demonstrated that moral courage is
related to concepts concerning assessment of ethics
under certain conditions like sensitivity to justice [9],
perception of control on one’s emotions and performance
such as emotional self-regulation [10], and selfefficacy
[11]. Moral courage predisposes to performing
ethical norms regardless of social costs [12], helping patients
reduce symptoms of pain and agony, communicating
effectively with patients and their families, and
cooperating with physicians [13], inclination for recognizing
others’ sufferings and sensitivity to them, expression
of sympathy and kindness, helping the needy, doing
something to decrease others’ pains and sufferings, and
challenging the current situation [14].
Stress, anxiety, fear of being scolded, and rejection by
colleagues and seclusion are some of the negative consequences
that may be created by moral courage [15].
Moral courage helps nurses overcome many barriers like
fear, thence enabling them to defend the patient effectively
[16]. In their study, Day reported the rate of moral
courage as low in healthcare settings and mentioned
many factors such as lack of occupational certainty as
barriers to nurses’ inclination for brave behaviors [17].
On the other hand, courage is the token of a powerful
nurse’s good performance and quality care. Empowerment
is a process completed by personal values and
struggles and also by environmental factors [18]. Psychological
empowerment is an appropriate solution for enabling
individuals to cope with mental pressures and
work stressors [19]. Studies have shown that psychological
empowerment is correlated with professional satisfaction
[20], exerting a predictive effect on emotional
commitment [21]. The results of many studies have suggested
that empowerment of personnel influences responsibility,
productivity, and quality of care [22],
diminishes costs, enhances organizational loyalty and
confidence, and organizational entrepreneurship [23].
The findings of other studies also demonstrate that increased
development and empowerment leads to reduced
staff displacement, fatigue and work leave [24],
promoted quality of nursing care [25], increased patient
satisfaction [20], increased occupational satisfaction, and
decreased turnover of nurses [26].
Observing professional ethics is an effective and
powerful factor in nurses’ development [27]. Ethic of
care, that is one component of nursing performance,
creates and promotes moral courage [7]. Although moral
courage is rendered as an important element of nursing,
little attention has been paid to it so that there are very
few studies focusing on this topic. Hence, this study investigated
the correlation between nurses’ moral courage
and psychological empowerment.
Methods
Design of the Study
This descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted in
2019. The study population consisted of all nurses
employed in Khatam-al-Anbia Hospital and Shahid
Beheshti Hospital affiliated to Shahid Sadoughi University
of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran. A total of 180 participants
were selected randomly using sample volume
formula with confidence interval of 95%, test power of
80% and the correlation coefficient of 0.18 according to
the pilot study. The inclusion criteria were: holding at
least a Bachelor of Science (BS) in nursing, at least 1 year
of clinical nursing experience, and inclination for participation.
The research instruments were distributed by the
researcher in various work shifts and collected after
completion.
Data collection instruments
Data were collected by Demographics Questionnaire,
Sekerka’s Moral Courage Scale, and Spreitzer’s Psychological
Empowerment Scale.
The Demographics Questionnaire included information
on age, gender, employment status, literacy level,
marital status, official position, and work experience.
The Moral Courage Scale was developed by Sekerka
et al. [28]. This 15-item scale covers five aspects: moral
agency, multiple values, endurance of threat, going beyond
compliance, and moral goals. Each aspect includes
3 separate items. This instrument uses a 7-point Likert
scale wherein each item receives 1–7 points (from never
correct = 1 to always correct = 7). Thus, the score of each
item may range from 3 to 21. The minimum and maximum
total scores were 15 and 105, respectively. The
mean score of items in each aspect and in the whole
item was considered as the moral courage score [28].
The validity of Moral Courage Scale was reported as
81% in the study by Mohammadi et al. and its reliability
was estimated to be 0.85 (Cronbach’s α) using a sample
volume of 30 nurses under study [29].
Spreitzer’s Psychological Empowerment Scale was used
to measure nurses’ psychological empowerment [30]. This
15-item inventory uses a 5-point Likert scale (form completely
disagree = 1 to completely agree = 5) to measure 5
aspects: meaningfulness, competence, self-determination,
impact, and confidence so that 3 items are devoted to each
aspect. The scores of this tool ranged from 15 to 75 and a
higher score indicated higher perceived psychological empowerment
[30]. Content and face validities were confirmed
using a qualitative method by asking the opinions
of 10 expert professors. The reliability of the instrument
was reported as Cronbach’s α = 0.84 [31].
Data analysis
The gleaned data were imported to SPSS16 and analyzed
with descriptive statistics (frequency distribution,
mean and standard deviation) and inferential
statistics (independent t-test, ANOVA, and Pearson
correlation coefficient). Normality of data distribution
was examined by Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test (P >
0.05).
Results
All 180 questionnaires were returned and analyzed. The
mean age of the participants was 33.55 ± 6.07 years with
a mean work experience of 2.40 ± 1.51 years. Most participants
were female (79.4%), were married (81.1%),
held a BS in nursing (93.9%), formally employed (61.7%),
and held the post of a nurse (96.7%) (Table 1).
The results revealed that nurses enjoy a high level of
moral courage so that the greatest mean belonged to
“going beyond compliance” and the least mean pertained
to “multiple values”. Moreover, the findings demonstrated
that the rate of nurses’ psychological empowerment
was moderate so that the greatest mean belonged
to “competence” and the smallest mean pertained to
“confidence” (Table 2).
The findings indicated a positive significant correlation
between “psychological empowerment” and “moral courage
and its dimensions” (P < 0.05). Besides, there was a
significant correlation between moral courage and all dimensions
of psychological empowerment except for
“confidence” (P < 0.05) (Table 3).
The results of Pearson Correlation Coefficient Test
showed a significant correlation between age and moral
courage (r = 0.230, P = 0.002) and between work experience
and moral courage (r = 0.181, P = 0.015) so that
moral courage increased with increasing age and work
experience (Table 4).
The rate of moral courage and psychological empowerment
was higher among the married, those with
MSc degree, head nurses/supervisors, and formally
employed personnel. Moral courage score was greater in
males whereas psychological empowerment score was
higher in females, albeit, the difference was not statistically
significant (P > 0.05) (Table 4).
Discussion
This study determined the correlation between nurses’
moral courage and psychological empowerment. The findings
showed that the participating nurses had a high degree
of moral courage. This is consistent with the results
of the study by Mahdaviseresht et al. [8], that reported a
high mean score of nurses’ moral courage (90.36 ± 10.56).
The studies by Taraz et al. [32], and Moosavi et al. [33],
also reported a high rate of moral courage among nurses.
Nonetheless, the study by Mohammadi et al. [29], reported
nurses’ moral courage at the moderate level. In
Day’s study, the rate of this variable was low [17]. The diversity
of results in different studies may be attributed to
disparities in work environment, ethical atmosphere,
organizational culture, organizational and managerial support,
fear of social seclusion, collective thought, and lack
of acceptance by the organization [34].
In the present study, the highest score of moral courage
belonged to “going beyond compliance” and the lowest
score pertained to “multiple values”. Some studies reported
the greatest amount of moral courage in “moral
agency” [8, 32, 34]. This is not consistent with our results.
Yet, consistent with our findings, in the studies by Mahdaviseresht
et al. [8], and Taraz et al. [32], the lowest score
of this variable pertained to “multiple values”. Nonetheless,
in the study by Aminizadeh et al. [34], the lowest
score of moral courage belonged to “endurance of threat”.
The high score of “going beyond compliance” indicates
that nurses do not merely consider laws and regulations;
rather, they progress beyond their internal capacity and
consider doing what is correct and ideal [28, 35], suggesting
nurses’ responsibility for their profession and patients.
The low score of “multiple values” indicates nurses’
inability in ethical decision-making and coping with
organizational constraints that may predispose to their
moral apprehension, finally affecting their quality of care
[28, 32, 35]. This needs to be noted by the responsible authorities.
Also organizations must accept moral virtues
such as courage and direct organizational culture towards
supporting the nurses with moral courage. Some of the
consequences are the right decision making, the right action,
the patient’s safety and comfort, and playing the role
of care [16].
The findings of the present study revealed that the
mean score of nurses’ psychological empowerment was
at the moderate level. The results of other studies are
consistent with this finding [36–40]. Ouyang et al. reported
in their study the Chinese nurses’ psychological
empowerment at the moderate level [38]. Moreover, another
study in Egypt, suggested a moderate level of
nurses’ psychological empowerment [37]. Furthermore,
the findings of a systematic review demonstrated that
Iranian nurses’ psychological empowerment is moderate
[39]. Yet, the study by Mirkamli et al. reported Iranian
nurses’ psychological empowerment at a high level [41].
In the present study, the highest score of psychological
empowerment pertained to “competence” whereas the
lowest score belonged to “confidence”. In the study by
Zahednezhad et al., the highest mean score belonged to
“competence” while the lowest mean score pertained to
“self-determination” [31], which is consistent with our
study in maximal score. In the study by Mirkamli et al.,
the maximal mean pertained to “meaningfulness”
whereas the minimal score belonged to “confidence”
[41], that is consistent with our study in the minimal
dimension.
The low score of nurses’ “confidence” in our study indicates
that they are not sure that the powerful authorities
will behave justly, honestly, and equally towards
them; in other words, they do not feel any personal
safety and security. Hence, nursing managers ought to
pay due attention to this issue.
In our study, there was a direct significant correlation
between psychological empowerment and its dimensions
so that increased psychological empowerment resulted
in nurses’ enhanced moral courage. No study was found
to have exactly investigated the association between
these two variables though some studies have indirectly
implied it. For instance, LaSala et al. emphasize that all
nurses in all roles and all work environments ought to
commit themselves to creating a structurally powerful
environment that supports moral courage [7]. ZahedBabelan
et al. also revealed that moral behavior, with its
high psychological empowerment path coefficients, can
be considered as an influential and powerful factor in
empowering or developing nurses [27]. Furthermore,
Sadooghiasl et al. refer to ethical and scientific competence,
self-construction, and rationalism as antecedents
of moral courage. They also refer to protective environment
and ethical climate of the organization as a factor
contributing to moral courage [16]. Kuokkanen et al. describe
courage, tenacity, and self-esteem as qualities of
an empowered nurse. An empowered nurse is able to
act under pressure, resist criticism, and act in their performance
and professional positioning without any fear.
Such a nurse accepts responsibility with courage in
decision-making [18].
To clarify this finding, it may be said that since increasing
psychological empowerment may lead to reduced
mental pressures and work environment stressors,
and enhance the power of decision-making and performing
moral behavior by the nursing staff [42–44], it can
ultimately result in the creation of moral courage in
nurses. Having a sense of control, competency, autonomy,
positive impact, and increased motivation in relation
to work affects the moral courage of nurses. In
these circumstances, nurses, as moral agency, can properly
manage moral dilemmas. This will improve the
quality of care.
The findings showed no significant correlation among
demographic variables, moral courage and psychological
empowerment except that moral courage was significantly
promoted with increasing age and work
experience. The study by Mohammadi et al. [29], and
Moosavi et al. [33], further demonstrated a positive significant
correlation between moral courage and work experience
that is consistent with our study. With
increasing age, individuals’ awareness of a situation is
enhanced and their capacity for recognizing behaviors
[45]. Aultman believes that moral courage is learned
over time by observing the courageous behaviors of
others. The occurrence of courageous behaviors is enhanced
by increasing work experience and frequent encounters
with therapeutic challenges [46]. Murray also
states that as the work experience of nurses increases,
the impact of barriers in the work environment on
nurses’ performance decreases and moral courage increases
[5]. Generally, moral courage and the decisive
behaviors of nurses are enhanced with increasing age
and work experience and familiarity with the work environment.
Using experienced nurses as role modeling for
junior nurses can be an effective factor in promoting
nurses’ courageous behaviors.
Limitations of the study
This study used self-reporting instruments for data collection.
These instruments suffer from possibility of respondents’
fatigue and impatience in responding or
shortage of time. Thus, some nurses may have not provided
real answers. Another limitation was lack of control
over intervening variables such as factors affecting
personnel’s concentration that might have confounded
the results.
Conclusion
Given the correlation found between psychological empowerment
and moral courage, it may be concluded that
promotion of nurses’ psychological empowerment can
increase their moral courage. Consequently, organizations
and nursing managers are obliged to provide some
strategies like changing managerial style in clinical
wards, nurses’ contribution to decision-makings, and
expanding a suitable organizational culture to move towards
promoting nurses’ mental power and its various
aspects as far as possible. Providing the necessary prerequisites
for promoting nurses’ psychological empowerment
can lead to increased morally courageous
behaviors, ultimately ending in improved nursing quality
care.