Introduction
Severe acute undernutrition affects 18.7 million children
worldwide, and moderate acute undernutrition (MAM)
affects an additional 32.8 million. Undernutrition remains
one of the most common causes of morbidity and
mortality among children throughout the world [1]. Assuming
every cases of undernutrition as lack of availability
of food due to poor socio-economic status is wrong
and may be associated with adverse outcomes [2]. Cardiovascular
diseases are one of the commonest medical
conditions which are strongly associated with undernutrition
[3–5]. The prevalence of malnutrition among
children with cardiac disease varies according to the
population studied. According to Okoromah and colleagues,
a study done in Nigeria, reported a prevalence
of undernutrition (90.4%) and severe undernutrition
(61.2%). However, there are no published data showing
the national prevalence of undernutrition among children
with cardiac diseases from Africa and Ethiopia [6].
The relationship between underlying cardiac disease
and undernutrition is multidirectional. Undernutrition is
strongly associated with frequent hospitalization, recurrent
infections, poor postoperative outcome and increased
mortality. However, the cause of undernutrition
in cardiac patients is multifactorial. Cardiac diseases can
cause or worsen undernutrition due to several reasons.
These could be due to decreased food intake, increased
energy requirement and venous congestion of the bowel
resulting in poor nutrient absorption [6–8].
Children with genetic syndromes/chromosomal disorders,
advanced heart failure and pulmonary hypertension
are more prone to develop growth failure and undernutrition
[8–11]. Every child with cardiac diseases should
be screened for growth failure and undernutrition to
identify patients at high risk of poor outcomes who
might benefit either from medical management or surgical
interventions to prevent deterioration of congestive
heart failure and improve prognosis [12]. Nutritional status
assessment of cardiac patients is often neglected in
majority hospitals in Ethiopia, despite the undernutrition
contributed for increased morbidity and mortality of our
cardiac patients [3]. This study aimed to identify the
demographic and clinical characteristics of children with
cardiac disease and undernutrition presenting to an outpatient
clinic at University of Gondar Hospital (GUH),
Ethiopia.
Methods
This hospital-based cross-sectional study was conducted
in the pediatric cardiology clinic at University of Gondar
Hospital. University of Gondar Hospital is a resourcelimited
a teaching and tertiary care hospital in northern
Ethiopia. It receives referrals from an area that encompasses
more than 17 million people.
Patients under age 18 years presenting to the GUH
cardiology clinic between April 1, to June 30, 2019 with
echocardiographic evidence of anatomic defects, with or
without functional deficiencies, were included in the
study. Premature infants, children with a known genetic
disorder, and children with other, non-CD chronic illnesses
were excluded. Eligible families completed a pretested,
self-administered, structured questionnaire. Two
physicians reviewed the medical records of all participants.
All methods were performed in accordance to
declaration of Helenski. Informed consent was obtained
from parents/legal guardians and this study was approved
by the University of Gondar hospital internal review
board (approval number – SOM/1209/2019).
Socio-demographic, anthropometric, clinical and echocardiographic
data were collected in the questionnaire.
One general practitioner and one pediatric resident obtained
anthropometric measurements using standardized
procedures. Cardiac diagnosis was made based on clinical
evaluation and investigation including Doppler echocardiography.
Pulmonary hypertension was defined
using transthoracic echocardiography.
Nutritional status was assessed using weight-for-age
(WFA), height-for-age (HFA), weight-for-height (WFH)
and mid upper arm circumference (MUAC), and measurements
were interpreted in accordance with World
Health Organization (WHO) standards. The WHO global
database on undernutrition recommends a cut-off z
score of ≤ − 2 to classify low WHZ (wasting), low WAZ
(underweight) and low HAZ (stunting) as moderate undernutrition,
and a z score of ≤ − 3 SD to define severe
undernutrition.
Data obtained from the study was entered, cleaned &
verified using Epi-info 7. Then, the data were exported
to SPSS version 22.0 for analysis. Descriptive summary
like frequencies, proportions, graphs and cross tabs were
used to present the study result. Bivariate regression was
performed to identify clinical and demographic variables
associated with undernutrition. Those variables found to
be significantly associated with undernutrition were included
in the multivariate regression model. Adjusted
odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
calculated.
Result
Two hundred sixty-nine children with CD were included
in this study. One hundred forty-two (52.8%) patients
were female and 49.8% were under age 5. The mean age
was 9.6 years (range 1 month - 18 years). Fifty-two percent
of patients lived in a rural area. 37.5% of fathers
and 53.2% of mothers were illiterate, and 82.9% of families
had more three family members (Table 1).
Acquired heart disease (AHD) was more common
than congenital heart disease (69.5% Vs 30.1%), and
rheumatic heart disease was the most common form of
acquired heart disease in the pediatric follow up clinic
during the study period. Of participants with congenital
heart disease, 68.2% had acyanotic disease and 31.8%
had cyanotic disease. 16.4% of participants had pulmonary
hypertension, 50.6% had congestive heart failure, and
90.3% had a history of hospitalization. (Table 2).
Undernutrition was identified in 65.7% of patients, of
whom 34.5% had moderate acute undernutrition and
31.2% had severe acute undernutrition. 39.7% of patients
were stunted, of whom 25.2% were moderately stunted
and 14.5% were severely stunted. Overall, 54.5% of patients
were underweight and 53.9% were stunted. The
prevalence of undernutrition was higher in children with
congenital heart disease than acquired heart disease
(85.7% v 57.2%, respectively) (Fig. 1).
Rural residence, recent admission, a history of > 4 admissions,
congenital heart disease, and any symptoms of
congestive heart failure (CHF) were associated with undernutrition
on bivariate analysis. On multivariable regression,
pulmonary hypertension (adjusted odds ratio
[AOR] 3.79, 95% CI 1.7–12.7), moderate to severe CHF
(AOR 4.6, 95% CI: 1.6–12.7), and cardiac chamber enlargement
(AOR 2.91, 95% CI 1.45–5.66) were associated
with undernutrition (Table 3).
Discussion
It is well known that undernutrition is common in cardiac
patients and related with increased morbidity and
mortality. In developing countries like Ethiopia where
surgical intervention for cardiac disease like congenital
heart disease and/or rheumatic heart disease is scarce or
unavailable at all, the magnitude of undernutrition is expected
to be high [3, 13, 14].
This study detected a high burden of undernutrition
and growth failure in children with cardiac diseases. The
overall prevalence of undernutrition was 65.7%, with
31.2% of cases having severe acute undernutrition.
Stunting which is an indicator of chronic undernutrition
was found to be 39.7% and with 14.5% of cases had severe
stunting whereas the prevalence of underweight
was found to be 54.5%. As noted above, this study detected
a high burden of undernutrition in children with
cardiac disease as compared to the country national estimate
of undernutrition in Ethiopia [15]. Other studies
also showed children with cardiac disease are higher risk
of undernutrition compared to those without cardiac
disease [5, 9]. Children with cardiac disease have several
reasons to have undernutrition. This includes higher
metabolic demand, inadequate intake, associated comorbidities
like recurrent respiratory infection, gut dysfunction
and associated chromosomal and genetic
syndromes [13].
Similar to our finding, a study done in Turkey by
Varun etal reported higher prevalence of acute undernutrition
(65%) and chronic undernutrition (42%) [7].
Okoromah and colleagues reported a prevalence of undernutrition
(90.4%), severe undernutrition (61.2%) and
chronic undernutrition indicated by stunting (28.8%) in
children with congenital heart disease visiting a tertiary
teaching hospital Lagos, Nigeria. Though they reported
lower prevalence of stunting, the overall prevalence of
undernutrition and severe acute undernutrition is much
higher than those seen in our study [6]. Another study
in India done by Vaidyanathan and colleagues, shows
higher prevalence of acute undernutrition (55.9%) evidenced
by weight for height deficit [14]. This suggests
the presence of heterogeneity from country-to-country
accounting for the difference in determinant of undernutrition
among children with cardiac disease.
This study found a higher prevalence of wasting,
underweight but a lower prevalence of stunting compared
to a study done at Mulago referral hospital,
Uganda (31.5% wasted, 42.5% underweight and 45.4%
stunted) and Cameron et al. study which reported a
prevalence of acute undernutrition (33%) and chronic
undernutrition (64%). In our study we included both
congenital heart disease and acquired heart disease patients
in contrast to the studies in the above setting
where they included only children with congenital heart
disease. This is could be the reason why our study has a
higher prevalence of undernutrition in addition to the
differences in socioeconomic characteristics and health
service delivery system of these countries [16, 17].
NYHA/Modified ROSS class III and IV heart failure,
cardiac chamber enlargement, and pulmonary
hypertension were associated with undernutrition in our
study. This is in line with various studies that reported
children with advanced congestive heart failure and/or
pulmonary hypertension were more likely to be malnourished
[8, 9, 18]. This association may be explained
by congestion of bowel and liver leading to early satiety.
In addition, heart failure activates the sympathetic nervous
system, leading to decreased appetite and increased
caloric demand [19].
This study has several limitations. First, many patients
in this study were referred to us with advanced disease,
which may have led us to overestimate the true prevalence
of undernutrition among children with cardiac disease.
Second, we were unable to include other variables
known to affect nutrition, including prematurity, genetic
disorders, and previous dietary interventions. Third, our
study was not powered to identify determinants of undernutrition
among children with different categories of
cardiac disease. However, this study provides new insights
into the burden of undernutrition and its associated
factors among children with cardiac disease in our
hospital and encourages for a more comprehensive
population-based analysis.
Conclusion and recommendation
Undernutrition is common among children with cardiac
disease in our setting. Advanced congestive heart failure,
pulmonary hypertension, and cardiac chamber enlargement
are associated with undernutrition. Nutritional
management should be considered for all patients with
cardiac disease, and prioritized for those with echocardiographic
risk factors. In addition to this we recommend
every effort to be made for early and definitive
corrective measures to be performed including surgery.