Background
Overweight and obesity are major public health concerns
affecting about half of the global adult population,
with prevalence being greater among women compared
to men [1, 2]. In low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs), overweight and obesity have been increasing at
a rapid rate, particularly in urban compared with rural
settings [3]. Tanzania is not an exception, with overweight
and obesity among women of reproductive age
increasing markedly from 21.5 to 28% from 2010 to
2015 [4]. The prevalence of overweight among women
in urban areas is twice (42%) as high as that for women
in rural areas (21%) [5].
The effects of overweight and obesity on health are
well researched. The global burden of disease related to
high body mass index (BMI) is high. Globally, high BMI
accounts for more than 4 million deaths, two-thirds of
which are due to cardiovascular disease [6]. In LMICs,
the disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) related to obesity
are high and have been steadily rising compared to
high-income countries [7]. Among women of childbearing
age, overweight and obesity have been associated
with increased risk of non-communicable diseases
(NCDs), pregnancy complications, caesarean section
births, adverse birth outcomes, and infant mortality [8–
11]. A recent study conducted in Tanzania reported associations
between maternal overweight and increased
risk of intrapartum obstetric complications and caesarean
section births [12]. Furthermore, offspring of obese
mothers have had up to 29% increased risk of hospital
admission from cardiovascular disease and 35% increased
risk of premature death in adulthood compared
to offspring of normal BMI mothers [13].
Several factors may be contributing to increasing overweight
and obesity among women in low-income settings
and sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), and these include
environmental and lifestyle factors, genetics and diseases
[14]. Additionally, high socioeconomic status, increasing
age, parity, and marital status have also been associated
with overweight among women in the region [15, 16].
Physical inactivity and poor dietary patterns characterised
by high intake of calorie-rich, processed and refined
foods may be key modifiable risk factors for
overweight and obesity in SSA [15, 16]. However, little is
known about the role of physical activity and nutrients
intake among African women of reproductive age because
most reports come from national demographic
surveys where physical activity and nutrient intake are
not assessed. Previous studies in urban African settings
assessing nutrient intake among women of reproductive
age are limited by small sample sizes affecting the generalisation
of their findings [17, 18]. Additionally, understanding
the actual contribution of physical activity to
women’s BMI is a bit tricky considering women’s
participation in energy-demanding domestic activities to
support household needs, which is often unaccounted. A
clear understanding of the role of these modifiable risk
factors in overweight and obesity in the African context
may assist in designing appropriate interventions given
unprecedented urbanisation, nutrition and dietary transition
observed in many African cities [19, 20].
High prevalence of environmental and lifestyle diseases
related to high BMI cannot be ignored in Tanzania, considering
the upsurge of maternal BMI in urban settings
recently reported from the Tanzania national Nutrition
Survey [21]. As a country, no effective policies and programs
to control overweight in women of reproductive
age. This may be due to several factors, including limited
pre-pregnancy BMI data from clearly designed populations
studies in Tanzania, as in other low-income settings.
This study aimed to determine the prevalence and
factors associated with overweight and obesity and
evaluate the role of physical activity in high BMI among
women of reproductive age in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Methods
The study was conducted in the Dar es Salaam Urban
Cohort Study (DUCS) site, a Health and Demographic
Surveillance System (HDSS) platform based in Ukonga
and Gongolamboto wards, in Ilala District of Dar es salaam.
The platform is a peri-urban area in Dar es Salaam,
the commercial city of Tanzania. The design of
the DUCS and the study population have been described
in detail elsewhere [22].
The study was a cross-sectional study nested in the
HDSS platform. We enrolled women of reproductive age
from September 2018 to January 2019. A list of women
of reproductive age was initially pulled from the HDSS
database that contained participants’ names, dates of
birth, and household identification numbers. A simple
random sampling technique using random numbers was
applied to select households with women of reproductive
age. A field worker then visited the selected households
to identify women who met the inclusion criteria. Inclusion
criteria for the study included (i) women aged 15 to
49 years, (ii) who intended to become pregnant within
the next 4 years, (iii) were currently not pregnant based
on the last normal menstrual period, and (iv) provided
written informed consent. A lottery method was used to
select one woman randomly from households with more
than one woman. A household replacement was considered
for those households in which no woman met the
inclusion criteria.
The sample size for the study was calculated based on
multiple indicators using a cluster survey formula that
factored in the predicted prevalence of overweight/obesity
(42%), the proportion of women of reproductive age
(30%), average household size in Dar es Salaam (4.0),
and the anticipated non-response [5]. Therefore, the
minimum sample size was 1012 women for 80% study
power and less than 5% level of significance.
Face-to-face interviews were conducted for data collection
using a standardized questionnaire. Study research
assistants collected information on participants’
socio-demographic and economic characteristics, lifestyle
characteristics such as alcohol use, smoking, dietary
intake, and levels of physical. Information on pregnancy
status and medical history was also collected. Anthropometric
measurements, including weight and height, were
taken using a calibrated weighing scale to the nearest
100 g and a height board to the nearest cm.
Outcome variable
The outcome in this study was overweight and obesity
obtained by computing BMI as weight in kilograms (Kg)
divided by height in meters (m) squared. BMI categories
followed the WHO recommendations as < 18.50 kg/m2
(underweight), 18.50–24.99 kg/m2 (normal), 25–29.9 kg/
m2 (overweight) and ≥ 30 kg/m2 (obese) [2]. A binary
outcome variable was generated by combining overweight
or obese and compared against women who had
normal BMI.
Assessment of physical activity
Research assistants collected information on physical activity
using the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire
(GPAQ) [23]. Metabolic Equivalents (MET) assessed
physical activity levels [23]. The value of MET for each
reported physical activity for each woman was obtained
from the compendium of physical activity types. Physical
activity was categorized into two groups: moderateintensity
and vigorous-intensity. Moderate-intensity
physical activity included brisk walking, dancing, housework
and domestic chores, gardening, animal rearing,
washing clothes, fetching water, and preparing food.
Vigorous-intensity physical activity included climbing a
hill, running, fast cycling, swimming, intense farming,
competitive sports, traditional games, and wood splitting
for fire. Total physical activity (MET-minutes per week)
was calculated based on analysis guidelines for physical
activity recommended by WHO [24]. Moderate to vigorous
physical activity was scored as ≥600 MET-minutes
per week, while sedentary physical activity was scored as
< 600 MET-minutes per week. Total time spent in vigorous
physical activity was categorized as ≥75 min per
week and < 75 min per week, and moderate physical activity
was categorized as ≥150 min per week and < 150
min per week.
Assessment of macronutrients intake
Dietary information was assessed using a locally adapted
Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) used previously in
the study area, containing at least 85 foods [25]. Women
were asked to recall foods consumed in the previous 30
days. Nutrient intake was assessed from each reported
food consumed by the respondent, based on the
Tanzania Food Composition Table (TFCT) [26]. Nutrient
values of each food item were calculated by multiplying
each food item’s frequency of consumption by the
food item’s nutrient content and the specific portion
size. Nutrient intake was categorized into tertiles,
namely low, medium, and high intake tertiles.
Statistical analysis
Data were cleaned and analyzed by using STATA version
15. Numerical variables were summarized using
means and standard deviations, and medians and interquartile
range. Categorical variables were summarized
using frequencies and percentages. We used the chisquare
test to compare the proportion of women with
overweight and obesity across explanatory variables, including
social-demographic characteristics, physical activity,
and dietary diversity.
Potential confounders for each outcome were selected
based on associations with the outcome in bivariate regression
models at levels of p < 0.1. Confounders considered
included age, marital status, education, parity,
wealth index, and employment type. The final model
was adjusted by total energy intake. Please note, wealth
index was created using principal component analysis
then categorised into tertile.
A modified Poisson regression model with a robust
standard error estimated prevalence ratios (PR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) [27]. The model was used to
evaluate the association between physical activity and nutrient
intake on overweight and obesity. Modified Poisson
regression was used due to the non-convergence of the
log-binomial regression model [27]. All analyses were
based on a two-tailed significance level at p < 0.05. The
Akaike Information Criteria (AIC) was used for model selection,
whereby the model with the lowest AIC was considered
as a parsimonious model. Tests for trend were
conducted for multivariate models for macronutrients.
Results
A total of 1004 women of reproductive age were enrolled
in the study. Women in the study had a mean age
(±SD) of 30.2 (±8.1) years. Of these, 31.7% were 35 years
or older, 57.9% were either married or cohabiting, and
54.4% had no employment. Fifty-four percent of the
women had at least two children. The nutrition status of
study women was poor, with 8.6% underweight, 27.8%
overweight, and 22.6% obese. The overall/combined
prevalence of overweight and obesity was 50.4%
[Table 1].
About 43 % (220/506) of overweight and obese women
had total physical activity above 600 metabolic equivalents
of task (MET for moderate to vigorous physical activity),
referred to as sufficient physical activity. Among
the overweight and obese women with sufficient total
physical activity, 61.9% had primary education level, and
64.0% were married or cohabiting. Additionally, 3.4% of
the women were widowed, 5.1% uneducated, and 8.5%
with an education level above secondary school [Fig. 1].
Results from the adjusted analysis for factors associated
with overweight and obesity are in Table 2. Compared
to women aged 15–24 years, women aged 25–34
years had a 26% higher risk of overweight and obesity
(95%CI 1.03–1.54; p = 0.03), while those aged 35 to49
years had a 59% higher risk of the outcome (95%CI
1.30–1.95; p < 0.001), adjusted for physical activity and
energy intake. Women who had informal employment
had a 14% higher risk of overweight and obesity (95%
CI: 1.01–1.29; p = 0.04) compared with those who are
not employed. Married or cohabiting women had a 33%
higher risk of overweight and obesity (95% CI: 1.11–
1.60; p < 0.01) compared with single, divorced or separated
women after adjusting for physical activity and energy
intake. However, other factors, including education,
parity and household size, were not significantly associated
with overweight or obesity. Women in the medium
and high wealth index tertiles had 25% (PR = 1.25;
95%CI 1.09–1.43; p < 0.01) and 24% (PR = 1.24; 95%CI
1.07–1.43; p < 0.01) higher prevalence of overweight and
obesity, compared to women in the low wealth index
tertiles in models adjusting for physical activity and energy
intake [Table 2].
Total physical activity and minutes per week of vigorous
physical activity were inversely associated with overweight
and obesity adjusted for other factors [Table 3].
Women who performed moderate to vigorous physical
activity of at least 600 MET per week had a 21% lower
prevalence of overweight and obesity compared with
those with a sedentary lifestyle (PR = 0.79; 95% CI 0.63–
0.99; p = 0.04). Women who performed vigorous physical
activity at least 75 min per week had a 32% lower
prevalence of overweight and obesity than those who
performed less than 75 min of vigorous physical activity
per week (PR = 0.68; 95%CI 0.47–0.99; p = 0.04). However,
work-related moderate physical activity (minutes
per week of moderate physical activity) and days of moderate
physical activity were not significantly associated
with overweight and obesity [Table 3].
Higher intake of sugar, total fat, animal protein were
positively associated with overweight and obesity. In
comparison, a higher intake of protein from fish and
poultry was associated with a lower risk of overweight
and obesity. There was a significant increase in overweight
and obesity with the increased consumption of
animal protein. Women in the highest tertile of animal
protein intake had a higher risk of overweight and obesity
(PR = 1.19, 95%CI: 1.01, 1.35), p for trend 0.26. Similarly,
women in the highest tertile of sugar consumption
had a higher risk of overweight/obesity (PR = 1.27,
95%CI: 1.03, 1.58, p for trend < 0.01). Women in the
highest tertile of protein intake from fish and poultry
meat had a 22% lower risk of overweight and obesity
(PR = 0.78, 95%CI: 0.61.0.99, p for trend 0.03) [Table 4].
Discussion
Our findings show that the combined prevalence of
overweight and obesity among women intending to
become pregnant within the next 4 years is very high in
Tanzania. Overall, we found that being older, having informal
employment and middle to high socioeconomic
status were associated with overweight and obesity
among women in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The study
found an association between vigorous physical activity
and decreased overall prevalence of overweight and
obesity. Sugary dietary intake was associated with an increased
prevalence of overweight and obesity. Consumption
of protein from fish and poultry was associated with
a lower risk of overweight and obesity after adjusting for
energy intake and physical activity.
More than half of the women in our study are either
overweight or obese, which is higher than the 2015 national
prevalence in urban settings (50.7% vs 42.0%) in
Tanzania [5]. The high prevalence of overweight and
obesity in the study area may explain the impact of economic
development, nutrition transition and women’s
empowerment on overweight and obesity that is more
pronounced in African cities like Dar es salaam [17, 19].
Women in this study had a 6-fold higher prevalence of
overweight and obesity when compared with the underweight
(50.4% vs 8.6%). This is of great concern given
most nutritional counselling observed in many antenatal
health care services; the emphasis is on maternal weight
gain and less on the overweight and obese control (a
personal conversation with the health facility providers
in the study area).
A high prevalence of maternal obesity is also reported
in a systematic review and meta-analysis across Africa,
ranging from 6.5 to 50.7% [28]. Economic and nutrition
transition remain the core reasons demonstrated to expose
women to sedentary life and unhealthy diets [29,
30]. Such a high prevalence of overweight and obesity in
women who intend to conceive within the next few years
is alarming considering the reported maternal and newborn
adverse outcomes associated with high prepregnancy
BMI [9, 11].
Being older, having informal employment, and middle
to high socioeconomic status were associated with an increased
prevalence of overweight and obesity in this
study. These findings are consistent with other studies
that reported a higher prevalence of overweight and
obesity in older women [15, 31, 32]. Increased parity,
hormonal changes, and a less active lifestyle may attribute
obesity among older women [33, 34]. In addition,
weight retained during pregnancy is often difficult for
women to lose, even for obese women, contributing to
increased BMI over time [35].
Women who were self-employed or under the informal
employment sector, such as street vendors, shopkeepers,
and tailors, had a higher prevalence of
overweight and obesity than women who were unemployed
or formally employed. The role of employment
status as a determinant of BMI is not clear.
Studies have shown that white-collar workers are at the
greatest risk of low occupational physical activity levels
and sedentary behaviour [36, 37]. In this study, women
under formal employment in most cases were in the
white-collar job category; however, this was not associated
with an increased risk of overweight and obesity.
There is, therefore, a need to understand the nature and
actual contribution of specific employment status to
women’s BMI.
We found that women with higher economic status
had a higher prevalence of overweight and obesity. Similar
findings have also been reported by other studies
from SSA, where socioeconomic status was an important
determinant of overweight and obesity [15, 32, 38]. This
may be due to socio-cultural factors and perceptions in
many LMICs favouring women having larger body size
[39, 40]. Being obese or overweight in many African
countries have been perceived as a sign of being wealthy,
having enough to eat, and less associated with diseases
such as HIV infection [41, 42]. More importantly, more
affluent households can afford more calories in their diets,
having financial power to purchase processed and
unhealthy foods, eat fast food from restaurants etc.,
while also being less likely to be physically active [43].
The findings are contrary to many studies in highincome
countries where adults with higher socioeconomic
status have a low prevalence of obesity [44, 45].
Besides controlling dietary intake, having sufficient exercise
and physical activity is considered an effective approach
for controlling weight gain [46]. This is in line
with our findings that women who met moderate to vigorous
total physical activity criteria (MVPA) had a lower
prevalence of overweight and obesity by 21%. Similar
findings have been reported from Ghana, where women
who did not meet the recommended physical activity
level had an increased risk of obesity by 23% [47]. Physical
activity, including aerobic exercises, reduces fat mass
and body weight [48].
We found that high sugar consumption was associated
with a higher prevalence of overweight and obesity,
which is consistent with findings from a systematic review
in SSA. The review found that a steady increase in
the availability and consumption of energy-rich foods
from the 1980s had contributed substantially to the increase
of obesity in the region [49]. High sugar and beverages
consumption above 10% of the total daily energy
requirement has increased in recent years, especially in
urban settings, including Tanzania [50]. Thus, this calls
for immediate attention, given that high sugar intake is
associated with non-communicable diseases [51]. Animal
protein and fat intake were not associated with an increased
risk of overweight and obesity. This is contrary
to the USA and European study, which associated animal
protein intake with increased global and abdominal
obesity risk. Fish and poultry protein intake was significant
associated with a low risk of overweight and obesity.
Compared to animal (red) meat, fish and chicken
have less saturated fat and cholesterol, which justifies
having less risk of overweight and obesity [52].
Our study is one of the few studies in SSA that has
measured physical activity and dietary intake given the
current situation of unprecedented urbanization and
dietary transmission in many African countries. Therefore,
we believe the findings are vital to underpin the importance
of addressing overweight and obesity
determinants in the region, including physical activity
and healthy diets. However, we cannot ignore the possibility
of a recall bias as some respondents may fail to remember
foods consumed in the past 30 days.
Additionally, we utilize a cross-sectional study design
which may be affected by confounding. However, we
tried to address the confounding effect by adjusted for
energy intake and known potential confounders. Additionally,
in the models for dietary intake, we controlled
for physical activity.
Conclusion
The overall prevalence of overweight and obesity among
women of reproductive age who intend to conceive
within the next 4 years was very high. Overweight and
obesity were significantly associated with a sedentary
lifestyle, wealth, older age, informal employment status,
and marital status. High sugar intake was associated with
a higher risk of overweight and obesity, while protein
consumption from fish and poultry was associated with
lower risk. The findings of this study underscore the
need to design culturally-sensitive, feasible and potentially
high-impact interventions to address the modifiable
risk factors of physical activity and healthy diets to
control the upsurge of pre-pregnancy overweight and
obesity among women in SSA countries.