Background
Undernutrition is an important public health issue particularly
for vulnerable groups including children and
women of childbearing age especially pregnant mothers
[1]. Undernutrition is a serious global health problem.
About 795 million people are undernourished mostly in
low and middle-income countries and the problem is
most critical during pregnancy [2]. Globally, undernutrition
is contributing to the deaths of 3.5 million mothers
and under 5 years of age children each year. It is estimated
that 13 million children are annually born with
IUGR (intrauterine growth retardation), 112 million are
underweight secondary to undernutrition during pregnancy
[3, 4].
Pregnancy is a critical phase in which mothers need
optimal nutrients of good qualities of food to support
the developing fetus [5]. An adequate supply of nutrients
and oxygen for the mother to her fetus is one of the factors
that are critical for fetal survival. The ability of the
mother to provide nutrients for her baby depends upon
the nutritional status, body size, and body composition
of the mother and all of which are being established
throughout the life of her fetus [6].
Undernutrition in pregnant mothers is a key contributor
to many problems. It makes the women more susceptible
to diseases, more risk of having miscarriages,
poor fetal growth, low birth weight, infant morbidity,
and mortality [7]. It can also cause long-term irreversible
and detrimental cognitive-motor and health impairment
[7]. In addition to serious consequences of health, the
economy can be also affected by undernutrition. The
high prevalence of undernutrition can hampers economic
growth and preserves poverty both directly,
through a loss of productivity due to poor physical condition,
and indirectly, through poor cognitive function
and learning deficits [8, 9].
Evidence showed that the burden of undernutrition
among pregnant women is high. The prevalence of pregnant
women’s undernutrition in India 5%, China 21%,
Sri Lanka 15%, Nigeria 10–40% [10–12]. In Ethiopia, the
prevalence of undernutrition in pregnant women varies
from 9.2–41.2%. It was reported in Central Refit Valley,
Wondogenet District in Ethiopia, Silte zone, Southern
Ethiopia, Dessie Northern Ethiopia, Eastern Ethiopia,
Gondar town and hospital in Northern Ethiopia, humanitarian
setting of Ethiopia, Shashemene, in a rural
community in southern Ethiopia, 31.7, 9.2, 21.8, 19.8%,
19.5, 16.2, 14.4, 24, 34, 35.5, and 41.2%, respectively [13–
22]. The most acceptable explanation for this wide variation
is likely to be the fact that variation in the contextual
factors of pregnant women’s undernutrition.
Previous studies identified different risk factors for
pregnant women undernutrition. These factors were:
age, educational status, family size, marital status, social
class, the height of the mother, household food insecurity,
household asset, homeownership, household saving,
financial constraint, ownership of life stock, job loss, and
low level of income, gender of household head, cultivated
farmland size, inadequate dietary intake, women’s
knowledge about nutrition, residence, iron supplementation
during pregnancy, meal frequency per day, trimester,
perceptions imposing dietary restriction on certain
food, health status of pregnant mothers, antenatal care
service dissatisfaction, and family planning utilization
before current pregnancy [23–34].
Due to differences in characteristics of socioeconomic,
culture, ethnicity, and geographical location,
associated factors for undernutrition in pregnant women
might not be the same across different regions of
Ethiopia. The government of Ethiopia launches a national
nutrition program. Maternal nutrition is one of its
targets that needs updated data which is essential to develop
effective intervention strategies to prevent undernutrition
of pregnant women and children. In addition
to this, there is limited data on prevalence and factors
associated with maternal undernutrition particularly in
the southern part of Ethiopia. According to the 2010 E.
C Konso district health office report, the prevalence of
undernutrition among pregnant mothers was more than
30% [35], but the risk factors were not well understood.
And also the cultural practices which restrict some important
foods during pregnancy are commonly practiced
in Konso. Therefore, the undernutrition of pregnant
women needs to be assessed in a specific context to develop
effective interventions. Hence, this study determined
the prevalence of undernutrition and its
associated factors among pregnant women in Konso district,
Southern Ethiopia.
Methods
Study area, study design, and study period
The community-based cross-sectional study design with
focus group discussion (FGD) was conducted in Konso
District from 1st December 2018 to 31st January 2019.
Konso District is located 595 Kilometers from Addis
Ababa (capital city of Ethiopia) and 365 km from
Hawassa (the capital city of the south region). Based on
the Konso district administrative population profile the
district has a total population of 270,837 from this 132,
710 male and female 138,127. The District has 50 health
posts, 11 health centers, and 1 primary hospital, and 25
private clinics which are providing health services for
the community.
Population
The source population of this study was all pregnant
women in Konso District. The study population was
all pregnant women in the selected Kebeles (small administrative
unit in Ethiopia) of Konso District. All
pregnant women who were residents of the Konso
district for at least 6 months or above were included
in the study whereas those pregnant women who
were seriously ill, those who had hand deformity were
excluded.
Sample size determination and sampling technique
The sample size was computed using single population
proportion formula; considering 95% confidence level, 5%
margin of error, 1.5 design effect, 31.8% hypothesized
prevalence of undernutrition among pregnant women
which has been taken from a study conducted in the central
rift valley of Ethiopia [15] and by adding 5% none response
rate the final sample size for this study was 527. A
multi-stage stratified sampling which was followed by a
systematic sampling technique was applied to reach each
study participant. The kebeles in the district were stratified
into rural and urban. One urban and eight rural
Kebeles were selected by using the lottery method from a
total of forty-one kebeles in the Konso district. Then by
using health extension workers housing registration, the
total number of households with pregnant women (2277)
was accessed and the sampling interval was calculated. Finally,
households with eligible pregnant women were selected
using a systematic random sampling technique. For
those households with more than one pregnant woman,
one pregnant woman was selected by using the lottery
method. Data collators visited the house on the next day
when the pregnant women were not available at home
and the pregnant women who were not available during
the second visit were recorded as non-response, and then
nearby household was considered.
Qualitative sampling procedure
Two FGD were conducted with 12 subjects in each
group who were purposively selected. A situational analysis
was done before conducting the focus group discussion
(FGD) to minimize errors in the selection of
participants. The key informants were a case team leader
for maternal health and a supervisor assigned for each
Kebele and agricultural expert (agriculture and natural
resource head). In each FGD pregnant women, their
husbands, and health extension workers participated. To
minimize the possible bias in a selection of the study
participants, we made sure to emphasize that we want a
group of people that can express a range of views, to be
able to have a proper discussion. A smooth discussion
environment was created and we tried to encourage
communication and interaction during the focus group
discussion in every possible way. FGDs were held in a
neutral setting which encourages participants to express
their views freely. We made sure that there were no disturbances,
adequate lighting, and ventilation as it was
the hottest season during the data collection period, and
also there were cold beverages including water. Materials
that were necessary to conduct the focus group discussion
(FGD) were prepared before a discussion like the
FGD guideline, voice recorders, notebooks, pen, and
pencils. To create a conducive discussion area, the chairs
were arranged in a circle.
Study variables
The dependent variable in this study was undernutrition
among pregnant women. The independent variables were:
Socio-demographic factors:-age, marital status, husband
education maternal education, family size, polygamy. Maternal
related factor: - parity, family planning utilization
before current pregnancy, birth interval, receiving iron
supplementation, ANC follows up, ANC satisfaction,
Nutrition knowledge, Illness, History of abortion, History
of stillbirth, dietary diversification (24-h recall), meal frequency,
Socio-Cultural factors: -food taboo and food restriction
during pregnancy, decision making on household
assets, family stable food. Economic factors:-Family source
of food, farmland ownership, employment (maternal&
husband job) status, household income, wealth index. Hygiene
and sanitation-related factors:-access to water and
sanitation facilities, such as latrine availability &
utilization, family source of water, distance to get water.
Food Security-related factors - food accessibility and
availability.
Data collection tool and procedure
An interviewer-administered structured questionnaire
was used to collect the data for the quantitative part of
the study and qualitative data was collected using two
focus group discussions (FGDs). The tool included:
Socio-demographic factors adapted from the Ethiopian
demographic and health survey (EDHS 2016) [36], Maternal
related factor, Socio-Cultural factors, Economic
factors, Hygiene and Sanitation related factors, and food
Security related factors.
To determine the nutritional status of pregnant
mothers, MUAC (mid-upper arm circumference) was
used. Mid upper arm circumference of the left arm was
measured triplicate using a non-stretchable standard
MUAC tape to the nearest 0.1 cm with no clothing on
the arm. The mean of triplicate measurement was taken.
The value of MUAC below 23 cm was considered as
undernourished and MUAC ≥23 cm was considered as
normal nutritional status [34, 37].
Dietary diversity information of individual respondents
was collected using the 24-h recall method and women
dietary diversity score model questionaries’ of nine food
groups with food listing method in which list of food
items replaced by common foods in local context included
in the questioner [38].
Household food security was measured by the
household food insecurity access scale (HFIAS) which
is an adopted approach in estimating the prevalence
of food insecurity in the united states (USA) and was
used to estimate the food insecurity among study participants
[39]. HFIAS prevalence indicator categorizes
households into four levels of food security as food
secure, mildly, moderately, and severely food insecure
[25]. HFIAS yes or no questions were used to collect
information on the food security status of the household
followed by the occurrence of the situation if
the response is yes [39]. For the occurrence of once
or twice, it was recorded as rarely if the occurrence is
3–10 times it was categorized as sometimes and if
the occurrence was more than ten times in the past 4
weeks it was categorized as often [26, 40].
Purposively selected subjects participated in the
two focused group discussions for qualitative data.
The composition of focus group discussion participants
was, pregnant mothers, elders or mother’s inlow,
and their husbands, health extension workers
were engaged in the discussion separately to facilitate
the expression of opinions without fear and a
key informant interview was held with the health department
head and agricultural expert (agriculture
and natural resource head). The discussion was conducted
at community meeting places, and the information
was collected using open-ended questions.
Note-taking and tape recording were used to document
the appropriate information and detect redundant
responses. Identified redundant responses were
considered to be saturated and removed every evening
after triangulation the day work during preliminary
analysis.
Data quality assurance
To assure data quality, training was given to data collectors
and supervisors before data collection. The data collection
tool was pre-tested in 5% of the sample size. The
pretest was conducted on individuals having similar
characteristics of the study in Kebele which was not selected
in this study. After the pre-test, the instrument
was modified accordingly. Supervisors supervised the
data collection process and checked the completeness of
the questionnaire daily. Besides, principal investigators
carefully cleaned the data and entered collected data into
computer software.
Data processing and analysis
Epi-data version 3.1 statistical software was used for data
entry and exported to SPSS version 21 for analysis. Descriptive
statistics like mean, standard deviation, frequencies,
and percentages were computed. Bivariable
and multivariable logistic regression was used to determine
the degree of association between independent and
dependent variables. All variables with a p-value less
than 0.2 in the bivariable analysis were entered into a
multivariable logistic regression. The presence of an association
between dependent and independent variables
was checked with an adjusted odds ratio with 95% confidence
intervals. Then the statistical significance was declared
at a p-value less than 0.05 and adjusted odds ratio
interval which excluded one. Assumption of logistic regression
such as; meaningful coding, multicollinearity,
and outliers checking was done before logistic regression
model analysis. Multicollinearity was also checked by
using Variance inflation factors and Tolerance test. The
Hosmer-Lemeshow tests were checked to assess the
goodness-of-fit model and it was a good fit(p-value >
0.05). The wealth index of individual respondent families
was also analyzed by using principal component analysis.
Results
Socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents
From the total of 527 pregnant women, 501 participated
in this study making the response rate 95%.
The mean age of the respondents was 28.4 ± 5.3 years,
range between 18 and 45 years, and the majority of
the study subjects were age between 25 and 34 years.
Regarding the marital status, 486(97%) of the study
participants were married and living with their husbands
and the rest were unmarried. Among the total,
92(18.4%) of the pregnant women had husbands who
have another wife or polygamous. The average family
size of the study subjects was 5.9 ± 2.8, with a maximum
family size of 14 and a minimum of 2. The
majority 335 (66.8%) of the study participants were
Protestants religious followers, 95(18.9%) were
Orthodox and the rest were traditional believers.
Regarding educational status, 341(68.1%) were
illiterate, 54(10.8%) were can read and write,
68(13.6%) were primary, and 38(7.6%) were secondary
and above educational status (Table 1).
Food security status
Regarding the food security status of the household of
the study subjects, about 244(44.7%) were food secured
families but the rest are food insecure (Fig. 1).
Maternal related characteristics of respondents
A total of 359 (71.6%) of mothers received pregnancyrelated
nutrition information from health professionals
and health extension workers. Regarding meal frequency,
42(8.4%) reported eating once a day, 302(60.2%) of them
had reported eating three times and more a day. The
majority of 432(86.3%) of the study participants were
multigravida whereas only 69(13.7%) were primigravida.
Regarding gestational age 46(9.2%) were in the first trimester
and 304(60.7%) of pregnant mothers were in
third trimesters of gestational age.
From total undernutrition cases, more than 50 % of
mothers or 134(62.0%) are reported from mothers in
third trimester gestational age. Regarding the birth interval,
141(28.1%) of mothers reported that the interval between
children is below 24 months and the rest was
above 24 months or more. A total of 336(67.1%) women
reported that they used the modern family planning
method before their current pregnancy and 105(20.9%)
of women reported that the current pregnancy was not
intended. A total of 34(6.8%) had a history of stillbirth
and the rest 467(93.2%) did not experience stillbirth.
Those mothers had a history of abortion were 41(8.2%)
and the rest had never experienced abortion. Regarding
ANC attendance majority of 339(67.7%) of women
attended antenatal clinic twice or more and 61(12.2%) of
pregnant mothers never attended ANC clinic (Table 2).
Dietary diversity score
According to the dietary diversity assessment result, the
majority (54.9%) of women scored low dietary diversity
score or DDS and the rest met the standard dietary diversity
score criteria of medium and high (Fig. 2). From
food groups consumed in the previous 24 h, a total of
399 (79.7%) consumed starch staples (grains, white roots
and tuber, and plantains), 185 (36.9%) pulses (beans,
peas, and lentils), 275 (54.9%) nuts and seeds, 85 (16.9%)
dairy, 76(15.2%) meat, poultry, and fish, 21(0.4%) eggs,
83 (16.6%) dark green leafy vegetables, 79(15.8%) other
vitamin A-rich fruits and vegetables, 2028 (45.5%) other
vegetables and 195 (38.9%) other fruits.
WASH-related characteristics of study participants
According to the water, hygiene, and sanitation status of
the study subjects, 230(45.9%) households did not have
pit latrine and the latrine coverage was only 54.1%. Regarding
time taken to fetch water, 134(26.7%) of mothers
were traveling 1 h and more to get water and 188(37.5%)
mothers were traveling less than 30 min to get water.
The majority 190 (37.9%) of respondents was using the
river as a source of water followed by communal water
point (Table 3, Fig. 3).
Prevalence of undernutrition among the study
participants
The result of this study found, 216(43.1%) (95% CI: 38.8%-
47.5) of the pregnant women were undernourished
(MUAC < 23 cm) and those with MUAC greater than or
equal to 23 cm were 285(56.9%) (Fig. 4). The mean
MUAC was 22.9 ± 1.4 (SD), the minimum and maximum
MUAC for the study subject was 18 cm and 26 cm
respectively.
Factors associated with undernutrition
Both Bivariable and multivariable logistic regression analyses
were employed. In the bivariable analysis variables
such as religion, marital status, mothers occupational
status, husbands occupational status, average family income,
source of water, resource decision making power
on the household asset, household food security status,
history of stillbirth, knowledge of additional meal during
pregnancy, latrine availability, dietary diversity score,
and iron supplementation was significantly associated
with undernutrition. Variables with a p-value of < 0.25
in the bivariable logistic regression analysis were entered
into multivariable logistic regression analysis.
In multivariable analysis, household food insecurity
(AOR = 3.1; 95%CI: 2.1–4.6), low dietary diversity score
(AOR = 4.9; 95%CI: 2.6–9.2), medium dietary diversity
score (AOR = 2.3; 95%CI: 1.2–4.7), absence of household
latrine (AOR = 1.8; 95%CI: 1.2–2.6) and having family
resource decision making by husband only (AOR = 1.7;
95%CI: 1.1–2.6) were significantly associated with undernutrition
(Table 4).
Focus group discussion
Focus group discussion was held with 12 participants in
each two FGD from different community groups such as
pregnant mothers, husbands of pregnant mothers,
mother in-low, and elders. Different barriers related to
pregnant mother’s nutrition in the study area were explored
during the focus group discussion session.
Responses were coded and categorized by content with
thematic analysis. These were: food restrictions, cultural
believe related barriers, food production-related barriers,
and food diversification practice-related barriers
(Table 5).
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to assess the prevalence
and associated factors of undernutrition among pregnant
women in Konso district, southern Ethiopia. This study
found that four in every ten pregnant women were undernourished.
Household food security status, dietary diversity,
latrine availability, family resource decision-making
were significant determinants of undernutrition. Food restriction
practices, weak nutrition education and malnutrition
screening program, the practice of depending on a
local alcoholic drink called “Cheka”, drought, raindependent
farming practices, and low socioeconomic status
were identified barriers from qualitative data.
The current study found that the prevalence of undernutrition
in pregnant women was 43.1% (95% CI: 38.8%-
47.5). This finding was in agreement with the reported
result from a rural community in southern Ethiopia
which was 41.2% [22]. The result of this study was
higher than those studies conducted in other areas of
Ethiopia, 31.8% in Central Refit Valley [15], 9.2% in
Wondogenet District southern Ethiopia [16], 21.8% in
Silte zone southern Ethiopia [17], 19.8% in Dessie town,
northeastern Ethiopia [14], 19.5% in Eastern Ethiopia
[13], 24% in humanitarian setting in Ethiopia [18], 16.2%
in Gondar hospital [20] and 14% in Gondar town [21].
The discrepancy might be due to differences in sociodemographic
characteristics, geographical variation, cultural
beliefs such as food taboos, poor nutritional intervention
programs in the Konso district. Another
possible reason may be due to a difference in the season
of studies conducted.
The finding of this study was also higher than the report
from Madagasgar, a systematic review in Africa,
South Sudan, Kenya, China, India, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, 9,
18.9, 19.3, 23.5, 11.8, 5, 15, and 10%, respectively [11, 12,
24, 27, 41–44]. This variation might be due to differences
in MUAC cut of value, and the socio-culture distinctions
between Ethiopia and the other counties.
The household food security status was significantly
associated with pregnant women undernutrition. The
odds of undernutrition among pregnant women who
had family food insecurity status were three times higher
than with those women who had secured family food
(AOR = 3.1; 95% CI: 2.1–4.6). This finding is similar to
the previous study conducted in Gambella and Arbaminch
Zuria Woreda Ethiopia [45, 46]. This could be
possibly due to that family food shortage usually results
in a lack of daily nutritional requirements and poor dietary
intake leading to undernutrition of women. This
finding was also consistent with the information given
from one key informant: - “… The area is drought-prone
and frequently affected by drought. The farming is raindependent
and the rainfall pattern is erratic every year,
the soil is seriously degraded and the landholding size is
also very small which is 0.25-0.5hector per household
which cannot adequately be the source for family food”
Agriculture and natural resource office head.
Dietary diversity score was one of the factors significantly
associated with undernutrition among pregnant
mothers. The odds of undernutrition among pregnant
women with low dietary diversity score were about five
times higher when compared with those women with
high dietary diversity score (AOR = 4.9; 95% CI: 2.6–9.2)
and the odds of undernutrition among pregnant women
with medium dietary diversity score were two times
higher when compared with those women with high
dietary diversity score (AOR = 2.3; 95% CI: 1.2–4.7). This
result is in line with the study conducted in Gambella
Ethiopia [45]. This might be because mothers who have
a practice of food diversity will get the different nutrients
from different diets and this might cause them to
be well-nourished than those with less than average dietary
diversity score.
The result was also consistent with data from focus
group discussion; the traditional belief that restricts the
consumption of some parts of foods with high proteins
and energy-providing foods such as butter, milk, milk
products, egg, and avocado during pregnancy. As one of
the participants said:- “… Culturally, pregnant women
are not allowed to eat egg, buttermilk, other milk products,
and Avocado during pregnancy. The reason why it
is not allowed to eat the list of food items above is, we believe
when the pregnant mother ate these foods, the baby
became very big and our fear is the mother will face difficulty
in childbirth.” 31 years old FGD Participant.
Therefore, this can also affect the dietary diversity of
pregnant women and lead to the poor nutritional status
of pregnant mothers.
Latrine availability at the household level was significantly
associated with the undernutrition of pregnant
women. The odds of undernutrition among pregnant
women without a latrine in their house were 1.8 times
higher when compared to the counterparts (AOR = 1.8;
95%CI: 1.2–2.6). This result is in line with the study
conducted in Tanzania [47]. The possible explanation
may be those pregnant women who have no latrine and
using open field defecation have higher exposure to recurrent
diarrheal disease and other infections these may
lead to the poor nutritional status of pregnant mothers
since infection and malnutrition have a direct relationship
and it is an immediate cause for undernutrition.
The decision-making power on household assets had
also a significant association with pregnant women undernutrition.
The odds of undernutrition among pregnant
women who had family resource decision-making
by husband only were 1.7 times higher than those who
made the decision both husband and wife (AOR = 1.7;
95%CI: 1.1–2.6). This finding is in line with findings
from a qualitative study conducted in three foodinsecure
districts of Tigray Region, Northern Ethiopia
[48]. This might be due to the reason that one part wife
only or husband only decision in family resources may
affect their communication and if one ignores the idea
of others, this may cause the wives not to be supported
by their husbands and this may also negatively affect
their nutritional habit. In addition to that, the finding
was consistent with qualitative data from focus group
discussion:- “… Some husbands have not given attention
for their wives and family because our community is
male dominant and males are the decision-makers for
all family-related issues. On the other hand, males are
mobile (moves from place to place for work-related purposes)
and can have an opportunity to get a variety of
foods but mothers and small kids are restricted to stay at
home so that they lack un opportunity to get a variety of
food.” FGD participant.
Limitations of the study
This study recognized the following limitations: this
study used MUAC < 23 cm as the cut-off value for undernutrition
in pregnant women. Currently, there is no
consensus on how to identify pregnant as acutely malnourished
but according to Ververs MT et al., MUAC
was identified as the preferential indicator of choice this
is because of its relatively strong association with low
birth weight, narrow range of cut-off values, simplicity
of measurement and it does not require prior knowledge
of gestational age and a conservative cut-off < 23 cm was
recommended in African contexts to include most pregnant
women of low birth weight for their infants [34].
Some self-reported variables like household food security
status and decision-making power on the household assets
may be affected by social desirability bias and it was
reduced through detailed clarification of the objective
before entering into individual interviews. In dietary diversity
assessment since 24-h recall data collection (food
listing method) used, thorough interview process recall
bias is expected (reduced by probing).
Conclusions
The prevalence of undernutrition among pregnant
women was found to be higher than previously reported
findings in Ethiopia and other countries. Food security,
dietary diversity, latrine availability, family resource decision
making, food restriction, weak nutrition education,
and malnutrition screening program, the practice of depending
on a local alcoholic drink called “Cheka”,
drought, poor hygiene and sanitation coverage, traditional
way of farming and low socio-economic status
were identified factors. Hence, interventions targeting
maternal nutrition education, personal hygiene, and
sanitation, encouraging irrigation through working with
the agricultural sector to change the traditional way of
farming practices and the economic status of the community
are recommended.