Background
In most cases, overweight or obesity is due to a positive
energy balance stemming from excessive energy intake -
compared to energy expenditure - from diets that are
typically nutritionally poor [1]. Excess body weight has
been shown to alter the absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and/or excretion of micronutrients [2]. For example,
vitamin D from cutaneous and dietary sources
has been shown to have decreased bioavailability in
obese persons and is potentially commandeered by adipose
tissue [3]; thiamine metabolism is also impacted in
obese persons, leading to a decrease in cellular absorption
and an increase in intracellular conservation [4].
Micronutrient interactions within the food matrix can
impact absorption and bioavailability by a number of
mechanisms. Minerals with chemical similarities can
compete for transport proteins or other uptake mechanisms,
as well as for chelating organic substances, facilitating
or hindering absorption [5]. The overall impact of
these interactions will be determined by the relative concentrations
of the nutrients. At normal dietary concentrations
the absorption of most minerals is active or
saturable, while at higher intakes passive diffusion can
take place [5, 6]. A poor nutritional status with regard to
vitamins affects mucosal integrity and can thereby affect
absorption of other nutrients.
Nutrient reference values as provided by the National
Health and Medical Research Centre (NHMRC) are
‘Recommended Dietary Intake’ (RDI) or Adequate Intake
(AI), which includes the amounts of specific nutrients
required on average each day for sustenance or avoidance
of deficiency states [7]. Further nutritional advice is
also provided in the form of national ‘Dietary Guidelines’.
These guidelines provide culturally-relevant food
and dietary patterns that will not only achieve nutritional
balance, but also reduce the risk of nutrition related
deficiency and chronic disease. When the diet of
obese individuals is nutrient poor, the question arises as
to whether micronutrient supply from consumed foods
is sufficient to provide for biochemical and physiological
demands. On the other hand, it may be that the high
consumption of nutritionally poor foods may be driving
the desire to consume more in order to attain nutritional
sufficiency.
Few studies have examined the nutritional status of
overweight and obese adults. One such study suggested
vitamin D, chromium, biotin, thiamine and vitamin C
levels are significantly lower in persons who are obese
and that insufficiency in these micronutrients has the
ability to impact glucose metabolism and cause insulin
resistance [8]. Biochemical markers of nutritional status
in overweight or obese populations have been previously
studied, however these studies have often been limited
by small sample sizes, or the examination of only a small
number of micronutrients [9].
The current study examined baseline blood micronutrient
levels of a group of overweight and obese Australian
adults with the most up-to-date serum nutrient
reference ranges for Australian adults. The aim of this
study was to assess the nutritional status of overweight
and obese Australian adults prior to the commencement
of a high fibre weight loss clinical trial, to determine if
there were any associations between BMI and poor
serum micronutrient levels. Vitamins A, B12, C, D, E and
B9 as well as minerals, iron, iodine, calcium, potassium,
sodium, magnesium and zinc were evaluated.
Research question
What is the baseline micronutrient status of a sample of
overweight and obese Australian adults?
Methods
Participants
Overweight and obese individuals (n = 127) with a BMI
between 25 and 40 kg/m2 and aged between 18 and 65
years, were recruited from the community in Perth,
Australia via advertisements in newspapers, flyers posted
around the University and community noticeboards, as
well as radio advertising on Curtin FM. Potential participants
were screened by telephone or online using a
Qualtrics Survey and attended an orientation session at
Curtin University to assess suitability for the study, at
which time the details of the study were also explained.
Exclusion criteria included smoking, lipid lowering
medication, use of steroids and other agents that may influence
lipid metabolism, diuretics, use of warfarin, diabetes
mellitus, hypo and hyperthyroidism, cardiovascular
events within the last 6 months, psychological unsuitability,
major systemic diseases, gastrointestinal problems,
proteinuria, liver, renal failure, weight fluctuations over
the past 6 months, vegetarianism or veganism and participation
in any other clinical trials within the last 6
months.
Study design
The study design for the larger scale, long term dietary
intervention study titled: Comparison of two different
fibre supplements on body weight, body composition,
metabolic and cardiovascular risk factors in overweight
and obese individuals, is as follows: The study was randomised,
controlled double blind, parallel design study
over a 12-month period. Group allocation was randomised
by the supplement supplier, who had no involvement
in the trial, and double blinded to reduce bias or
interference from the participants and the research assistants.
Participants attended a briefing session on how to
consume the supplements, complete the paperwork and
comply with the study protocol. Dietary intake over the
course of the trial was monitored through the completion
of 3-day food diaries at each clinical visit (week 0,
12, 26 and 52). Participants in all groups were asked to
maintain their usual diet for the duration of the study.
For the purposes of this study only serum and food diary
data obtained from week 0 was used for comparison.
Assessments
Micronutrients blood analysis
For the purposes of this present study, baseline blood
samples were analysed for 127 participants. Volunteers
attended Curtin University, after an overnight fast of
10–12 h, where blood samples were drawn by venepuncture.
Samples were collected into lithium heparin or
serum separator tubes (5 ml) for antioxidant/vitamins A,
B12, B9, C, D and E and minerals (calcium, iron, iodine,
magnesium, potassium, sodium and zinc) for analysis.
All blood samples were collected by a trained phlebotomist.
Blood samples were then centrifuged at 2500 rpm
at 4 °C for 10 min using an Eppendorf centrifuge and
prepared for storage at -80 °C. Micronutrients were analysed
systematically, after all the participants had completed
the 52-week study. Vitamins A, E, D, as well as
vitamin B9, and B12 and thyroglobulin as a measure of
Iodine status were measured using Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent
Assay kits (ELISA). ELISA combines antibody
binding with enzymatic detection to identify
molecules of interest; the result is a colour change that
is measured by spectrophotometry at a particular wavelength
[10]. Vitamin C was measured by colorimetric
assay. All trace metals (calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc,
sodium and potassium) were analysed by Flame Atomic
Absorption Spectroscopy (FAAS). Atomic absorptiometry
measures the concentration of gas-phase atoms
or ions as a solution via the absorption of light after the
solution is vaporized in a flame or graphite furnace [11].
Outcome measures
The present study was designed to assess participants’
nutritional status in relation to: vitamins A, B12, B9, C, D
E, folate and minerals calcium, iron, iodine, magnesium,
potassium, sodium and zinc. Other outcome measures
that formed part of the larger study, such as weight/BMI
and metabolic syndrome risk factors, have been analysed
and discussed elsewhere [12, 13].
Statistical analysis
To determine the nutritional status of this sample (n =
127) of overweight/obese individuals, baseline micronutrients
were observed with the clinical reference intervals
(serum) sourced from the Stedman’s Medical Dictionary
(established by the Harmonisation Committee of the
Australasian Association of Clinical Biochemists
(AACB)) or, where there was an absence of data, The
Merck Manual [6, 14]. The reference range for thyroglobulin
(as a marker of iodine status) however was
taken from the assay manual as neither Stedman’s Medical
Dictionary nor the Merck Manual had useful values
for this micronutrient. The food diary micronutrient
data were compared to the National Health and Medical
Research Council (NHMRC) Nutrient Reference Values,
which are the recommended dietary intake to maintain
good health [15].
One sample t-tests were conducted, with the lower
limit from the clinical reference range for each micronutrient
used as the test value, with the exception of thyroglobulin
(an indirect measurement of iodine status),
where the upper limit was used [16]. The baseline data
did not meet the assumption of normality for simple linear
regressions (or one-sided Pearson’s bivariate correlation),
so instead a one-side non-parametric bivariate
correlation (eg Spearman’s) between BMI and each
micronutrient was conducted. Statistical significance was
considered at p < 0.05. All statistical analysis was conducted
using SPSS 23.0 (IBM® SPSS® Statistics, New
York, NY).
Results
Baseline characteristics
Blood samples, for the 127 overweight and obese participants,
were analysed for baseline micronutrient levels.
The group results showed that the average age of the
study participant was 49.3 ± 1.0 years, the average weight
was 94.0 ± 1.5 kg and average BMI was 32.3 ± 0.4 kg/m2.
The gender of the study group was mostly female with
73 women versus 54 men. Of the 127 participants 33.1%
were classified as overweight and 66.9% fell within the
obese category according to BMI.
Nutritional assessment
Mean baseline serum and dietary intake data is outlined
in Table 1. Dietary intake data was analysed using Food-
Works nutritional analysis software. For the purposes of
this study iodine levels from blood samples were measured
as serum thyroglobulin, as it is a more accurate
biomarker for iodine deficiency [16]. Values were
expressed as Mean ± SEM in their units of measurement
for serum. Table 2 compares the Mean ± SEM serum
values with the clinical reference intervals with values
being either less than (<), within range or greater than
(>) clinical reference intervals (14). Table 3 compares
the dietary intake data analysed using FoodWorks nutritional
software against the Nutrient Reference Values
(NRV) for Australia and New Zealand [15]. Data from
FoodWorks is not available for B12 and direct comparison
between the NRVs and vitamin A, measured as retinol
equivalents (RE) was not possible either as
FoodWorks breaks vitamin A into retinol and beta carotene
(refer to Table 4). Mean ± SEM serum values for
micronutrients were also correlated with BMI (Table 4)
and significant associations can be seen in Fig. 1a), b), c)
and d). The relationship between self-recorded dietary
intake and BMI was also examined as shown in Table 5,
and there were no significant differences p > 0.05 found.
As data analysis for vitamin B12 cannot be performed in
FoodWorks, this micronutrient is not in Table 5.
Correlations
Baseline serum and dietary micronutrient concentrations
of the participants, are shown in Table 1). Mean and
median values of this population are shown, however for
the purposes of statistical analysis, median values were
used. The data was not normally distributed due to outliers
so median values were seen as the most accurate
representation and more likely to be applicable to the
wider community than mean values.
The baseline serum values were compared with the
clinical reference intervals for nutrients in Australia
(AACB) [17]– shown in Table 2). Serum values were either
‘lower than the recommended range (<)’ indicating
a deficit of that particular nutrient, ‘within range’ indicating
sufficiency or ‘greater than the recommended
range (>)’ indicating excess. The results (Table 2)
showed that 62.7% of the participants in the study were
within the healthy reference range for dietary vitamin E
(5–20 μg/mL), with a mean value of 7.79 ± 0.5 μg/mL.
For vitamin B12 57.1% of the sample population in the
study were within range where as 41.3% were in excess
of the reference range with mean levels at 722.9 ± 41.3
pg/mL. Vitamin C showed that 96.1% of the sample were
in excess of the reference range whereas 100% of subjects
did not meet the clinical reference interval for vitamin
A; results were considerably less that the reference
range of 28–86 μg/dL with the mean sample value only
5.04 ± 0.2 μg/dL. The majority (89%) did not reach required
levels for vitamin D, deficiency is described at <
20–24 ng/mL and the sample mean was 10.9 ± 0.6 ng/mL.
Only 28% were within the reference range for folate, with
deficiency <3 μg/L, the sample mean was 2.5 ± 0.2 μg/L.
However, thyroglobulin levels were mostly (84.9%) within
range 2–50 ng/ml with a mean of 8.8 ± 1.3 ng/mL. 100%
of the sample did not meet the NRV for potassium with
deficiency at <3.5 mEq/L; and the sample mean: 2.5 ± 0.02
mmol/L. Sample population serum values for sodium
(Mean 118.8 ± 0.9 mmol/L), zinc (Mean 27.9 ± 1.2 μg/
dL) and calcium (3.4 ± 0.1 mg/dL) levels were all
lower than the clinical reference interval. The majority
of participants were within the clinical reference
interval for iron with a reference of 30 to 300 ng/mL
for serum ferritin and mean values for men 114.4 ±
4.8 μg/dL and women 95.2 ± 4.4 μg/dL respectively.
Serum magnesium levels were significantly lower than
the clinical reference interval with a mean value of
0.7 ± 0.01 mg/dL compared to 1.8–2.6mg/dL.
Table 3) shows micronutrient status of participants at
baseline using self-reported dietary intake data compared
to NRVs for Australia and New Zealand
(NHMRC). Table 3) indicates that recommended nutritional
intake from the diet is being met for some
micronutrients, but not for others. Vitamin E is measured
as adequate intake (AI) per day for 19–70 years
old’s, and for men the reference is 10 mg while for
women its 7 mg per day. The study participants were
under the reference value for men (8.1 mg) and slightly
over the reference value for women (7.9 mg). The RDI
for vitamin C is 45 mg daily for 19–70 year old’s; the
study participants well exceeded this RDI at 76.9 mg. For
vitamin A, retinol equivalents (RE) are the reference
used. Retinol (μg) RDI is 900 RE and 700 RE for beta
carotene (μg). Study participants were under the recommendations
for retinol with a median value of 322.6 μg
and over the RDI for beta carotene at 2134.2 μg. For
vitamin D, both men and women were under the AI for
both age groups, with dietary intake data showing only
3.3 μg for 19–50 years compared to the recommended
5 μg required daily and 2.8 μg for 51–70 years old compared
to 10 μg required. The mean dietary folate intake
was just under the 400 μg recommended intake value at
332.4 μg; similarly the mean iodine intake was 120.2 μg,
which is below the RDI of 150 μg. For potassium, males
were below the AI of 3800 mg daily with a median value
of 3207.4 mg, whereas females exceeded AI of 2800 mg
with 3053.1 mg. Dietary intake for sodium well surpassed
the AI of 460–920 mg daily with 2603.2 mg recorded.
Males met the RDI for iron of 8 mg per day. Females of
19–50 years of age were under the recommended 18mg
daily with 11.2mg, but exceeded the RDI for females aged
51–70years. The zinc RDI for 19–70 years old was met for
females but slightly under recommendations for males at
13.6mg instead of 14 mg. Both males and females did not
meet the RDI for calcium, however females were further
below the RDI than males. For the 19–50 year age group,
data for females showed a daily intake of 869.4mg/day
compared with the 1000mg recommended. The 51–70
year age group showed a greater deficit with 797.6mg
compared to 1300mg RDI. The magnesium RDI was met
for males in the 19–30 year age category but below the RDI
for females at 301.6mg instead of 310mg. However the reverse
was true for the 31–70 year age category, with females
exceeding the RDI and males only achieving a median value
of 385.2mg instead of the recommended 420mg.
For Table 4) Correlation between BMI and serum
micronutrients for participants at baseline, significant associations
(Spearman’s rho) were found for vitamin D
(rs = − 0.152, p = 0.044), folate (rs = − 0.176, p = 0.025),
potassium (rs = − 0.177, p = 0.023), and magnesium (rs =
− 0.206, p = 0.010). Vitamin D, folate, magnesium and
potassium all showed that as BMI increased the serum
concentration for these micronutrients decreased slightly
(refer to Fig. 1) a, b c) and d). The line of best fit in Fig.
1a), b) and c) all show a downward trend which correlates
with the negative r-values obtained for these micronutrients.
However, the line of best fit for folate appears to
show a slightly positive association with increased BMI,
even though the r-value is negative (Fig. 1d). The line of
best fit should show a downward trend as BMI increased
similar to the other micronutrients, but the slight upward
trend appearance may be due to possible BMI outliers
skewing the trend line making it appear slightly positive.
Correlations for all other serum micronutrients with BMI
were not considered statistically significant.
For Table 5) Relationship between self-recorded dietary
intake data and BMI showed no significant associations
at p < 0.05.
Discussion
Overweight and obesity is one of the predominant health
issues in todays’ global society, having superseded
malnutrition in recent years [18, 19]. The diet of an
overweight or obese individual is typically energy dense
and nutrient poor, thus low micronutrient levels may result
from inadequate dietary intake and/or alterations in
nutrient absorption or metabolism over time [18]. Baseline
serum micronutrient results for study participants
indicated that vitamin D, magnesium, potassium and folate
status appeared to be affected by BMI. When serum
and dietary intake data was compared to the clinical reference
intervals and the Nutrient Reference Values for
Australia and New Zealand, many micronutrients were
also outside normal ranges or recommendations.
This study found a negative correlation (Spearman’s
rho rs = − 0.152, p = 0.044) between serum vitamin D status
and body mass index (refer to Table 4 and Fig. 1a),
with the majority (89%) not reaching the required levels
for Vitamin D which is 5 μg/day for 19–50 year old Australian
adults (refer to Table 3). Vitamin D deficiency is
noted in serum levels less than 50 nmol/L, with clinical
reference ranges from 60 to 160 nmol/L [20]. Most vitamin
D is obtained from sun exposure, however dietary
intake of vitamin D containing foods is still important.
Oily fish such as salmon and mackerel, eggs, mushrooms
and fortified foods are among the highest vitamin D
containing foods [7, 20]. Baseline dietary intake data
from study participants was compared to the NRV’s for
Australia and New Zealand (Refer to Table 3) and it was
found that vitamin D obtained from dietary sources was
below the daily recommended amount. For the 19–50
year age group 5 μg is the AI per day, while the mean
showed only 3.6 ± 0.3 μg was obtained from dietary
sources. For 51–70 year old’s the AI for vitamin D increases
to 10 μg per day, however self-recorded intake
showed a significant deficit at only 3.7 ± 0.7 μg per day.
This could help explain why serum vitamin D levels were
below the clinical reference intervals (refer to Table 2) with
89% of participants having serum levels less than 20 ng/mL.
Vitamin D has also been shown to have decreased bioavailability
from cutaneous and dietary sources in overweight
and obese populations, as it is potentially
sequestered by adipose tissue [21]. This may explain significant
negative association between BMI and serum
vitamin D levels during this study. A study by Sadiya
et al. demonstrated that large amounts of vitamin D3 is
stored in adipose tissue after vitamin D3 supplementation,
and suggests that overweight and obese participants
may store more vitamin D than healthy weight participants
because they have larger amounts of adipose tissue
[22]. An Australian study by Gill, et al. 2014 found a direct
correlation between BMI and vitamin D status, indicating
that those with a BMI >25 had lower serum
vitamin D than those with a BMI < 25. Secondly, those
who undertook regular physical activity had higher
serum vitamin D than those who were inactive [20].
Seasonal changes in vitamin D levels are also prevalent
with lower serum vitamin D3 levels (≤ 50 nmol/L) found
in winter and spring [23]. Due to the large sample size
and the rolling roster of clinical appointments, some
participants baseline values were obtained during summer,
autumn and winter, which may have resulted in
some variability in the findings [23]. While seasonal variations
are important, it could be argued behavioural
changes are more significant. In summer, although participants
are more inclined to have more skin exposed,
they are also more likely to wear sunscreen and a hat
due to the harsh Australian sun and the associated increase
in skin cancer risk [24]. A large study by Daly
et al. examined serum vitamin D in 11,247 samples collected
Australia wide; results showed that vitamin D deficiency
(< 50 nmol/L) to be common in adults aged 25
years and over (31% of total sample), with women, those
with obesity, the elderly, those from a non-European
background and those with insufficient physical activity
levels being most at risk of low serum vitamin D [24].
Table 4) shows that serum magnesium levels were also
lower in those with higher BMIs (see Fig. 1b). This finding
is further supported by all participants being outside
normal serum parameters of the clinical reference intervals
(Refer to Table 2). Typically green leafy vegetables,
nuts, seeds, legumes and whole grains, are good sources
of magnesium [7]. The RDI for Australians 19–30 years
of age is 400 mg for men and 310 mg per day for
women, and for those 31–70 years of age its 420 mg for
men and 320 mg for women (Table 3). When using the
self-reported dietary intake data and comparing the
mean values to the NRVs, dietary intake of magnesium
was being met. However this did not translate to serum
magnesium with all participants being below the clinical
reference intervals (Table 2). It is estimated only 30 to
40% of dietary magnesium is absorbed by the body, so
regular intake is essential [25]. Previous studies have
linked obesity, and obesity-related metabolic risk factors
such as glucose intolerance, cardiovascular disease, dyslipidaemia
and insulin resistance, with low serum magnesium
[26]. Low dietary intake of magnesium, impairs
intestinal absorption and promotes higher circulating inflammatory
markers in overweight and obese individuals
[27]. Intestinal inflammation is known to impair micronutrient
absorption [28]. There is also a correlation between
lower serum magnesium and low vitamin D levels
in overweight and obese individuals. Although a
magnesium-regulating hormone or factor has yet to be
described, the effect of vitamin D on serum magnesium
concentration has been confirmed in some studies [29].
A study by Farhanghi, et al. 2009 showed that low baseline
concentrations of serum magnesium in obese participants
can induce higher renal magnesium retention
following vitamin D supplementation [27]. The injection
of the metabolite of 1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D (equivalent to
600,000 IU) given in this study acted as a strong modifier
of magnesium in participants with baseline serum concentrations
lower than 1 meq/l. While this may explain
lower magnesium and vitamin D concentrations in those
with higher BMI in the current study, measuring total
body magnesium status accurately can be a challenge as
serum magnesium represents approximately 1% of total
body Mg, which may reflect renal handling rather than
dietary intake [25].
Significantly lower baseline potassium concentrations
in participants with a higher BMI was also found (Table
4 and Fig. 1c). Potassium is an intracellular cationic electrolyte,
necessary for normal cellular function [30]. Potassium
is not stored in the human body, but excreted
by the kidneys, therefore a regular dietary supply is required
[31]. Several studies have suggested a correlation
between potassium and central adiposity, which is a risk
factor of metabolic syndrome (MS) [31], however the
precise relationship is unclear. Current evidence suggests
that overweight and obesity alters potassium channel
function [30]. Potassium plays a critical role in insulin
secretion, hypertension and carbohydrate metabolism,
and can affect carbohydrate accumulation and glucose
homeostasis [31]. However, adequate potassium intake
appears to have a protective effect on obesity. Fruit and
vegetables are a major source of dietary potassium, thus
a high intake would also be beneficial to MS risk factors
such as central adiposity [30]. Dietary intake data in
Table 3 showed that males were slightly below the NRV
for potassium at 3800 mg per day, whereas females
exceeded the NRV of 2800 mg per day. Potassium is very
well absorbed by the body with about 90% absorbed
from dietary sources [15]. However the serum potassium
levels for all study participants as compared to the clinical
reference intervals (Table 2) was below the acceptable
range of 3.5–5.1 mmol/L. Assessing potassium
levels via serum is not the best indication of potassium
status because most potassium in the body is stored inside
cells. Although serum levels can provide some indication
of potassium status, they are a poor reflection of
tissue potassium stores [7, 30].
Baseline serum folate levels also correlated negatively
with BMI (Refer to Table 4 and Fig. 1d). The form of
folate used in supplements and food fortification is folic
acid. Folate and folic acid is found in dark green leafy
vegetables, legumes, fortified cereals and foods and has a
bioavailability of 50–85% depending on the food and
form consumed [32]. Serum folate levels as shown in
Table 2), indicated that 72% of participants were below
the clinical reference interval and 28% were within normal
reference range for serum. Dietary intake data
(Table 3) showed that males and females were just under
the RDI for folate of 400 μg per day at 373.2 ± 17.0 μg.
Recent studies on folic acid fortification have revealed
that individuals with obesity present low fasting serum
but high erythrocyte folate concentrations, as well as
high levels of serum folate oxidation products [33]. It
has been shown that high erythrocyte folate status can
reflect long-term excess folic acid intake; increased folate
oxidation products are correlated with increased folate
degradation as obesity can result in increased cytochrome
P450 2E1 activity. Cytochrome P450 2E1 is a
monooxygenase enzyme that can use folic acid as a substrate
[33]. This clarifies why folate status decreases as
BMI increased, and why folate status is impacted negatively
by being overweight or obese.
Calcium intake of the majority of participants was also
below the reference value recommendation (Table 3). In
addition, serum calcium levels were well below the clinical
reference interval for 91.3% of participants (See
Table 2), however within this study there was no correlation
between calcium and BMI. Calcium intake recommendations
from food sources such as dairy products,
nuts, green leafy vegetables, and fortified foods and
milks, for Australian adults is 1000 mg/day for adults between
19 and 50 years of age and 1300 mg/day for older
groups [15]. According to the Australian Health Survey
2011–2012, over half of the Australian population aged
2 years and over had inadequate usual intakes of calcium
[34]. Low calcium intake is considered a risk factor for
certain disorders, including osteoporosis, hypertension,
cancer, insulin resistance, and the metabolic syndrome
[35]. Interestingly, low dietary calcium intake was listed
among the risk factors significantly associated with overweight
and obesity in a number of published studies [36,
37] and there appears to be a direct link between high
dietary calcium levels and increased faecal fat excretion.
The proposed mechanism by which calcium may contribute
to a negative energy balance is the formation of
insoluble calcium/fatty-acid soaps, which pass unabsorbed
through the intestinal tract and are excreted in
the faeces [38, 39], appetite control as demonstrated
from intervention studies involving dairy calcium supplementation
[39] and cellular mechanisms such as the
mobilisation and oxidation of fats [40]. Low dietary calcium
can lead to an elevated cytosolic calcium and free
ionic calcium in the cytosol plays a significant part in
metabolic disorders related to insulin resistance and
obesity [40].
Serum sodium levels were also significantly lower than
the recommended clinical reference interval (Table 2),
however exceeded the NRVs in the 3-day dietary intake
data (Table 3). Sodium levels within the body are maintained
within a narrow range of 135 to 145 mEq/L, and
the mechanisms which maintain the plasma sodium concentration
in a narrow range are thirst and antidiuretic hormone
(arginine vasopressin) release [41]. Hyponatremia
(low sodium) indicates hypotonicity - water excess for the
amount of sodium present [41]. Participants were instructed
to fast prior to clinical visits, however were still allowed to
drink water to maintain hydration for ease of venepuncture.
No fasting obviously occurred during recording of the 3-day
food diaries completed by participants, so this may explain
why self-recorded dietary intake versus serum sodium was
so different. The low serum sodium levels obtained from
study participants at baseline may be due to simple dilution
of serum prior to blood samples being taken, especially as
the dietary intake data shows that participants were exceeding
the NRV for sodium, however this dilution theory is not
supported by the available literature.
Micronutrients (and macronutrients) have been implicated
as an important factor in regulating various metabolic
processes and thus playing a role in the aetiology
of obesity. Many studies are being conducted worldwide
that clearly show a direct link between obesity and
micronutrient deficiencies [21, 42]. Deficiencies of
various micronutrients, such as fat-soluble vitamins, B
complex, vitamin C and ions such as calcium and magnesium,
have been associated with increased BMI as
overweight or obese is synonymous with an energy
dense, nutrient poor diet [8]. Current research shows
that micronutrients play a crucial role in bioavailability
and absorption of nutrients in the gastrointestinal tract,
as well as regulate the hunger/satiety hormones [8]. If
dietary insufficiency is ongoing then deficiency states
may present, however this is potentially offset by food
fortification of vitamins and minerals in a variety of
processed foods and beverages.
In an ideal world, micronutrient requirements would
be met by a varied diet high in fruit and vegetables.
However several of studies have shown that people simply
are not consuming the amounts required to achieve
and maintain nutritional sufficiency [34]. In many cases,
micronutrient food fortification, which involves adding
specific nutrients to flour, cereals, processed or ready to
eat foods, infant formula fortification, and vitaminenriched
drinks, has been used to treat and prevent nutritional
deficiency diseases in populations at risk [43].
Many industrialized countries have used fortification to
prevent deficiencies of vitamins A and D, several B vitamins
(thiamine, riboflavin and niacin), iodine and iron
[43]. In addition, vitamins and minerals may be obtained
easily from artificial sources, such as nutritional supplements
[44].
Key findings from the 2011–2012 Australian health
Survey support that notion. Usual Nutrient Intake data
showed that 73% of females and 50% of males aged 2
years and over did not meet their calcium requirements;
17% of males and 14% of females had inadequate usual
intakes of vitamin A. One in eleven adult females (aged
19 and over) did not meet the requirement for folate
however almost all males let the dietary requirement
through intake; insufficient B12 intake accounted for between
5 and 8% of females dependent on age and less
than 1 % of males; 40% of 14–18 year old females and
38% of 19–50 year-old females had inadequate iron intakes
compared to only 3% of males; less than 5% of the
population did not meet their dietary needs for vitamin
C and vitamin E; and, from age 14 males have a much
higher requirement of zinc than females due to its key
role in the male reproductive system [45]. According to
the Australian Health Survey results 37% of men and
one in ten women (9%) had inadequate usual zinc intakes
[46]. One in every three people aged 2 years and
over (37% of males and 34% of females) did not meet
their requirements for magnesium, however 76% of
males and 42% of females aged 2 years and over
exceeded the UL for sodium [46].
When comparing the current study with the Australian
Health survey findings (Table 2), 31% of participants
had lower than required vitamin E levels, whereas 41%
exceeded the requirement for B12. All of the study participants
either met or exceeded vitamin C levels and for
vitamin A every person had less than adequate serum
levels. Eighty nine percent of participants had vitamin D
levels that would put them in the ‘severe’ deficiency category.
Seventy two percent were below the lower limit
for folate, however 84.9% were within range for thyroglobulin
which is a more accurate biomarker of folate
status. For potassium, all participants measured had inadequate
serum levels and 94.5% had lower than normal
sodium levels. Approximately 90% (or 88.9% of males
and 93.2% of females) were within reference range values
for iron, however 99.2% had less than adequate serum
values for zinc. Calcium values of the participants were
also lower than the clinical reference values with 91.3%
having a serum calcium level lower than < 4.64 mg/dL.
Implications of associations
The exact mechanisms that explain the relationship between
folate metabolism and obesity are still being
established. Previous studies have reported people with
higher BMI have high erythrocyte folate concentrations,
as well as high levels of circulating serum folate oxidation
products, but can also have low fasting serum levels
[47]. Overweight and obesity are associated with epigenetic
changes such as abnormal DNA methylation patterns
for genes involved in metabolic regulation [47].
Significant associations between serum folate, DNA
methylation, BMI, and body fat percentage have been reported
[48]. This supports the results obtained in this
study as a negative correlation between BMI and baseline
fasted serum folate levels was found. The current
hypothesis is that higher folate intake could act as a protective
factor against obesity by epigenetic mechanisms,
thus a poor folate status could contribute adversely to
an individual’s weight [47]. A prolonged deficiency in
folate can lead to folate deficiency anaemia (megaloblastic)
and pancytopenia. Glossitis, angular stomatitis
and oral ulcers as well as neuropsychiatric manifestations
such as depression, insomnia, and psychosis are
also known to occur with folic acid deficiency [32].
Neural tube defects are also a concern for the foetus of a
pregnant woman with an insufficient folate intake [49].
A negative association with BMI for vitamin D, potassium
and magnesium, implies people with higher BMI
are at risk of deficiency and deficiency related conditions.
Vitamin D, potassium and magnesium all play essential
roles in bone health and calcium storage,
resorption and regulation [22, 50]. A study by Sadiya
et al. demonstrated that large amounts of vitamin D3 is
stored in adipose tissue and suggests that overweight
and obese participants may store more vitamin D than
healthy weight participants because they have larger
amounts of adipose tissue [22]. There is also a correlation
between lower serum magnesium and low vitamin
D levels in overweight and obese individuals. Vitamin D
plays a role in renal magnesium retention, thus low Vitamin
D would contribute to low magnesium levels [25,
27]. Current evidence suggests that overweight and
obesity alters potassium channel function, however this
mechanism is not currently well understood [51]. However
a relationship between low potassium and central
adiposity has been established [31]. Assessing potassium
and magnesium levels via serum is not the most accurate
measure of micronutrient status as most potassium
in the body is stored inside cells and serum magnesium
represents approximately 1% of total body Mg, however
serum magnesium and potassium results do still provide
reliable information on overall micronutrient status. Prolonged
deficiencies of these micronutrients can lead to
osteoporosis and poor bone health for vitamin D [24].
For magnesium and potassium deficiency symptoms are
similar and include, fatigue, numbness, tingling, cramps,
seizures, personality changes, abnormal heart rhythms,
and coronary spasms can occur [52, 53]. Severe deficiency
can also result in hypocalcemia because mineral
homeostasis is disrupted [54].
Strengths and limitations
This study is unique in the fact that not many studies
have examined the nutritional status of overweight and
obese individuals, as most focus on over-nutrition in
terms of macronutrients, and interventions to treat this
disease. The baseline figures suggest show that serum
micronutrient levels for vitamin D, calcium, folate, potassium,
sodium, magnesium and vitamin A were all
below the NRV recommendation. The study participants
who fall below the clinical reference intervals for these
micronutrients could be said to have high calorie malnutrition.
There is an emerging theory that proposes overweight
and obese individuals who consume a large
amount of highly processed food within the standard
‘Western Diet’ have a physiological drive to eat excessive
amounts due to the poor nutritional content of these
foods, and the body’s innate need to achieve (micro) nutritional
sufficiency [55]. This study provides some useful
data on another aspect of the overall health of this
population subgroup.
Possible limitations of the current study may include
that the blood samples and dietary intake data from 3-
day food diaries were only collected at baseline whereas
multiple time periods throughout the year may have
been of more significance. Many deficiency states happen
over a period of time depending on the micronutrient,
so analysis of a ‘snap shot’ on the time scale may
not be the most representative of micronutrient levels.
Some also argue serum measurements aren’t the most
accurate assessment of nutritional status for every
micronutrient. Calcium status for example, bone mineral
density is potentially a more accurate measure than
serum calcium levels as serum calcium is so tightly regulated
within the blood. Consequently if serum calcium
levels fluctuate this is not necessarily an indication of
status, but rather something is affecting bone calcium
release or renal processing and reabsorption [56]. Also
in this study, iodine status is measured by assessing
thyroglobulin levels in the blood. Higher thyroglobulin
levels suggest that the thyroid is working harder to compensate
for low iodine levels and may be an indication
of iodine deficiency [16]. However some experts suggest
urinary iodine tests are a more accurate measure of status.
For the purposes of the confines of this study, serum
measurement of micronutrients was the best method
available at the time. Misreporting by participants also
had the potential to introduce confounders for this
study. Including under reporting or not enough detail
recorded by participants of food diaries, consumption of
multivitamins that weren’t recorded, starting medications
that may interfered with the data.
Significance
With studies of overweight and obese individuals, it is
not often that their baseline nutritional status is examined.
By comparing serum micronutrient levels against
the clinical reference intervals for Australia, it shows that
dietary intake affects nutritional status and not just body
weight, further highlighting the importance of following
dietary recommendations for fruit and vegetables.
Conclusion
There is limited research examining micronutrient status
in individuals with overweight and obesity, and it is
probable that different mechanisms explain nutrientspecific
increases or decreases among the overweight
and obese. Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain
the variability of serum micronutrient levels in this
subset of the population, including: how a vitamin or
mineral is absorbed, excreted, stored/distributed;
whether its sequestered by fat or dispersed in tissue,
metabolic processes (catabolic loses, possibly oxidative),
increased physiologic requirements, and lower absolute
total dietary intake [4, 9]. Overeating to compensate for
a nutritionally poor diet and food fortification may also
explain why serum micronutrient levels are not more
significantly affected in overweight and obese Australian
adults. In addition, the interrelationship between overweight
and obesity and increased risk of associated comorbidities
such as cardiovascular disease, atherosclerosis,
hypertension and myocardial infarction versus the potential
decreased risk associated with adequate intakes of certain
micronutrients especially magnesium and potassium
[30, 57].
This study aimed to identify potential relationships between
BMI and baseline micronutrient status, and found
that participants within this sample with a higher BMI
tended to have lower serum vitamin D, folate, magnesium
and potassium levels. Serum micronutrient levels
compared to the clinical reference intervals and dietary
intake data compared to the NRVs also supported the
theory that diet quality in this subset of the population
is poor. More research is needed to further clarify the
associated health implications of micronutrient deficiency
or surplus in overweight and obese individuals.