Background
Pathologic myopia is defined as a refractive error of −
6.0 diopters or worse spherical equivalent, accompanied
by the characteristic degenerative changes in the sclera,
choroid, and retinal pigment epithelium, with severe visual
impairment [1, 2]. The Asian population displays a
higher prevalence of pathologic myopia, ranging from
0.9 to 3.1%, compared to other regions of the world.
Pathologic myopia has been reported to be the major
cause of visual impairment or low vision in 12 to 27% of
the Asian population [3–5].
The complications associated with pathologic myopia
include posterior staphyloma, myopic maculopathy, myopic
choroidal neovascularization (CNV) [1]. Myopic
CNV is one of the most common complications associated
with the aforementioned condition that may cause
severe visual impairment [6]. It has been estimated that
5.2 to 11.3% of the patients with pathologic myopia will
develop myopic CNV and the natural course and prognosis
of subfoveal CNV are generally poor [3, 7–9].
Currently, therapy involving the intravitreal injection
of anti-vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs),
such as bevacizumab, ranibizumab and aflibercept, is
widely used for the treatment of myopic CNV [10–17].
Recently, aflibercept, a novel recombinant fusion protein
binding all isoforms of VEGF, was approved for the
treatment of CNV secondary to pathologic myopia, following
the well-tolerated and effective results demonstrated
by the MYRROR study [18]. Traditionally, the
diagnosis of myopic CNV relied on fundus fluorescein
angiography, indocyanine green angiography, and optical
coherence tomography (OCT). Optical coherence tomography
angiography (OCTA) is a recent, noninvasive
method without dye injection, which provides a layered
image to observe the different shapes and sizes of CNV
[19–21]. The ability of OCTA to detect the morphological
features of myopic CNV have been reported by
few studies [22]. A previous study used OCTA to assess
the therapeutic effects of intravitreal ranibizumab injection
on myopic CNV [19]. Current study is the first one
to assess the one-year visual outcomes in patients with
myopic CNV who underwent treatment with aflibercept
and evaluations using OCTA.
Methods
The current, retrospective study involved the patients
with subfoveal/juxtafoveal CNV secondary to pathologic
myopia who received intravitreal aflibercept injections.
The patients underwent treatment during the time
period from August 2015 to June 2020 in the Department
of Ophthalmology, Kaohsiung Veteran General
Hospital, Taiwan. Informed consent was obtained from
all the patients. The study program was reviewed and
approved by the Institutional Review Board of Kaohsiung
Veterans General Hospital (KSVGH21-CT1–17).
The study included 21 patients with pathologic myopia
and subfoveal/juxtafoveal CNV. The inclusion criteria
included the following: treatment-naïve patients who
were under follow-up for a minimum of 12 months; myopia
with a spherical equivalent refractive error ≤ −6 D
or axial length ≥ 26.5 mm; active CNV secondary to
pathologic myopia defined as presence of leakage from
CNV seen by fluorescein angiography, and presence of
intraretinal edema or subretinal fluid (SRF) or increase
of central foveal thickness (CFT) seen by spectraldomain
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT); subfoveal/
juxtafoveal CNV; and a best corrected visual acuity
(BCVA) of 20/800 or greater. The exclusion criteria
included the following: prior treatments for CNV, including
PDT and thermal laser photocoagulation; history
of intraocular surgery, except cataract surgery; extrafoveal
CNV; CNV secondary to ocular pathology other
than pathologic myopia, such as age-related macular degeneration,
choroiditis, angioid streaks, or trauma; and
hereditary diseases in the eye under investigation or the
contralateral eye [23].
Complete ophthalmic examinations were performed at
the baseline and all subsequent visits, which included
Snellen BCVA (converted to the logarithm of the minimum
angle of resolution; logMAR), slit-lamp biomicroscopy,
tonometry, fundus examination, fluorescein
angiography, and SD-OCT (RTVue XR Avanti with
AngioVue, Optovue, Inc., Fremont, CA).
OCTA was conducted using RTVue XR Avanti with
AngioVue at 70000 A-scans per second containing
304 × 304. The 3 × 3mm scanning area focused on the
macula and was acquired using the split-spectrum
amplitude-decorrelation angiography technique. The
OCTA images were automatically divided into four
layers: superficial, deep, outer retina, and choroid capillaries
[19]. Automatic retinal segmentation was performed
using the software in the machine. Four retinal
layers are classified by the software: the superficial vascular
plexus (from the inner limiting membrane to the
inner plexiform layer), the deep vascular plexus (between
the inner and outer boundaries, respectively, at 15 and
70mm beneath the inner plexiform layer), the outer retina
(from the axonal outer plexiform layer to the Bruch
membrane), and the choriocapillaris (from 31 to 59mm
inferiorly to the RPE). OCTA images were collected at
the level of the outer retinal layer.
However, distortion of the retinal tissue boundaries resulted
from high myopia often makes automated boundary
segmentation more difficult. Manual segmentation
and adjustment by the clinician were necessary at times
to identify the neovascular network. The CNV area was
manually contoured and measured in mm2 using the
internal software of the device. Then, the flow area of
the area selected manually was measured automatically
in mm2, too. The values pertaining to the selected CNV
areas were recorded, according to the selected size of
CNV. The values pertaining to the flow area of CNV
were automatically measured from the flow signals detected
within the selected area. All the patients underwent
OCT and OCTA prior to injection, and after one,
three, and 12 months after the injection. The current
study excluded the data pertaining to nine of the 21 patients,
on account of poor quality or loss of original
image from the database, which made further analysis
impractical. Intravitreal injections of aflibercept 2 mg
were administered under aseptic conditions using a 30-
gauge needle, 3.5mm or 4mm from the limbus. Retreatment
using aflibercept was performed on the basis of at
least one of following observations: an increase in the
central foveal thickness (CFT) of more than 50 μm between
successive examinations, new or persistent cystic
retinal changes, subretinal fluid, and new or persistent
CNV on OCT or hemorrhage.
Continuous variables with normal distribution were
described as mean and standard deviation, and continuous
variables with non-normal distribution were described
as median and interquartile range (IQR). An
analysis of the normality of independent variables in the
different groups (using the Shapiro-Wilk test) revealed
that the results of the current study do not follow a normal
distribution. Paired data were analyzed using the
Wilcoxon signed-rank and two-way ANOVA (Friedman)
tests. The significance of the differences between the
values pertaining to the study groups were evaluated
through further analysis. A significance level of 5% was
adopted for the decision-making in statistical tests. Data
were analyzed using the SPSS version 22.0 (IBM Corporation,
Armonk, NY, USA).
Results
The study involved 21 eyes pertaining to 21 patients (15
females and 6 males). The baseline clinical characteristics
pertaining to the aforementioned patients are shown
in Table 1. The baseline mean age pertaining to all the
patients included in the present study (± standard deviation
[SD]) was 51 years (± 18.5 years; range: 43 to 61.5
years). The present study detected CNV in thirteen right
eyes (61.9%) and eight left eyes (38.1%). The mean axial
length was 29.34mm (± 2.72 mm; range: 28.08 to 30.80
mm). The mean duration of follow-up was 16.6 months.
The study observed that myopic CNV resolved in 10
of the 21 patients (47.6%) after one aflibercept injection.
Furthermore, among the 21 patients under study, nine
(42.9%) received two aflibercept injections and two
(9.5%) received three aflibercept injections during the
follow-up (mean of two aflibercept injections per
patient). In addition, among the 11 patients who required
more than one injection, 10 patients received the
second injection within 3 months after the primary injection
and only a single patient received a third injection
6 months after the second injection (Fig. 1).
In all the patients, the mean CFT was observed to decrease
significantly from the baseline value of 285.5 μm
to 249 μm after 12 months (P = 0.009). The mean BCVA
(± standard deviation; SD) significantly improved from
the baseline value of 0.7 to 0.39 logMAR after 3 months,
and 0.3 logMAR after 12 months (P = 0.001) (Table 2).
The greatest improvement in visual acuity within the
first 3 months after the initial aflibercept injection, and
the BCVA remained stable 12 months after the
injection.
Further analysis of the 21 eyes revealed that 10 eyes
belonged to the patients below the age of 50 years and
11 eyes belonged to patients above or at the age of 50
years. The improvement in median CFT was greater in
the younger group (< 50 years), compared to the older
group (≥ 50 years) (− 52 μm against − 30 μm,
respectively; P = 0.038) (Table 3). However, the improvement
in median BCVA at the third and twelfth months
were not statistically significant in the younger group,
compared to the older group (− 0.42 logMAR against
− 0.34 logMAR, respectively; P = 0.0832) (Fig. 2).
A comparison of the therapeutic effects of intravitreal
aflibercept injection between the two groups of patients
with axial length below or above 30mm using the
Mann-Whitney U test revealed that the improvement in
median CFT and BCVA, in the two groups at the third
and twelfth months, were not statistically significant
(Table 4, Fig. 3).
Myopic CNV presented as an irregular or round,
closed lesion at the outer retinal layer on OCTA. This
study identified two neovascular patterns: interlacing
and disorganized patterns. In the interlacing pattern,
which was observed in six among the twelve eyes (50%),
OCTA images revealed dense vascular hyperintensity
with a well-circumscribed appearance (Fig. 4). This pattern
revealed a high-flow network, comprising a small
capillary with a feeder vessel and small capillary ramifications.
In the disorganized pattern, which was observed
in six among the twelve eyes (50%), OCTA images revealed
a small, high-flow network, harboring a vascular
loop-like pattern with no obvious capillary ends (Fig. 5).
The OCTA images revealed changes in the group of
eyes with the interlacing CNV after intravitreal aflibercept
injection. One month after the treatment, shrinkage
of peripheral vascularity and reduction in vessel density
from previous, dense, hyperintense vascularity with wellcircumscribed
interlacing lesion was observed. The CNV
lesion displayed a greater decrease in size and vessel
density after 12 months (Fig. 4). In the group of disorganized
CNV, OCTA showed shrinkage of the lesion 1
month after treatment. Reduction in vessel density from
a small, high-flow network, harboring a vascular loop-
like pattern with no obvious capillary ends was also observed
in theses lesions. The CNV lesion showed a
greater decrease in size and vessel density after 12
months (Fig. 5).
Three and twelve months after the primary injection,
the size of the selected CNV area and the flow area revealed
a trend towards decline in both the interlacing
pattern and the disorganized pattern (Table 5)
(Fig. 6(a)(b)). The interlacing pattern displayed a trend
towards better improvement in the size and flow of the
selected CNV area (Fig. 6(a)(b)). However, the present
study did not observe any obvious difference between
the two groups with different patterns with regard to the
improvement in BCVA after intravitreal aflibercept
injection (Table 5).
Discussion
In the current study, most eyes showed improvement in
vision and the burden of intravitreal therapies was found
similar to the MYRROR study, which revealed that the
patients with myopic CNV who underwent intravitreal
aflibercept injection displayed significant improvements
in visual and anatomic parameters over a time period of
48 weeks [18].
After intravitreal aflibercept injections, the subjects in
the younger group displayed a greater reduction in CFT
at 12 months compared to the order group. The aforementioned
observation was concordant with the clinical
findings reported by Yoshida et al. and Bruè et al. [7, 24]
At 3 and 12 months, the younger group displayed a
trend towards better improvement in vision after intravitreal
aflibercept injections, although the results were
not statistically significant.
A less reduction in CFT at 12 months after treatment
associated with myopic CNV in the older age group
could be attributed to the decreased integrity and function
of the myopic retinal pigment epithelium that
downgrades the inhibition of angiogenesis [25]. Indeed,
some studies report that myopic CNV in older patients
could manifest simultaneous AMD and high myopia,
resulting in poor natural outcomes. Moreover, older patients
tend to develop chorioretinal atrophy or degeneration
that negatively influences the final visual acuity.
However in our study, no statistically significant
difference in BCVA changes at 12 months after treatment
between younger and older group is noted.
Previous studies reported that the role of spherical
equivalent refraction and axial length as predictive factors
associated with the final visual acuity after anti-
VEGF treatment in myopic CNV remained controversial.
Bruè et al. reported that higher myopia is associated with
decreased visual acuity after intravitreal aflibercept injections
in young patients with myopic CNV. Some studies
identified a significant positive correlation between
BCVA and macular choroidal thickness after anti-VEGF
treatment [23]. Greater axial length was often considered
to be major factor associated with macular choroidal
thinning. The current study did not observe any difference
in the treatment outcomes between the groups
with long and short axial length (Table 4). This could be
attributed to the relatively small sample size and short
duration of follow-up. Further investigations should be
performed to elucidate the significance of axial length in
predicting treatment outcomes.
Recently, OCTA is being widely used in the diagnosis
of various macular diseases and provides detailed, layered
images of enface retinal and choroidal vasculature
[26–29]. Cheng et al. used OCT B-scan and OCTA to
perform quantitative analysis and monitor the therapeutic
effects of intravitreal ranibizumab injection (0.5
mg/0.05 mL) (Lucentis; Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco,
CA) in myopic CNV [19]. The OCTA revealed
significant attenuation of the capillaries and small caliber
feeder vessels after intravitreal ranibizumab injection.
Moreover, the study reported a simultaneous reduction
in the size of the selected CNV area and flow area.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study
that used OCTA to detect the changes in the shape, selected
area, and flow area of CNV after intravitreal aflibercept
injection at 3 and 12 months. In the current
study, among twelve patients who underwent OCTA,
eleven patients displayed improvement in BCVA and
twelve patients displayed decrease in the selected CNV
area at 3 months. The treatment effects persisted until
the twelfth month. Nine in twelve patients displayed decrease
in the selected CNV flow area at 3 months after
aflibercept injection. While eleven in twelve patients displayed
decrease in the selected CNV flow area at 12
months after aflibercept injection (Table 5). The decrease
of selected CNV area and flow area after aflibercept
injection is consistent with the results reported by
Cheng et al., wherein myopic CNV was treated using intravitreal
ranibizumab injection [19].
According to a previous study, it was often considered
that active CNV presented as retinal hemorrhage, intraretinal
fluid, sub-retinal fluid, or pigment epithelial detachment,
as shown by the fundus photography and
OCT B-scan images. These active CNV lesions were also
considered to be more sensitive to anti-VEGF therapy.
However, some cases of myopic CNV that presented
with scars or fibrosis on fundoscopic examinations after
anti-VEGF treatment could also show residual, high reflective
neovascularization lesions on OCT B-scan images.
The aforementioned condition often confused
clinicians regarding the necessity for further treatment
and the presence of CNV activity. Hence, OCTA is expected
to provide additional biomarkers and parameters
to guide further management.
Bruyère et al. used OCTA to identify two types of neovascular
membranes in high myopia. The first involved
small, disorganized vascular loops, suggesting an immature
neovascular network. The second is a larger, highly
structured, interlacing network, suggesting a mature lesion
[21]. Querques et al. reported that on OCTA
images, active myopic CNVs could be mainly interlacing,
whereas the abnormal vascular network with tangled
pattern could be inactive myopic CNV [30]. Cheng et al.
reported that sea-fan and lacy-wheel types tend to be
clinically active CNVs, whereas poorly defined lesions,
such as filamentous CNV vessels, could be either active
or inactive.
In the present study, the interlacing group displayed a
trend towards better improvement in CFT reduction
and decrease in the selected CNV area and flow area
(Table 5) (Fig. 6(a)(b)). Additionally, previous studies
have reported consistent results and stated that the capillaries
and small caliber feeder vessels were significantly
attenuated after intravitreal ranibizumab injection,
whereas the main central trunk vessel and large caliber
feeder vessels remained unchanged [22, 31].
However, owing to the limited sample size, the scenario
warrants further investigation to clarify the significance
of CNV patterns in predicting the response to
anti-VEGF therapy. OCTA could be considered as a useful
tool that can be employed to identify the different
CNV patterns and detect CNV activity, predict treatment
response, and monitor the need for repeated treatments
in patients with myopic CNV.
The current study has certain limitations. The series
was relatively small, and the duration of follow-up was
short. The present study observed some poor image
quality with significant motion artifacts, due to unstable
fixation, which could make the analysis more challenging.
Similarly, the accuracy of the layers automatically
divided by OCTA could be affected by the long axial
length of the pathologic myopia eyeballs.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the administration of a single injection of
intravitreal aflibercept 2.0 mg at the baseline in patients
with myopic CNV showed effective results. A single aflibercept
injection was observed to resolve myopic CNV
in approximately half of the patients. The median number
of injections was two injections within 12 months.
Eyes with the interlacing pattern on OCTA displayed a
greater decrease in size and flow after intravitreal
aflibercept.
Further studies with large sample sizes and longer
follow-ups are necessary to explore the relationship between
different CNV patterns, detected through OCTA,
and the therapeutic effects of anti-VEGF on myopic
CNV.