Summary statement
Pachychoroid phenotypes were identified in myopic eyes
with nontractional serous foveal detachment and were
divided two groups: myopic central serous chorioretinopathy
and myopic pachychoroid neovasculopathy.
Background
High myopia has been increasing globally and has
become one of the major causes of visual impairment,
especially in Asia [1–3]. Among various complications
associated with high myopia, foveal detachment is one of
the clinical manifestations that inevitably lead to visual
impairment. This finding is usually observed in myopic
traction maculopathy, macular hole, or myopic choroidal
neovascularization (CNV) [4, 5]. high myopia is characterized
by markedly thin choroid compared to the normal eye
[6]. However, foveal detachment has been observed in the
pachychoroid diseases. Pachychoroid diseases share common
characteristics such as a thick choroid, dilated outer
choroidal vessel (pachyvessel), inner choroidal attenuation,
and a history of central serous chorioretinopathy (CSC);
drusen, pigmentary abnormality, and geographic atrophy
are absent [7]. The pathogenesis of pachychoroid diseases
is unknown, but pachychoroid features, such as choroidal
congestion and hyperpermeability, are generally associated
with the focal disruption of retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) and Bruch’s membrane, which can lead to subretinal
fluid (SRF) and CNV [8]. Although both high myopia
and pachychoroid diseases may develop exudative
complications, the two disease entities are perceived
as incompatible due to inherent structural differences,
mainly the choroidal thickness. However, high myopia
has presented with serous non-tractional foveal detachments,
typical clinical features of pachychoroid
diseases. The purpose of this report was to describe
myopic nontractional foveal detachment with features
mainly associated with pachychoroid diseases.
Methods
This retrospective study was performed at a single
center according to the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki. The study was prospectively approved by the
Institutional Review Board of the Samsung Medical
Center.
We retrospectively reviewed electronic medical records
of Samsung Medical Center to identify those who
had serous nontractional foveal detachment with high
myopia between January 2010 and November 2018. high
myopia was defined if refractive errors were − 6.0 diopters
or more and/or the axial length was larger than
26.0mm [9]. If the subjects had undergone refractive or
cataract surgeries, then, their eyes manifesting obvious
fundus changes related to pathologic myopia were also
included. The eyes with history of ocular inflammation,
history of vitreoretinal surgery, history of ocular trauma
or glaucoma were excluded. On optical coherence
tomography (OCT), the eyes were excluded if they had a
macular or paramacular hole, vitreous or membrane
traction on the fovea, or classic myopic CNV. Classic
myopic CNV was diagnosed by the pattern on fluorescein
angiography which showed well-defined hyperfluorescence
in the early phases and leakage of fluorescein dye
during the late phase. Also, subretinal hyper-reflective materials
that represented by a highly reflective projection
above retinal pigment epithelium was detected to signify
type 2 CNV [4].
All subjects in the study had undergone fluorescein
angiography (FA), indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)
(Spectralis HRA + OCT; Heidelberg Engineering, Inc.,
Heidelberg, Germany), spectral domain-OCT (Spectralis
HRA +OCT; Heidelberg Engineering, Inc., Heidelberg,
Germany), OCT Angiography (OCTA) (DRI-OCT Triton,
Topcon co., Tokyo, Japan). OCT imaging by raster scan
was conducted for the existence of SRF, intraretinal fluid,
retinal pigment epithelial layer, subfoveal choroidal thickness,
choroidal vessel and macular hole to exclude. OCT
images were raster scanned to exclude macular hole or
traction. Subfoveal choroidal thickness was defined as the
distance between the outer portion of retinal pigment
epithelium below the foveal center to the inner surface of
the choroidal–scleral junction. In this study, we utilized
OCT scans to define pachyvessel as the large choroidal
vessel occupying a significant portion of the choroid and
manifesting as the attenuation of choriocapillaris and
Sattler’s layer and dilated Haller’s layer beneath SRF [8].
On ICGA, choroidal vascular hyperpermeability was defined
as the area of patch hyperfluorescence, and punctate
hyperfluorescent spot was defined as pinpoint intense
hyperfluorescent spot seen in late phase (over 10min)
[10]. The presence of choroidal vascular hyperpermeability
and punctate hyperfluorescent spots was independently
evaluated by two examiners (YKS, KHB), both of whom
were masked to diagnosis and OCT results.
Eyes with nontractional foveal detachment in high myopia
were categorized into two groups according to the
presence of type 1 CNV. Group1 was defined as the
presence of SRF without evidence of CNV on ICGA and
OCTA. Localized serous detachments of the neurosensory
retina with focal RPE detachment or diffuse RPE
abnormality were found on OCT, but indistinct or
diffuse leakage or nonspecific finding on FA and no
evidence of CNV on multimodal imaging were noted in
Group1. Interestingly, such features look similar to those
observed in chronic CSC in myopic eyes. Herein, we
used the term “myopic CSC” for such conditions.
Group2 was defined as the presence of SRF with evidence
of type 1 CNV on ICGA and/or OCTA. Localized
serous detachment of neurosensory retina with focal
RPE disruption or flat irregular RPE detachment
(double-layer sign) were observed in Group2. There was
evidence of CNV on multimodal imaging, but typical
classic myopic CNV was not identified. Herein, we used
the term “myopic pachychoroid neovascularization
(PNV)” for such conditions.
Statistical analysis was executed using SAS version 9.4
(SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and R 3.5.1 (Vienna, Austria;
http://www.R-project.org/). The best-corrected visual
acuity was converted into logarithm of the minimal
angle of resolution (LogMAR) units prior to the analysis.
T-test and Wilcoxon rank sum test were conducted after
the normality test respectively. P-values less than 0.05
were considered statistically significant.
Results
A total of 15 eyes from 13 patients (6 men, 7 women)
between January 2010 and November 2018 were included
for analysis. Demographic and clinical characteristics
of all patients were shown in Table 1. The mean
age was 50.0 ± 10.5 years. The mean follow-up period
was 37.3 ± 31.9 months (range, 1 to 99 months). Mean
logMAR visual acuity at baseline and at the final visit
was 0.22 ± 0.67 and 0.20 ± 0.60, respectively. Mean refractive
error was − 7.8 ± 3.8 diopters and all eyes had
the pathologic myopic feature on funduscopy. Three
eyes had refractive surgery history, and 3 eyes had
cataract surgery history at first visit. Only three eyes had
axial length measurements for reasons of cataract
history. The mean subfoveal choroidal thickness was
104.1 ± 27.4 μm.
Of the 15 eyes, 8 (53.3%) were in group1 (myopic
CSC), and 7 eyes (46.7%) were in group2 (myopic PNV).
The mean age was 48.9 ± 11.3 years for myopic CSC
group and 51.1 ± 9.5 years for myopic PNV group. The
logMAR visual acuities of myopic CSC and myopic PNV
groups at baseline were 0.26 ± 0.76 and 0.18 ± 0.60, respectively.
The logMAR visual acuities in both groups at
the final visit were 0.21 ± 0.62 and 0.19 ± 0.58, respectively.
Mean total follow-up period in myopic CSC and
myopic PNV groups from baseline to the final visit was
35.0 ± 35.0 and 39.9 ± 28.1 months, respectively. Subfoveal
choroidal thickness was 110.1 ± 29.4 μm in myopic
CSC and 97.1 ± 25.3 μm in myopic PNV. There was no
statistically significant difference. Five out of 8 eyes in
myopic CSC group and all 7 eyes in myopic PNV group
received treatment (Intravitreal anti-VEGF (vascular
endothelial growth factor) injections and/or photodynamic
therapy (PDT)). In the myopic PNV group,
anti-VEGF injection was the first-line therapy. In the
myopic CSC group, we applied half-fluence PDT as the
first-line treatment in patients with foveal detachment
accompanied by choroidal hyperpermeability on ICGA
and who showed recent visual deterioration. In all other
patients, we monitored the condition without
intervention. At the final visit, Among the 11 eyes that
underwent treatment, excluding one eye that was lost
follow-up after treatment, were sorted according to their
responses to treatment as followed: complete, incomplete,
refractory and recurred response. Complete responses
were noted in 5 eyes that 2 eyes from myopic
CSC group, 3 eyes from myopic PNV group. Incomplete
responses were noted in 4 eyes, 3 of which were in the
myopic PNV group. Recurred response was noted in one
eye in myopic CSC group, and refractory response was
noted in one eye in myopic PNV group. Two of three
untreated eyes in myopic CSC had no significant change
and the last one had a spontaneous resolution of SRF
(Tables 1, 2).
Pachyvessels on OCT corresponding to the enlarged
choroidal vessel on ICGA were noted in all eyes (8 eyes
(100%) in myopic CSC and 6 eyes (100%) myopic PNV)
in both groups. ICGA results were examined in all eyes
in myopic PNV group except one eye (No.10). In myopic
CSC group, 8 eyes (100%) showed choroidal vascular
hyperpermeability and 5 eyes (62.5%), punctate hyperfluorescent
spots. In the myopic PNV group, 5 eyes
(83.3%) showed choroidal vascular hyperpermeability,
and 5 eyes (83.3%) showed punctate hyperfluorescent
spots. All multimodal imaging findings were reported in
Table 3.
Figures 1 and 2 show cases representing myopic CSC
and myopic PNV.
Discussion
Both high myopia and pachyspectrum diseases such as
CSC and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy are more
common in the Asian population [9, 11]. However,
pachychoroid diseases are very rare in high myopia. In
this study, we describe high myopia which had nontractional
foveal detachment with pachychoroid characteristics
In this study, no eyes demonstrated intraocular
inflammation.
There is a number of complications that require careful
scrutiny when dealing with high myopic eyes exhibiting
foveal detachment with SRF. Usually, these
complications of high myopia include myopic CNV and
myopic traction maculopathy. Myopic traction maculopathy
is a wide spectrum of related disorders, encompassing
vitreomacular traction, myopic foveoschisis and
myopic macular hole. In severe forms of myopic traction
maculopathy, OCT reveals foveal detachment and
foveoschisis with posterior staphyloma in high myopia
[12]. In the case of myopic CNV, FA and OCT are
recommended for baseline diagnostic examination. In
typical myopic CNV, FA reveals well-defined hyperfluorescence
in early phases and leakage of fluorescein dye
during the late phases, and OCT typically delineates a
highly reflective area above the retinal pigment epithelium,
namely subretinal hyper-reflective material, with
minimal SRF. The relationship between dome-shaped
macula and serous foveal detachment in eyes without
typical myopic CNV was reported [13]. The morphologic
changes in choroidal vascular structure were reported
according to presence of posterior staphyloma [14].
However, the main focus of our report was to present
serous non-tractional foveal detachment in highly myopic
eyes with pachychoroid features and to classify
them by presence of type 1 CNV.
Although FA and OCT are the most commonly conducted
baseline examinations, in case of clear SRF in
highly myopic eyes, these baseline examinations often
fail to delineate myopic CNV [4]. ICGA may be more
sensitive for detecting CNV or lacquer crack formation
[15]. In 7 eyes of the myopic PNV group, the presence
of the type1 CNV was confirmed via ICGA or OCTA.
In this study, all the eyes manifested myopic retinal
changes consistent with the META-PM criteria [16].
However, all included eyes also showed common characteristics
of pachychoroid features. Considering that
retinal changes associated with pachychoroid spectrum
disease stem from the structural instability inherent
with the thick choroid, the naturally low prevalence of
pachychoroid features in the thin choroid of high myopia
is self-explanatory. In a previous study by Kim
et al., choroidal vascular hyperpermeability was not
noted in any of the eyes and punctate hyperfluorescent
spot was noted in only 4 eyes (4.7%) among 84 eyes
with classic myopic CNV [17]. Interestingly, the results
in this study indicate that all myopic eyes with thin
choroid, with or without type 1 CNV, shared pachychoroid
phenotypes. On ICGA, choroidal vascular
hyperpermeability, dilated choroidal vessel and punctate
hyperfluorescent spot were detected in 13 (92.9%),
14 (100%) and 10 eyes (71.4%), respectively among the
14 eyes enrolled. This is also supported by previous
reports claiming that together with dilated choroidal
vessels, the punctate hyperfluorescent spot was a coexisting
characteristic of choroidal vascular hyperpermeability
[18]. On OCT, the presence of pachyvessels
beneath SRF was noted in all 15 of 15 eyes (100%) of
the current study. These results indicate that
nontractional and non-rhegmatogenous serous foveal
detachment in high myopia most likely accompany
pachychoroid features.
FA and OCT are well-established tests for the diagnosis
and monitoring of the activity of myopic CNV
because myopic CNV is predominantly classic, type 2
CNV. Meanwhile, the detection of type 1 CNV within
flat irregular RPE detachment most often requires on
ICGA or OCTA examination. However, polypoidal
choroidal vasculopathy and CSC have also been reported
in highly myopic eyes [19, 20]. Five of 7 eyes
in myopic PNV group had shallow irregular RPE
detachment which appears as double layer sign, i.e.
flat irregular RPE detachment overlying pachyvessel.
The double layer sign indicates the presence of type 1
neovascularization, because CNV vascularity was detected
in all of these eyes using ICGA and OCTA.
Other 2 of 7 eyes in myopic PNV group showed
slight hyper-reflective area with SRF above disrupted
retinal pigment epithelium on OCT. Pachyvessels with
the dilated choroidal vessel were also observed. This
study is the first to address the presence of pachychoroid
characteristics as the etiology of myopic
serous foveal detachment.
Both ICGA and OCTA are very useful in studying
choroidal vascularization especially in high myopia, and
high sensitivity and specificity of OCTA are rendered
useful in diagnosing myopic CNV [21]. Although the
angiographic images in high myopia were difficult to interpret
in many cases because of degenerative RPE
changes, OCTA, nonetheless, provides high-resolution
confocal images of type 1 CNV even in the presence of
diffuse RPE window defect. In the current study, the
high-flow network located in outer-retinal and choriocapillaris
slab shown on OCTA was considered type 1
CNV in high myopia. Our results confirmed that OCTA
is very valuable in analyzing outer-retinal neovascular
structures for the eyes with serous foveal detachment in
high myopia.
The intravitreal anti-VEGF injection is the first-line
therapy for myopic CNV [22]. On the other hand, a
combination of ranibizumab and PDT was superior to
monotherapy for the treatment of non-myopic polypoidal
choroidal vasculopathy in improving BCVA and
achieving complete polyp regression [23]. In our study,
all of 7 eyes in myopic PNV were treated with either intravitreal
anti-VEGF injection or PDT, and 3 eyes
achieved complete resolution and other 3 eyes, incomplete
resolution. The refractory response was noted in
one eye.
In myopic CSC group, half-fluence Verteporfin PDT
was initially considered except for those with a history
of anti-VEGF injection, and if there was an incomplete
response, then anti-VEGF injection was performed.
After PDT, complete resolution of SRF was noted in
two of 3 eyes, while the incomplete response was noted
in one eye. Some studies demonstrated PDT as a more
favorable method than anti-VEGF injection in the treatment
of atypical CSC [24]. In the present study, PDT
may be considered as the first optional treatment in
myopic CSC. However, further controlled study is
required to establish the treatment principles in these
groups of patients.
In the case of myopic PNV, our initial treatment
was intravitreal anti-VEGF injection. If there was an
incomplete resolution of SRF, we tried PDT in the
area of choroidal hyperpermeability and SRF. After
PDT, complete resolutions of SRF were noted in one
of 3 eyes, while incomplete responses were noted in
the other 2 eyes. Interestingly, these 2 eyes both had
specific structural changes that involved the presence
of staphyloma and dome-shaped macula. And incomplete
response after PDT in myopic CSC was noted
in one eye above that had a dome-shaped macula.
According to previous studies, the primary cause of
SRF development was not only choroidal vascular
permeability, but also mechanical and vascular damage
to the choroid by excessive scleral bulging [25].
Various structural changes accompanying high myopia
may affect the treatment outcome and make treatment
difficult. And these results suggested weaker response
in the eyes with myopic PNV to anti-VEGF
treatment when compared to anti-VEGF treatment for
classic myopic CNV. Despite some time of investigation
and clinical experiments since the initial report
on PNV, the prognosis and treatment of non-myopic
PNV with or without exudation has not been sufficiently
addressed. We speculated that PNV is an
arterialized mature neovascularization of type 1 CNV
over a long period of slow vascular remodeling that
increases tolerance and poor response to anti-VEGF
treatment.
There were several limitations to the present study.
First, the study design was a single-center, retrospective,
short-follow up cases that could not represent the prevalence
of overall population. Future studies looking at larger
and longer series will be needed to characterize
these conditions further and determine the optimal
treatment approach. Second, the study population was
small for both groups. However, this is because the nature
of myopia and pachychoroid disease is difficult to
coexist. Despite the limitations, this study has significance
in that it elicited the interest in the clinical entity
of myopic pachychoroid phenotypes as the etiology of
myopic serous detachment. We provide new data on
angiographic findings on OCTA and present our perspectives
in diagnosing and treating myopic CSC and
myopic PNV.
In conclusion, Pathologically myopic eyes could
have pachychoroid features such as choroidal hyperpermeability
or pachyvessel. In this study, we used
‘myopic CSC’ and ‘myopic PNV’ that demonstrate
pachychoroid phenotypes. These may result in
nontractional serous foveal detachment. In general,
these are responsive to anti-VEGF treatment and/or
PDT, but shows limited response. Despite of small
series, our treatment experience broadens the perspective
on disease entity overlapping between high
myopia and pachychoroid spectrum disease.