Background
Myopic traction maculopathy (MTM) refers to a
series of pathological changes in the macula in high
myopia, including vitreomacular traction, an epimacular
membrane, retinoschisis, a lamellar macular hole
(LMH) and foveal detachment [1]. Damage to the
outer retinal structure or development to foveal detachment
and a full-thickness macular hole in the advanced
stage can cause visual impairment in MTM,
and surgical intervention is recommended to promote
anatomical reattachment of the retina and visual recovery
[2–5]. Retinoschisis is a major characteristic
lesion of MTM, and the incidence of retinoschisis in
high myopia with posterior staphyloma is as high as
31.3 % [6]. Retinoschisis can occur in the fovea and
extrafovea and in different locations of the intraretinal
neural layers due to different dominant pathological
factors. However, the mechanism of retinoschisis has
not yet been fully elucidated, and many studies have
shown that inward and tangential forces produced by
partial posterior vitreous detachment (PVD), an epiretinal
membrane, arteriosclerosis, and a stiff internal
limiting membrane (ILM) and outward traction generated
by asynchronous global elongation and posterior
staphyloma may play important roles in its pathogenesis
[7–11].
Recently, several studies have indicated that the progression
rate of MTM varies, that paravascular abnormities
and paravascular inner retinoschisis may be
associated with the pathogenesis of foveoschisis, and that
the severity of retinoschisis in MTM can affect its progression
regardless of whether cataract surgery is performed
[12–17]. Poor baseline visual acuity is often
found in entire macula-involved retinoschisis eyes accompanied
by a disruption in the ellipsoid zone (EZ)
[16], and progression of MTM can lead to worse visual
outcomes in its natural course [15]. However, these
studies have focused little on identifying the evolution of
retinoschisis prominent in different locations caused by
different initiation factors, on the role of inner retinoschisis
at paravascular arcades and ILM detachment in
the progression of MTM, or on the comparison of the
baseline factors affecting visual acuity at follow-up in
large series.
Thus, we conducted this study to describe the natural
course of MTM, to determine the effects of morphological
characteristics of retinoschisis by OCT on MTM
progression and to assess the risk factors influencing visual
prognosis.
Methods
Patients
This retrospective study recruited patients with MTM
who initially visited the Department of Ophthalmology
of the Sixth People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University from June 2014 to March 2018.
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) MTM diagnosed
by OCT, and (2) highly myopic eyes defined as
an axis length ≥ 26 mm or a spherical equivalent refractive
error ≥-6.00 D. The exclusion criteria were as
follows: (1) OCT images with poor quality; (2) a fullthickness
macular hole at baseline; (3) a history of
vitreoretinal surgery, and (4) other ocular diseases
such as glaucoma, retinal vascular diseases or myopic,
or age-related macular degenerative diseases. The
study adhered to the guidelines of the Helsinki
Declaration and had the approval of the Ethics
Committee of Sixth People’s Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. The
study was registered in the Chinese clinical trial registry
(http://www.chictr.org.cn/, Registration number:
ChiCTR2000038824). All patients signed written informed
consent for participation.
Clinical examinations
All patients were given a comprehensive ocular examination.
Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and refractive
error were measured by applying a Snellen chart, and
BCVA was then converted to logarithmic minimal angle
of resolution (logMAR) units for statistical analysis.
Axial length was measured by an IOL-Master, and the
presence of posterior staphyloma was observed by Bscan
ultrasonography. Spectral domain OCT (SD-OCT)
(Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) was performed
on the MTM eyes. The SD-OCT scanning
protocol consisted of an A-scan through the center of
the macula with a length between 9.2 mm and 11.5 mm
in the horizontal and vertical direction and 31 B-scans
covering an area of 30°×25.0° centered on the fovea at
an interval of 256 μm. Two subtypes of retinoschisis
were recorded: outer schisis (occurring in the outer
plexiform layer) and inner schisis (occurring in the inner
plexiform layer and/or ILM detachment). The eyes were
classified into 5 groups based on the size and the location
of the outer retinoschisis as proposed by Shimada
et al. [15]. The central foveal thickness (CFT) was measured
and defined as the distance between the hyperreflective
band of the ILM and the hyperreflective band of
the retinal pigment epithelium through the central fovea
and averaging the values measured in the horizontal and
vertical A-scans. Then, we determined the most prominent
location (upper and lower vascular arcades or their
branch vessels, the fovea or the posterior staphyloma) of
outer schisis within a diameter of 10 mm centered on
the fovea from OCT images, in which the maximum
neural thickness (MNT), defined as the distance between
the hyperreflective band of the ILM and the hyperreflective
band of the retinal pigment epithelium, was
measured. Partial PVD, an epimacular membrane, an
LMH and the integrity (intact, partially continuous, or
absent) of the EZ were examined by OCT. Dome-shaped
macula (DSM) is defined as an inward protrusion of the
retinal pigment epithelium of the macula ≥ 50 μm in the
horizontal or vertical section or both by OCT examination
[18].The progression of MTM was characterized as
the height of outer schisis increasing by 100 μm, expansion
in the extent of outer schisis, or the development of
an LMH, FD or a full-thickness macular hole. MTM improvement
was termed a reduction in the height or
extent of outer schisis unaccompanied with the development
of an LMH, FD or a full-thickness macular hole.
Cases that did not meet the standard of progression or
improvement were treated as stable based on the definition
of Shimada et al. [15]. The follow-up time lasted
for at least 2 years. BCVA measurements and OCT examinations
were performed in all patients at every visit.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SAS software
version 9.13 (SAS Institute Inc., Chicago, IL). Data are
depicted as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). The
one-way analysis of variance was used for the comparison
of continuous variables, and the chi-square test was
used for the statistical analysis of count data. If the sample
size in the group was < 5, Fisher’s exact test was performed.
If the data did not conform to a normal
distribution, the Kruskal-Wallis test was performed. We
determined the factors influencing BCVA at the last visit
using multivariate regression analysis. When P was <
0.05, the difference was considered statistically
significant.
Results
Baseline characteristics
We enrolled 113 patients (113eyes) with MTM in this
study, and the mean follow-up time was 38.2 ± 11.1
months. The baseline characteristics of all patients are
listed in Table 1.
Changes in morphological characteristics by OCT
There were 5, 23, 8, 42 and 35 eyes in stages S0, S1,
S2, S3, and S4 of MTM, respectively, at the last visit.
In the follow-up period, 49 eyes (43.4 %) progressed
(Figs. 1 and 2), 45 eyes (39.8 %) remained stable
(Fig. 3), and 19 eyes (16.8 %) experienced improvement
(Fig. 4). A full-thickness macular hole was
found in 1 eye, an LMH developed in 3 eyes, and FD
developed in 6 eyes (Fig. 5). At the last visit, ILM detachment
was disrupted or disappeared in 4 eyes that
did not experience progression.
Risk factors for progression
We divided the patients into three groups, progressive,
stable and improved, to explore the possible risk factors
affecting progression (Table 2). When we determined
the influence of the subgroup, subtype and location of
retinoschisis on progression, 8 eyes with S0 at baseline
were excluded. The progression rate in eyes with outer
schisis most prominently located in the fovea or
staphyloma (51.6 %) was significantly higher than that in
eyes with outer schisis located in the vascular arcades
(20.9 %) (P = 0.0011). Eyes with partial PVD during the
follow-up had a higher proportion of progression
(60.5 %) than those without PVD (32.9 %) (P = 0.0447).
In contrast, age, axial length, presence of posterior staphyloma,
epimacular membrane, subgroup, subtype of
schisis or DSM were not different among the three
groups (P > 0.05).
Changes in BCVA and predictive factors for visual acuity
LogMAR BCVA at the last follow-up was worse than
that at baseline in all patients (P = 0.0372), in patients
who were older than 65 years, in patients without DSM,
and in patients with defects in the EZ (P = 0.0416, P =
0.0494, and P = 0.0130, respectively) (Table 3). In the
multiple linear regression analysis, logMAR BCVA (P <
0.0001) and a defect in the EZ at baseline (P < 0.0001)
were significantly correlated with logMAR BCVA at the
last follow-up (Table 4).
Discussion
Our study found that 49/113 eyes (43.4 %) with MTM
progressed over the 2-year follow-up period, and eyes
with retinoschisis prominently located in the fovea or
posterior staphyloma were prone to progression.
Vitreoretinal traction may be one of the risk factors
for progression, and the integrity of the EZ was considered
to be a main factor affecting visual prognosis.
The progression rate of MTM or retinoschisis varies,
ranging between 11.6 and 68.9 %, according to different
standards [14, 15]. Gaucher et al. [14] found that 68.9 %
(20/29 eyes) of the eyes with foveoschsis progressed with
enlargement of retinal cleavage and/or visual decline
during a mean follow-up period of 31.2 months. In our
retrospective study, 41/105eyes (39.0 %) with MTM progressed
based on the criteria of morphological changes
of MTM described by Shimada et al. [15], even when 8
S0 eyes were excluded at baseline, which was much
higher than that reported by Shimada et al. [15] (11.6 %).
The different progression rates may be related to the difference
in age, the status of vitreomacular traction, the
involved location and area of schisis or the follow-up
period in these studies.
Our results showed that eyes with outer schisis prominently
located in the fovea or posterior staphyloma had
a higher risk of progression than those in which outer
schisis located in the vascular areas. The mechanism of
retinoschisis is complicated, and the growth of the eyeball
is considered an initial factor in the pathogenesis of
foveoschisis [19]. Shinohara et al. [20] suggested that
posterior staphyloma may act as the main cause of retinoschisis
located within the area of the posterior staphyloma
by ultrawide-field swept-source OCT, and outer
and inner retinoschisis located in vascular arcades may
be caused mainly by vitreous adhesion in the blood vessels
of the retina and the tractional force of the retinal
arterioles [8, 21]. However, after reaching the loose outer
retina through the transmission of intraretinal tissues,
the inner traction may become weak, and the inner retina
may play a “shock-absorbing”-like role, while outward
traction is direct and persistent, which may be the
reason why outer retinoschisis at the blood vessel develops
more slowly than that in the fovea. In our series,
almost all cases of inner schisis were confined to the
paravascular area adjacent to the superior or inferior
temporal vascular arcades, which may result from tangential
traction of the retinal arterioles. The presence of
inner schisis did not significantly promote the progression
of outer schisis in different locations regardless of
the presence of ILM detachment, revealing that the retina
itself may play a secondary role in the occurrence
and development of outer schisis. In this study, MTM
with partial PVD during follow-up was more likely to
progress. Shinohara et al. [20] also proposed that the
posterior vitreous extensively adhered to the retinal surface,
exerting persistent inward traction in eyes of retinoschisis,
which may contribute to the development of
retinoschisis without posterior staphyloma. Additionally,
we found that the stage of schisis had no significant influence
on the risk of progression. Shimada et al. [15]
and Cheng et al. [16] suggested that the status of S4 eyes
was unstable and had a high risk for deterioration. Cai
et al. [17] also believed that as long as the schisis involved
the fovea, regardless of whether it extended to
the entire macula, the possibility of progression was
relatively high. Therefore, attention should be paid to
each stage of MTM, especially in eyes with vitreomacular
adhesion. Meanwhile, we observed that eyes in which
ILM detachment was disrupted or disappeared did not
progress. In foveoschisis, Müller cells and astrocytes proliferate
to produce tangential stress to separate the
intraretinal tissues [10]. Once ILM detachment is disrupted,
tangential stress is released, and the splitting
cavity may shrink or even completely disappear. In
addition, recent studied have shown that extrafoveal retinoschisis
is more common in highly myopic eyes with
dome-shaped macula (DSM) than foveal retinoschisis
[22, 23], and DSM may reduce the traction on the fovea,
acting as a macular buckle [18], whereas, in our study,
there was no significant difference in the progression
rate of MTM between the DSM group and the non-
DSM group, and the presence of DSM did not seem to
delay the progression of MTM, the possible reason may
be that the existence of DSM was not enough to completely
offset or resist the inward or tangential traction
force acting on the retina or the shape of the posterior
staphyloma changed during follow-up period in our
cases.
In this study, patients who were older than 65 years,
who had not a DSM, and who had EZ defects at the first
visit had poor final BCVA, and further multiple linear
regression analysis showed that first-visit visual acuity
and EZ defects are factors affecting visual prognosis.
The interruption or absence of reflection EZ in the outer
retina of retinoschisis may represent the abnormal
energy metabolism of the elongated mitochondria of the
photoreceptors, which means that visual function is impaired.
Damage to EZ is not uncommon in patients with
retinoschisis. Sayanagi et al. [24, 25] reported that the incidence
of EZ defects in foveoschisis is between 29 and
38 %. Studies on the influencing factors of vision recovery
after vitrectomy for foveoschisis have confirmed that
the recovery of the EZ has a significant correlation with
postoperative vision recovery [26, 27]. Cheng et al. [16]
reported that 6/14 (42.9 %) patients with retinoschisis
who had ≥ 2 lines of vision loss in their natural courses
had EZ disruption at the first visit. We speculate that
some elderly patients had a long course of schisis, and
the baseline EZ was not intact or even absent, the photoreceptors
were damaged severely over time, which subsequently
caused poor vision. Even in pseudophakic
eyes, the improvement in their visual function was not
satisfactory after cataract surgery. In addition, Zhu and
her colleagues [23] proposed that DSM brought better
visual acuity after cataract surgery in highly myopic eyes.
BCVA of DSM eyes at the final visit was not significantly
different from that at the first visit in our study, the
presence of DSM may reduce the risk of the deterioration
of visual acuity, nevertheless, EZ defect was still
the leading factor of visual impairment in our study.
Our study has some limitations. First, the occurrence
and development of cataracts in some elderly patients
who experienced a long follow-up time inevitably affected
visual acuity, and an electrophysiological examination
may be required as a good supplement to evaluate
visual function and prognosis. Second, the exertion of
centrifugal vertical and tangential forces may cause an
increase in the height and expansion of the extent of retinoschisis,
respectively. In future studies, if we can increase
the sample size, quantify the extent of the schisis,
supplement the criteria for the progression of MTM,
and further explore the equivalence of the impact of the
expansion of the extent and the increase in height of the
schisis on the progression of MTM, it may be of some
significance to investigate its pathogenesis.
Conclusions
In summary, MTM had a high progression rate during
the follow-up. MTM progression was related to the location
of retinoschisis. Vitreomacular traction may play an
important role in the natural course of MTM. Defects in
the EZ have a negative influence on visual prognosis,
which may provide some clues to the long-term evolution
and pathogenesis of MTM, it may be of some
significance to investigate its pathogenesis.