Introduction
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common disease with a
worldwide prevalence of 15-25% in children and 7%
in adults. Similar prevalence of AD has been reported
also in Korea [1]. According to a previous study, AD
patients have 2 to 12 times more ocular diseases such
as dry eye, keratoconjunctivitis, keratoconus, retinal
detachment (RD), glaucoma, and cataract than nonatopic patients [2].
.RD is a pathological condition in which the retina is
detached from the inner wall of the eyeball. Te annual
incidence of RD is about 12 in 100,000 persons, and if
this condition continues, permanent retinal atrophy
occurs, resulting in blindness and atrophy of the eyeball
[3]. It has been shown that RD occurs 3.22 times more
in AD patients than in the general population [2] with a
frequency of 8-10% in patients with AD between 10 and
30years of age, and lead to a poorer prognosis in AD
patients than in a non-AD population [4, 5].
If the retina is detached, the retina is not supplied with
nutrients and the function of photoreceptors gradually
decreases [6]. Terefore, vireo-retinal surgery is required
in most cases of RD. Te pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) is
one of the most efective surgical method for the treatment of RD with high anatomical success rate, the mean
postoperative reattachment rate being 93.3% [7]. Te risk
factors for low functional and anatomic outcomes after
primary RD surgery are as follows: more than 6days of
visual loss, macular involvement and the size of detachment area, and independency from surgical procedures
(buckling or vitrectomy) chosen to repair the detachment
[4]. It is known that usage of steroids may infuence the
infammatory and proliferative components of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), by reducing the breakdown
of the blood-retinal barrier [8–10].
Although causes of atopy-related RD have not been
elucidated yet, it has been suggested that RD might be
caused by atopic edema induced by allergies or blood
vessel abnormalities known to be associated with atopic
dermatitis [2], or diseased vitreous that can cause retinal break due to immune response [11]. Te most widely
accepted theory is that frequent rubbing of the eye in
AD patients might lead to traction and retinal tear of the
anterior vitreous, resulting in RD. One study has reported
that the incidence of RD is about 8 times higher in people with frequent eye rubbing [12]. Moreover, it has been
noted that RD associated with AD is more frequent in
bilateral involvement than RD associated with congenital
anomaly or infammation, or high myopia. Atopic RD is
also associated with a higher risk of surgical failure due
to PVR [13]. PVR is believed to be the leading cause of
failure of RD surgery with accounts for 75% of retinal redetachment surgeries [14].
.Although the risk of RD in AD patients is known to be
high, there have been few studies on clinical characteristics of atopic RD. Especially, the risk of developing RD
after cataract surgery in AD has not been reported yet.
Terefore, the objective of this study was to investigate
the frequency and clinical characteristics of RD in AD
patients in a single institution after a relatively long follow-up period.
Methods
Medical records of 2258 patients who underwent RD
surgery in Seoul St. Mary’s Hospital (Seoul, Republic
of Korea) between 2008 and 2018 were retrospectively
reviewed. A total of 61 (2.7%) patients had AD. Tey were
assigned to the experimental group. Of 2197 patients who
did not have AD, 100 patients were randomly selected for
the control group. Patients with RD due to trauma, exudate, or macular hole were excluded from this study. AD
was diagnosed by a dermatologist based on the ‘Diagnostic criteria for Korean atopic dermatitis’.
All patients analyzed in this study underwent a complete preoperative evaluation, which included a comprehensive history taking, best-corrected visual acuity
(BCVA) measurement, slit-lamp microbioscopy, fundus examination with a contact wide angle viewing lens
(Superquad 160, Volk) that could evaluate range, type,
and location of retinal break, optical coherence tomography to confrm macular involvement, and presence of
proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) (those classifed as
Grade 3 or above according to the classic classifcation of
the Retina Society) [13]. Optical coherence tomography
(OCT) was done using a swept-source OCT device (DRI
Triton, Topcon, Tokyo, Japan).
Break types had six categories; retinal dialysis, horseshoe tear, retinal tear (as tear except horseshoe tear), hole
with lattice, hole without lattice, and unknown (if the
type of break was unclear). Te location of the break had
fve categories; superotemporal, inferotemporal, superonasal, inferonasal, and unknown.
BCVA and refraction (RK-F1®, Canon, Tokyo, Japan)
were compared before surgery Refraction was excluded if
it occurred in a pseudophakic state. In eyes with a history
of cataract surgery, the mean period between the cataract
surgery and the diagnosis of RD was recorded.
Te range of the area with RD involvement was defned
as the number of quadrants containing RD.
In all patients, the surgeon decided the surgical procedure by considering fundus and lens status, age, location of tear, and PVR. Te surgery was performed using
the procedure of silicone sponge (506-silicone; Labtician,
Oakville, ON, Canada) buckling, 23 or 25 gauge pars
plana vitrectomy (Accurus surgical system; Alcon Laboratories, TX, USA), or both. Additional sub-retinal drainage, air-gas exchange, silicone oil implantation, and laser
photocoagulation were performed if necessary.
To evaluate anatomical and functional outcomes, postoperative BCVA and recurrence rate of RD were investigated at 6 months and the last visit after surgery.
In subjects with RD for both eyes, each eye was
recorded separately. For two cases of the atopy group, the
opposite eye was a localized RD and cured only with the
use of a barrier laser. Tose two subjects were excluded
from analysis. Among evaluated bilateral patients, if the
operation of the other eye was performed in another
hospital, the other eye was excluded from this study; one
case in each group.
Statistical analysis
Logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (log
MAR) was used for VA analysis. VA values for counting fngers, hand movements, and light perception were then assigned ratios of 0.01, 0.001, 0.0005, respectively. A
Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare demographics, surgical prognosis and refractive status between the
two groups. Chi-square test was used to compare initial
surgery method and demographics. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS statistical software for
Windows, version 25.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical signifcance level was set at P <0.05.
Results
In this study, there were a total of 2258 patients who
had RD surgery in our clinic between 2008 and 2018.
Of these, 61 patients had AD and it accounts for 2.7% of
total RRD patients.
Demographic characteristics of study participants are
summarized in Table 1.
Of these 61 patients with AD, 13 had bilateral RD. Two
of them had localized RD that was treated with barrier
laser only. For that reason, they were not included in this
study. Additionally, one patient received RRD surgery
for the opposite eye from another hospital. Tat eye was
excluded from the experimental group. Tus, a total of 71
eyes were included in the atopy group.
Of the 100 control patients, only one patient had bilateral RD. Te other eye of this patient received RD surgery
from another hospital. Tat eye was not included in this
study. Terefore, a total of 100 eyes were included in the
control group.
Te rate of bilateral RD was 21% in the atopic group,
which was signifcantly higher than that (1%) in the control group (P value=0.000).
Tere were 39 (64%) males and 22 (36%) females in the
atopy group, and 63 (63%) males and 37 (37%) females in
the non-atopy group (P value=0.811).
Te mean age was 23.08  ±  10.24years in the atopy
group, which was signifcantly (P value=0.000) younger
than that (52.29  ±  15.48years) in the control group
(Table 1, Fig. 1).
In the atopy group, 37 had RD in the right eye and 34
had RD in the left eye. In the non-atopy group, 50 had
RD in the right eye or the left eye, showing similar rates
in both groups. Tere was also no statistically signifcant
diference in the lens status (phakic or pseudophakic)
between the two groups either.
Te mean spherical equivalent before surgery was
−3.09 ±  0.392 in the atopic group and −  3.56 ±  0.372
in the control group, showing no signifcant diference
between the two groups (P value=0.953, Table 2).
Initial operative method was also analyzed. Results are
shown in (Table 3). PPV alone was performed for 21% (15
eyes) of the atopy group and 59% (59 eyes) of the control
group. Buckling alone was performed for 17% (12 eyes) of
the atopy group and 31% (31 eyes) of the control group.
Encircling alone was performed for 24% (17 eyes) of the
atopy group and 7% (7 eyes) of the control group. Encircling and ppV were performed at the same time as an initial surgery for in 38% (27 eyes) of the atopy group and
3% of the control group, showing signifcant diference
between the two groups.
As the initial surgery, “encircling” was performed for
62% of the atopy group and 10% of the control group,
showing diference between the two. In the control
group, the most used operation method was ppV alone.
In this study, ffteen (21%) eyes of atopic patients
received cataract surgery and RD surgery at the same
time. Phacoemulsifcation in 11 eyes and pars plana lensectomy (ppL) in 4 eyes were performed. In the control
group, 27 eyes had cataract surgery together; with phacoemulsifcation (17 eyes) or and ppL (10 eyes).
Preoperative log MAR VA was 1.14 for the atopy group
and 0.96 for the control group, showing no signifcant difference between the two groups. Postoperative log MAR
VA was 0.80 for the atopic group, which was signifcantly
(P value=0.05) poorer than that (0.34) for control group.
Preoperative macular-of ratio showed no statistically
signifcant diference between the two groups. PVR rate
was 35% for the atopy group, which was signifcantly
(P value=0.000) higher than that (12%) for the control
group. Reoperation rate was 35% for the atopy group,
which was also signifcantly (P value=0.001) higher than
that (10%) for the control group. Terefore, PVR and
reoperation rate were shown to be signifcantly higher in
the atopy group (Table 4).
Data of RD involving quadrant are present in Table 5.
RD was limited to one quadrant in 6 (8.5%) eyes in the
atopy group and 9 (9%) eyes in the control group. RD
involved two quadrants in 56.3% of the atopy group and
66% of the control group. It involved three quadrants in
25.4% of the atopy group and 18% of the control group.
RD involved all four quadrants in 9.9% of the atopy
group and 7% of the control group. Tese diferences
between the two groups were not statistically signifcant (P value=0.213).
Te location of the retinal breaks was also analyzed.
Results are shown in (Table  6). In the atopy group,
retinal breaks were found in the superotemporal and
inferotemporal areas as 34 and 30%, respectively. In the
control group, breaks were mainly in the superotemporal area (50%). Te type of retinal breaks was also analyzed (Table  7). Horseshoe tear and retinal tear were
observed in 30 and 28% of the atopic group and 35 and
27% of the control group, respectively. Retinal dialysis
was more frequent in the atopy group (16% in the atopy
group vs. 2% in the control group, P value=0.000),
whereas lattice hole was more observed in the control
group (8% in atopy group vs. 21% in control group, P
value=0.000).
In this study, twenty-eight (39%) out of 71 eyes in the
atopy group, and 26 (26%) out of 100 eyes in the control group had undergone a cataract surgery before the
onset of detachment. RD occurred at 1.93 ± 0.48 years
after the cataract surgery in the atopy group and at
4.86 ± 0.90 years after the cataract surgery in the control group, showing a significant difference between
the two. (P value 0.002, Table 8). Notably, RD occurred
within 6 months after cataract surgery in 9 (32%) of
28 eyes in the atopy group and 4 (15%) of 26 eyes in
the control group (P value = 0.154). RD within 1 year
after cataract surgery was significantly more common in atopy group; 17 (60%) of 28 eyes in the atopy
group and 7 (26%) of 26 eyes in the control group (P
value = 0.013).
Discussion
Characteristics of RD associated with atopic dermatitis
were analyzed in this study. Although some studies have
already reported the characteristics of atopic RD, this is
the frst report that compares characteristics of atopic
RD with those of non-atopic RD. Moreover, we compared
the incidence of RD associated with cataract surgery, tear
type or location in an atopy group and non-atopy group.
In Korea, the prevalence of atopic dermatitis is 2.2% in the
total population, 6.9% in those under 18years of age, 0.9% of
those over 18years of age [15]. In this study, 2.7% of all RD
patients had atopy. And in both groups the number of male
patients was 1.7 times more than that of female patients.
Although the prevalence of atopy itself is not signifcant
diferent by gender in previous studies, male patients were
more common than female patients of RD in this study. Tis
result was similar to one study from Japan, showing that the
incidence of atopy was not diferent by gender but the rate
of RD was nearly doubled in males [2]. In the control group,
male patients were more than females, consistent with a
previous study showing that men were at a higher risk for
RD than women regardless the presence of AD [2].
In the control group, the incidence rate of RD by age
was the highest in those aged 50-60years and the second highest in the age group of 20s. Likewise, a previous
study has reported bimodal distribution of RD [16]. However, in the atopy group, most patients were teenagers or
in their 20s. Te mean age of onset was 52 years in the
control group and 23 years in the atopy group, showing
signifcant diference between the two (P value=0.000).
Bilateral RD accounts for 5-10% of total RD in a previous study [2]. In th present study, 21% of subjects in the
atopy group and 1% in the control group showed bilateral involvement of RD. Te rate of bilaterality was signifcantly higher in the atopy group than in the control
group.
Tere was no signifcant diference in the mean preoperative refractive index between the two groups. However, the proportion of high myopia patients with −8
diopters or more was 7% in the atopic group, which was
signifcantly lower than that (19%) in the control group.
(P value=0.005).
Tere was no signifcant diference in RD involving
quadrant or preoperative VA between the two groups.
However, postoperative VA was signifcantly poorer in
the atopy group (log MAR VA 0.80) than in the control
group (log MAR VA 0.34), (P value=0.005). Although
VA before surgery was similar, the prognosis after surgery was signifcantly worse in the atopy group. Tis
might thought to be due to infammation caused by atopy
itself, delayed wound healing, or increased PVR.
In the control group, the superotemporal area was
the most common location of the retinal tear, followed
by inferotemporal area and superonasal area similar
rates for these two areas. In the atopy group, the ratio of
unknown was 14%, higher than that (2%) in the control
group. Most tears noted in the atopy group were found
in the temporal area. Tears showed similar rates in superotemporal and inferotemporal areas. Tese results suggests that RD might occur due to frequent rubbing of the
lateral side of eyes in the atopy group. However, the temporal area was also common in the control group, further
studywith more subjects might be needed to confrm this
fnding.
Te incidence of RD showed no signifcant diference
between right and left eyes. Tis result suggests that
right-handedness and left-handedness might play no role
in the incidence of RD.
Interestingly, the type of tear was characteristically different between the two groups. Retinal dialysis was found
in 16% of the atopy group, which was signifcantly higher
than that (2%) of the control group. A previous study
has shown that slapping of the eye can acts as a trauma,
resulting in retinal dialysis [17].
.Retinal dialysis refers to disinsertion of the retina
from the vitreous base. It is an uncommon cause of
RD, accounting for 8 to 17% of all RD cases. A previous
study has suggested that retinal dialysis might be associated with trauma in many cases [18, 19]. Trauma caused
by eyelid rubbing could be associated with atopic RD.
Horseshoe tear and retinal tear had a similar incidence
rates in both groups. However, lattice hole was more frequently found in the control group.
PVR is a disease process that involves proliferation of
ectopic cell sheets in the vitreous and/or periretinal area,
causing periretinal membrane formation and traction, in
patients with RRD [2]. Previous studies have shown that
PVR occurs in 5–10% of all RRD cases. PVR is implicated
in re-detachment after surgery in 75% of cases, remaining a major barrier to successful repair of RD [17]. In our
study, the PVR rate was 35% in the atopy group and 12%
in the control group, showing a statistically signifcant
diference between the two (P value=0.000). As mentioned above, RD with atopy is generally thought to be
associated with eye rubbing, which often leads to poor
peripheral retinal and to more occurrences of PVR.
Previous studies have shown that about 13% of patients
needed reoperation after a single surgery of RD [20]. As
mentioned above, it is known that the anatomical success
rate of PPV reaches 93.3% [21]. In this study, the reoperation rate was 30% in the atopy group, which was three
times higher than that of the control group (10%), showing a statistically signifcant diference (P value=0.001)
between the two.
Despite macular-of rate and preoperative VA were
similar between two groups, vitrectomy and encircling
together as an initial operative method was performed
more in the atopy group than in the control group (38%
vs. 3%) Te surgical method of vitrectomy and encircling
together is usually performed for patients with severe
PVR or retinal reattachment due to retinal dialysis.
Despite these aggressive treatments, both recurrence rate
and postoperative visual prognosis were poorer in the
atopy group than those in the control group, consistent
with a previous study [20].
.At the time of RD occurence, pseudophakic cases
accounted for 40% in the atopic group and 26% in the
control group. Te mean time between the cataract
surgery and onset of RD was 1.93 ±  0.48years in atopy
group and 4.86  ± −0.90years in control group, showing statistically signifcant diference between the two
groups. Especially, RD within 1 year after cataract surgery occurred in 60% of the atopic group and 26% of the
control group. Tis suggests that the risk of RD might be
increased after cataract surgery in atopy patients, especially at up to 1 year post surgery
In phakic eyes, the movement of the vitreous body
might be limited due to the lens. Tus, the progression
of RD could be suppressed to a certain extent. However,
after a cataract surgery, these mechanisms might be broken and be more susceptible to RD development due to
trauma of eyelid rubbing. In addition, atopic patients
could be more vulnerable to RD due to their specifc
immune reactions and the resulting degeneration of the
vitreous body.
Tis study has some limitations such as its retrospective
design, the small sample size and the relatively short follow up. Terefore, further randomized clinical trials with a
longer follow-up and a larger sample are highly demanded
to clarify the diferences in the demographics, clinical fndings, and management of atopy-related RD and its complications. In addition, steroids were used as intravitreal
triamcinolone only with the PPV surgery in both group.
Te efect of steroids was not considered in comparison
with other surgical methods, so further studies may be
needed.
In conclusion, atopic patients had RD at a younger age
with poorer prognosis due to high incidence of PVR or
recurrence. Terefore, extensive treatment and management are needed for these patients. Moreover, atopic
patients had a much higher risk of RD after cataract surgery than controls. Tus, careful examination should be
performed regularly for atopic patients after a cataract
surgery to achieve the best patient outcomes.
