Background
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a malignancy that arises
in the nephron tubules and has very heterogeneous
histologic and clinical manifestations, accounting for approximately
90% of all cases of kidney cancer and 2.4%
of all adult tumors [1]. The incidence of RCC continues
to increase [2]. As of 216, there are more than 15 RCC
subtypes classified by the World Health Organization [2],
based on histologic and molecular criteria. Clear cell RCC
(ccRCC) is the most common subtype, accounting for
75% of RCC cases, followed by papillary RCC (pRCC) and
chromophobe RCC (chrRCC) [3]. The MiT family of
translocation carcinomas (tRCC) and succinate dehydrogenase
deficiency RCC (SDHD RCC) are rare subtypes,
which are diagnosed based on molecular alterations.
Recent advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology have revealed numerous genetic alterations
that are important in RCC pathogenesis and prognosis
[4–6]. For instance, the driver mutation of each subtype,
such as von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), PBRM1, and BRCA-1
associated tumor protein 1 (BAP1) in ccRCC; MET and
fumarate hydratase (FH) in pRCC; and phosphatase and
tensin homolog (PTEN) or TP53 in chrRCC; as well as
the mutations related to prognosis, such as BAP1,
PBRM1, or SET domain-containing 2 (SETD2) in ccRCC
and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) in
pRCC have been identified in numerous NGS studies
[7]. In the era of precision medicine, determining the
molecular alteration in each RCC by NGS analysis is essential
for diagnosis and treatment planning. However,
Asian data have been limited in previously conducted
large-scale NGS studies [8] and the histologic subtype
and clinical behavior of RCC can differ among races [9].
Thus, Korean NGS data are essential for precision
medicine.
We developed a pan-cancer panel to screen for important
genetic alterations in various solid tumors, including
major urological cancers, such as prostate,
kidney, and bladder cancers. We assessed the feasibility
of the pan-cancer panel assay for high-risk RCC in the
Korean population. We also analyzed the clinical and
genetic factors contributing to metastasis in ccRCC to
determine the clinical utility of the pan-cancer panel
assay for high-risk ccRCC.
Methods
Patient selection
All patients were selected from the Seoul National University
Prospectively Enrolled Registry for Renal Cell
Carcinoma – Nephrectomy (SUPER-RCC-Nx). This is a
prospective, multidisciplinary, and biobank lined cohort
that was established in March 2016 [10]. This prospective
cohort collects patients’ preoperative information,
pathologic reports, surgical procedure details, and information
on postoperative complications functional outcomes,
and oncological outcomes. We selected 31
advanced RCC patients who were pathologically T3–4
or N1 or M1. The patients had undergone radical nephrectomy
surgery from March 2016 to June 2016. The
tumor and normal tissues that were collected in the operating
room or frozen biopsy room were immediately
stored in a − 195 °C liquid nitrogen tank at the SNUH
Cancer Tissue Bank.
Cancer panel
The FIRST-panel version 3 and 3.1 SNUH cancer panel
was used for this analysis. The panel was developed by
SNUH. It includes all exons of 183 genes, specific introns
of 23 fusion genes, the telomerase reverse transcriptase
promoter region, 8 microsatellite instability
(MSI) markers, and 45 drug target lesions. The total
length captured was approximately 1.949 Mbp. The
FIRST-panel was designed to screen for the important
genetic alterations in major urological malignancies, including
prostate, bladder, and kidney cancers [11]. We
selected RCC-related mutations by reviewing landmark
studies, and finally selected 25 renal cell carcinomarelated
genes, including VHL, PBRM1, SETD2, and
MET mutations, in the FIRST-panel version 3.x.
DNA extraction from fresh frozen tissue
Fresh frozen tumor tissues were homogenized and lysed
with proteinase K. Total DNA was isolated from each
target using the Maxwell® 16 CSC DNA Blood kit (Promega
Corp., Madison, WI, USA). Extracted DNA was
quantitated using a Quantus fluorometer (Promega
Corp.) and TapeStation4200 (Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA, USA).
Capture library preparation and sequencing
The quality of functional genomic DNA was assessed
using the 2200 TapeStation System (Agilent Technologies)
before preparation of the library. The input DNA
(200 ng ~ 1 μg) was sheared using an S220 Focusedultrasonicator
(Covaris, Inc., Woburn, MA, USA).
Paired-end libraries were prepared with the SureSelectXT
Target Enrichment System Kit (Agilent Technologies)
for the Illumina paired-end sequencing library
protocol using SNUH FIRST Cancer Panel v3.0 and
v.3.1, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
quality of the DNA library was evaluated using a Bioanalyzer
2100 and DNA 1000 chips (Agilent Technologies).
The final libraries were sequenced on the Illumina Hiseq
2500 platform (2× 100 bp and 1000× coverage).
Next-generation sequencing
Targeted NGS was performed using the Illumina Hiseq
2500 platform. Sequencing data were transformed as
FASTQ files and quality control (QC) by FASTQC and
Trimmomatic (0.33). Binary alignment/map (BAM) formation
was performed after alignment based on the reference
genome (GRCh 37) by BWA (0.7.12) and Picard
(1.134). QC of BAM files was performed using SAMtools
(v1.2) and GATK (v3.3). Single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) discovery was performed using MuTect (1.1.7) and
SAMtools (v1.2). Indel and copy number variation (CNV)
discovery were performed by IndelGeontyper (0.36.3336)
and CoNIFER (0.2.2), respectively. The fusion search was
conducted using Delly (0.7.2). All data were converted to
VCF format and annotated using ANNOVAR.
Variant prevalence comparison of SNUH pan-cancer data
and TCGA prostate cancer data
Three RCC databases were downloaded from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; TCGA-KIRC, TCGA-KIRP, TCGA-KICH) variant MAF files, belonging to
the NCI GDC data portal. We extracted the variants
of interest from the MAF files: VHL, PBRM1, BAP1,
SETD2, KMT2D, MET, TP53, FH, BRCA2, TSC1,
TSC2, KMT2D, NOTCH3, NOTCH4, DNA polymerase
theta (POLQ), Franconi anemia complementation
group A (FANCA), and ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-
related (ATR). Four MAF files were provided for their
corresponding variant callers: MuSE, Mutect2, VarScan2,
and SomaticSniper. We selected variants that
were present in at least two of these files. According
to the “Variant_Classification” column of the MAF
files, the data were categorized as missense mutation,
truncating mutation (frameshift indels, splice site variants,
and nonsense mutations), and in-frame indels.
After matching pathologic TNM staging (T3 over or
N1 or M1) of TCGA data with SNUH data, the prevalence
of the mutations was compared with our SNUH
pan-cancer data.
Integrative statistical analyses of clinical and genomic
data
The clinical and demographic variables of three of the
major subtypes of RCC were compared. As the tRCC
and SDHD RCC groups contained one patient each, only
described characteristics were compared, without statistical
analysis. The continuous variables are summarized
as the median value, and categorical variables are reported
as actual numbers and percentages. A one-way
ANOVA test was performed for three of the major
groups (ccRCC, pRCC, and chrRCC).
We performed univariate and multivariate analyses of
clinical and genomic data from 20 ccRCC patients. The
factors associated with the presence of metastasis (both
synchronous and metachronous) were compared using
Student’s t-test, Pearson Chi-square test, or Fischer’s
exact test. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression
analyses were then performed for the presence of metastasis.
All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS
Statistics 22 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). A p-value < 0.05
was considered significant.
Results
Patient characteristics
The demographic and clinical characteristics of the enrolled
patients are presented in Table 1. The 31 patients
were categorized into the following subclasses of RCC:
ccRCC (n = 21), pRCC (n = 5), chrRCC (n = 3), tRCC
(n = 1), and SDHD RCC (n = 1). Our data only contained
type 2 subtypes of pRCC. The mean follow-up period
was 19.0 months. Twelve patients presented with metastatic
lesions within the follow-up period, including 6
synchronous and 6 metachronous metastases. There
were no deaths in the follow-up period.
Sequencing QC
DNA was successfully extracted from the 30 fresh frozen
tissue samples (96.8%) for library preparation. DNA
could not be extracted from a sample with 90% necrotic
lesion (ccRCC) in the library preparation step. The total
read number ranged from 22,704,326 to 35,508,848, and
the average size of FASTQ data was 2084.7 ± 265.3 Mb
in the cancer panel analysis of the 30 patients. The average
sequencing depth was 430.8 ± 206.6, ranging from
152 to 971. Average values of coverage above 50 and
100 were 98.6 ± 3.5% and 96.4 ± 5.8%, respectively.
Pan-cancer panel report
A total of 97 mutations were detected in the pan-cancer
panel analysis. VHL was the most commonly mutated
gene (46.67%). This observation was evident only in
ccRCC. Genetic alterations in PBRM1 (30%), NOTCH4,
POLQ, and BAP1 (23.3% each) were also frequently detected.
An average of 7 SNPs was detected per patient.
However, no fusion or CNVs were noted (Fig. 1). Integrative
analysis of the pan-cancer panel data are presented
in Fig. 2. We detected SDHB mutation in the
specimen obtained from the SDHD RCC patient. The
TFE3 mutation was detected in the specimen of a tRCC
patient. None of the mutations detected was exclusive to
a particular subtype of RCC. No mutation common to
all mutational profiles was detected.
Comparison with TCGA database
We compared the SNUH database with 110 TNM stage
matched advanced RCC data from TCGA (TCGA-advance
KIRC). The 17 mutations of interest (VHL,
PBRM1, BAP1, SETD2, KMT2D, MET, TP53, FH,
BRCA2, TSC1, TSC2, KMT2D, NOTCH3, NOTCH4,
POLQ, FANCA, and ATR) were compared between the
two groups. VHL (70.0% vs. 59.0%) and PBRM1 (35.0%
vs. 52.0%) were prevalent in both groups. KMT2D,
TSC1, TSC2, NOTCH3, NOTCH4, BRCA2, FANCA, and
ATR were more frequently mutated in the FIRST-panel
analysis of RCC, compared to the TCGA-advance KIRC
database. However, mutations in PBRM1, SETD2, and
BAP1 were more common in the TCGA-advance KIRC
database. No mutations were detected in POLQ, BAP1,
MET, TP53, and FH genes in the FIRST-panel analysis
for ccRCC (Fig. 3).
The FIRST-panel results revealed that PBRM1, POLQ,
TSC1, and SETD2 genes were commonly mutated in papillary
RCC. The MET mutation was frequently detected in
the TCGA-KIRP database. However, no mutation or
CNVs were observed in the FIRST-panel analysis of RCC
patients. The type 1 and 2 pRCC displayed different
molecular signatures, and MET mutations were more frequently
found in the type 1 subtype. All five patients were
the type 2 subtype, featuring commonly altered CDKN2A,
SETD2, BAP1, and PBRM1 mutations, consistent with our
data. In the chromophobe subtype, the TP53 mutation
was common in TCGA-KICH database. However, FIRSTpanel
analysis did not reveal any mutations in the TP53
gene in this subtype. A detailed comparison of the FIRSTpanel
and TCGA database was performed for papillary
RCC and chromophobe RCC (Supplementary Table 1).
Owing to the limited number of mutations included in the
FIRST-panel, we could not examine some of the important
mutations of RCC (TTN, MUC4, and MUC16), which
are relatively common in the TCGA database.
Univariate and multivariate analyses of metastatic events
Clinical and pathologic information concerning the presence
of a metastatic event was compared (Table 2). Mass
size (p = 0.008) was significantly different between metastatic
and localized RCC. In the mutation profile data,
only PBRM1 showed a possible relationship with metastasis.
(p = 0.062). Univariate and multivariate logistic regression
analyses data for metastasis are presented in Table 3.
Among the clinicopathologic information and mutation
data, only tumor size (p = 0.042) and PBRM1 (p = 0.046)
mutations were statistically correlated with metastasis.
Discussion
In this study, we successfully identified 97 genomic alterations
in various subtypes of RCC. DNA was extracted
from 30 of the 31 patients’ samples. All 30 DNA samples
were successfully analyzed using the pan-cancer panel.
DNA could not be extracted from the fresh frozen tissue
of one patient, which consisted mostly of necrotized tissue.
Using univariate and multivariate analyses, we
assessed the risk factors contributing to metastasis in
ccRCC patients.
Most of the mutational signatures of ccRCC detected
by this pan-cancer panel analysis were similar to those
in the TCGA database and previous genetic studies. For
example, in this study, VHL mutation was the most
common mutation (70.0%) in ccRCC samples, followed
by the PBRM1 mutation (35.0%). Genetic or epigenetic
alterations in chromatin remodeling genes, which include
VHL, BAP1, PBRM1, and SETD2, are the most
prevalent events in the development of ccRCC [12, 13].
Similar to our findings, alterations in the VHL gene are
reported to be the most frequent (60–70%), while those
in PBRM1, BAP1, and SETD2 were reported as 40, 10,
and 10%, respectively, in previous genetic studies [4, 13,
14]. We also found TP53 and PTEN mutations in
chrRCC patients. These are important driver mutations
of chrRCC [6, 15]. However because all the patients were
papillary type 2, we did not detect MET mutations in
pRCC patients in the pan-cancer analysis, which are
more important driver mutation of type 1 pRCC than
type 2 pRCC [15, 16].
Important driver mutations of uncommon RCC subtypes
(tRCC and SDHD RCC) were also detected by the
pan-cancer panel analysis. MiT family translocation carcinomas
(tRCC) are characterized by translocations involving
breakpoint lesions at Xp11.2 and are frequently
fused with the TFE3 gene [17, 18]. SDHD RCC is a
newly classified subtype that was first announced in the
2016 WHO classification [2]. This subtype is characterized
by genetic alterations in the Krebs cycle enzymes
(SDHB/C/D) that result in the Warburg effect in ccRCC
with the accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor [19].
SDHD RCC can be diagnosed by distinguishing histologic
features, such as vacuolated eosinophil or clear
cells. However, detecting SDHB alteration by immunohistochemistry
is more effective [2]. We successfully detected
SDHB and TFE3 mutations in tissues specimens
from SDHD RCC and tRCC patients using the pancancer
panel analysis.
Although the mutational profile revealed by our pancancer
panel analysis was mostly similar to the TCGA
database, some discrepancies were evident. In this study,
NOTCH family genes (NOTCH3/4), TSC1, TSC2, and
KMT2D showed a relatively higher incidence of mutations
than TNM matched data from TCGA-KIRC [4].
BRCA and FANCA is well known mutation of DNA repair
pathway and is more common in FIRST panel analysis
than TCGA-advanced KIRC. Owing to the small
number of Asian patients included in the TGCA database
[4–6], these differences may provide clues regarding
the prevailing racial differences. However, owing to
small number of study population, we cannot made concrete
conclusion. More large-scale data are needed before
any definitive conclusions can be made.
We conducted univariate and multivariate analyses
using genetic alterations and clinicopathologic features
in ccRCC. The multivariable analysis showed that the
PBRM1 mutation and primary tumor size were significantly
associated with metastasis in ccRCC. Primary
tumor size is a well-established prognostic factor of metastasis
[20, 21]. Eric et al. [21] retrospectively analyzed
data from 2651 RCC patients, including 182 cases of
synchronous metastasis, and found that the primary
tumor size was significantly associated with metastasis.
In general, PBRM1 mutations mutually exclusive from
BAP1 mutations, [3] and both genes harbor a higher
number of alterations in cases with metastatic lesions.
Eckel-Passow et al. [22] analyzed paired tissue of primary
and metastatic ccRCC and found that both BAP1
and PBRM1 were highly altered in metastatic lesions (98
and 90%, respectively), compared to the primary lesions
(20 and 57%, respectively). The PBRM1 mutation alone
is considered more favorable than the BAP1 mutation,
but alterations in both lesions correlate with worst survival
[23]. We could not analyze the expression pattern
of BAP1 with PBRM1 or study their prognostic impact
on survival, as no BAP1 mutations were detected. This
observation might be attributed to the small sample size
of our study.
With the advancement of NGS technology, there have
been several attempts to use genetic analysis in clinical
practice. Memorial Sloan Kettering-integrated mutation
profiling of actionable cancer targets (MSK-IMPACT)
[24] is a well-known pan-cancer NGS panel that targets
more than 341 cancer associated genes. The MSK-IMPA
CT panel was successfully applied for a multi-institutional,
diverse primary tumor prospective cohort including more
than 12,670 tumor samples in 2017 [25]. These were promising
results. However, the clinical application of NGS
cancer panels in routine practice is not a reality yet,
due to several issues of low matching yield in clinical
trials [26, 27], high cost [28], and racial differences
[26, 28]. The present study represents only a first step
towards oncology precision medicine for clinical practice
in advanced RCC. More data from global studies
are required for further progress.
This study has several limitations. RCC is a highly
heterogeneous disease, and the statistical power of
our study (owing to the small sample size) may not
be enough to concretely support our findings. In
addition, because we used targeted sequencing to detect
alterations in RCC, we did not determine the
whole mutational profile of the RCC patients who
were screened. Despite these limitations, we successfully
conducted a pan-cancer panel analysis with good
sequencing depth (> 400). The data shed light on the
feasibility of using the pan-cancer panel for the diagnosis
of RCC, and the possibility of deriving meaningful
prognostic information from the mutational
profiles.
Conclusion
The pan-cancer panel comprised of RCC-related genes
is a feasible and promising tool to evaluate genetic alterations
in advanced RCC. However, the limited information
on genetic analysis necessitates large-scale studies
and a focus on the clinical utility of cancer panels to further
explore the routine use of the panel.