Background
Implant treatment is becoming an increasingly popular
choice for patients. A study showed that the
implant survival rate of implant supported fixed prostheses
(single crowns) was satisfactory [1]. However,
complications arising from implant treatment are a
bothersome issue for both doctors and patients [1, 2].
Additionally, it has been reported that screw failure is a
large concern for clinicians and patients [3]. As shown
by a systematic review, 12.7% of implant supported
fixed prostheses are affected by loosening after an
average of 5 years [4]. Screw loosening can be caused
by inadequate tightening torque, fatigue, the settling
effect, micromotion, and excessive bending [5]. Thus,
an appropriate preload is crucial for the joint stability.
Although screw loosening does not necessarily lead to
prosthesis failure, it can allow plaque deposits to form
that result from microgaps and micromotion [6, 7], and
these deposits can lead to further biological complications,
such as peri-implantitis or peri-implant mucositis.
Accordingly, pure (screwless) implant systems, such
as conical connection systems that are fixed by only
friction, have been developed.
The implant-abutment interface of the conical connection
system is mostly Morse taper connected
with cold-welding [8, 9], thus eliminating the prosthetic
complications associated with screws [10]. The
implant-abutment connections were usually less than
1.5° Morse tapers with an internal cone [8]. The abutment
is fixed only by means of friction. Moreover,
cold-welding provides a well-closed abutment-implant
interface, which is conducive to plaque control and may
reduce the incidence of biological complications [11].
Compared to screw-based systems, locking-taper connections
are more stable and can better resist lateral
and axial forces [8, 12].
Many studies and systematic reviews [13, 14] have
assessed the complication rates of implant-supported
fixed prostheses. However, most of these earlier studies
focused on butt-joint screw- type implant-abutment
connection systems, while relatively few have examined
conical connection systems [15, 16]. The present
study was a long-term retrospective study that aimed
to assess the correlations between the cumulative prosthetic
complication-free rate of fixed prostheses supported
by locking-taper implants and various relevant
factors, such as patient age, patient sex, prosthesis position,
jaw position, restoration type (single crown (SC)
or fixed partial prosthesis crown (FDP)), and the prosthetic
materials that were used. The marginal bone loss
(MBL) and implant survival rate were also investigated.
Methods
Study design and sample
The current work was a long-term retrospective clinical
study with an average follow-up of 5 years. All patients
who were referred to the Beijing Stomatological Hospital
during 2000–2010 and received at least one Bicon (type
of implant type, Bicon, Boston, MA, US) implant were
enrolled in the study. This article has been reported using
a statement from STROBE (Strengthening the Reporting
of Observational studies in Epidemiology) as closely
as possible. This study was performed in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics
Committee (Scientific Research/Technical Branch)
of Beijing Stomatological Hospital affiliated with Capital
Medical University (Approval Number: CMUSH-IRB-KJPJ-
2019-12). Informed consent was obtained from all the
participants enrolled in the present study.
The exclusion criteria were as follows:
1. Patients for whom the implant failed in regard to
osseointegration before the prosthetic procedures;
2. Patients with implants supported over dentures;
3. Patients whose medical records cannot provide sufficient
information (specific restoration materials);
4. Patients with CAD-CAM zirconia or non-precious
metal porcelain crowns;
5. Patients for whom a guided bone regeneration (GBR)
procedure was used.
6. Patients for whom a sinus floor elevation procedure
was used.
The relevant factors that were considered were
age > 60 years or 18 years ˂age < 60 years, sex, implant
position (anterior, premolar, or molar region), implant
location (maxilla or mandible), prosthesis type ( single
crowns(SCs) or fixed dental prosthesis (FDP), and restoration
material (integrated abutment crowns(IACs) or
gold alloy porcelain crowns(GPCs)). Information was collected
from the patients’ medical records and disaggregated
based on the relevant factors to identify those that
had an impact on the incidence rate of prosthetic complications.
Specific definitions of the complications are
presented in Table 1. Both IACs and GPCs are most commonly
used at our hospital, while non-precious metal
porcelain and zirconia crowns are seldomly used. Therefore,
the latter two types of crowns were not included
in the study. Since the present study mainly focused on
the prosthetic complications, implants that failed before
prosthetic procedures started were excluded. Implants
that demonsteated failed osseointegration, i.e., within
6 months of the implant operation, were excluded. To
make the marginal bone loss (MBL) values more comparable,
patients for whom a sinus floor elevation procedure
and a guided bone regeneration (GBR) procedure were
used were excluded.
Surgical and restorative procedures
All implants were Bicon (type of implant type, Bicon,
Boston, MA, US) American implants. The implant-abutment
connections were 1.5° locking tapers with an internal
cone. Preparation of the implant sites was performed
according to the standard procedures for the Bicon system.
Bone healing took over 6 months, and the prosthetic
procedure was initiated thereafter. All the impressions
were taken using polyether silicone rubber (type of rubber
type, 3 M, St. Paul, MN, US). IACs or GPCs were
used, and the prosthesis type was an SC (single crown)
or an FDP (fixed dental prosthesis). Integrated abutment
crowns (IACs) are a typical and fully retrievable type of
restoration that is supported by locking-taper implants.
IACs are metal-resin crowns made from a titanium
base and a composite resin veneer of Ceramage (type
of veneer resin, SHOFU, JP). Ceramage(Type of veneer
resin, SHOFU, JP) is a fiber-reinforced composite resin
with filler particles that has a higher strength than conventional
resin [17]. The GPCs were cemented with glass
ionomer cement. Once the crown was in place, its occlusion
was thoroughly checked and adjusted, and then the
crown was glazed (GPCs) or finely polished (IACs).
Clinical and radiographic examination
This study focused on prosthetic complications, including
veneer chipping/fracture, abutment loosening/
fracture, and restoration decementation. These complications
were recorded as endpoint events. Biological
complications were not examined in the present study.
Implant failures were counted in this study. Implant
failures in this study were defined as the failures occurring
after prosthetic loading, and other failures occuring
before prosthetic loading were not included. Implant failures
in this study included peri-implantitis, progressive
bone loss and implant body fracture.
Intraoral periapical radiographs were taken for each
implant at 1-, 5- and 10- year follow-up examinations
time respectively for comparative analysis and measurements
(Digimizer, ver.4.3.4, MedCalc Software, Ostend,
Belgium). The distance from the most coronal bone to the
margin of the implant neck was measured. To eliminate
the impact of the distortion of images, the distance was
calculated as the ratio of the implant length measured on
the radiograph to the actual implant length. Mesial and
distal distances were measured for each implant, and
the average of the two was considered as the final MBL.
The process was repeated by the same observer for three
times, and the final result was the average of the three
measurements.
Data management and statistics
A database was prepared using Microsoft Excel. The populations
of the different variable groups were assessed,
and the data were then transferred to GraphPad Prism
(version 7.0) for statistical analysis. Kaplan–Meier estimators
were used to obtain survival curves (restoration
based), from which the cumulative complication-free
rates were calculated (95% CI). Log-rank and Gehan-
Breslow-Wilcoxon tests were used to assess whether
there were significant differences in the survival curves
between the different groups (p < 0.05 represented a significant
difference). In addition, implant failures and
MBL were also investigated.
Based on the statistical results, the factors that had an
impact on prosthetic complications were identified. After
single-factor analysis was performed, multifactor analysis
using a Cox regression model (SPSS version 23.0) was
used to identify the factors that independently influenced
the results. Factors with a p value < 0.1 were included in
the Cox regression model.
Results
Preliminary statistical results
A total of 392 patients who had at least one Bicon implant
installed between January 2008 and January 2010, including
a total of 541 implants and 434 restorations (201
for male patients and 233 for female patients), were
included in the study. The average age of the patients was
43.07 years (restoration-based). The patient distribution
is shown in Table 2.
The complication distribution by time is shown in
Table 3. Between 2008 and 2010, 77 of the 434 restorations
were affected by prosthetic complications. Other
mechanical complications, such as implant fracture, were
not included since no implant fractures occurred. The
most common prosthetic complication was veneer chipping
(52), with a frequency of 67.53%. Only one abutment
fracture occurred in the 3rd year after the prosthesis
placement. The complication frequencies are presented
in Fig. 1.
details are shown in Table 4. The MBL values at the 1-,
5- and 10-follow up were 0.25 mm (95% CI ± 0.12 mm),
0.40 mm (95% CI ± 0.03 mm), 0.51 mm (95%
CI ± 0.05 mm), respectively (Table 5).
Univariate survival analysis
The overall prosthesis survival curve is presented in Fig. 2.
The overall 5-year cumulative complication-free rate was
83.84%, while the 10-year rate was 67.48% (Table 6). Significant
differences in the survival curves were observed
in the material and position groups (p < 0.05). Conversely,
no significant differences were observed in the
sex, age, location, or prosthesis-type groups (p > 0.05).
There were significant differences in the early phase for
the position groups (Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test:
p = 0.02). For the location groups, prostheses in the mandibles
showed a slightly higher complication incidence
rate than those in the maxilla (p = 0.09). Furthermore,
the female group had a slightly higher complication rate
than the male group (p = 0.05), and the older group had a
slightly higher complication rate than the younger group
(p = 0.33). However, these differences were not statistically
significant. No notable differences were observed
between these groups (p = 0.67). Nevertheless, these factors
may influence each other. Multivariate analysis with
Cox regression was used to identify the factors that independently
influenced the results. To avoid the omission
of possible influential factors, factors with a p value < 0.1
were included in the Cox regression model, including
sex (p = 0.0526), material (p = 0.04), implant position
(p = 0.04) and location (p = 0.09) (Table 6).
Multivariate regression analysis
Multivariate regression analysis with Cox regression was
used to examine the influential factors, including sex,
material, implant position and location. The results are
shown in Table 7. After multivariate regression analysis,
the results showed that material, gender and tooth position
were independent factors affecting the survival time.
According to the HR value, the material was an independent
protective factor, indicating that IACs had a longer
survival time than GPCs (p = 0.043, HR = 0.615 (95% CI
[0.385;0.984])). Sex was an independent risk factor, and
the female survival time was shorter than the male survival
time (p = 0.041, HR = 1.627 (95% CI [1.021;2.592])).
The survival time of premolars was longer than that of
molars (p = 0.024, HR = 0.375 (95% CI [0.160;0.879])).
The other indicators did not independently affect the survival
time.
Discussion
A previous 5-year systematic review of the clinical outcomes
of fixed complete dentures supported by implants
showed that the survival rate of the implants was satisfactory
but that the prosthetic complication rate was
rather high [18]. Veneer chipping was the most common
prosthetic complication. Other studies have also shown
that the complication rates of implant-supported fixed
prostheses have significantly increased over time [2,
19]. In most clinical studies regarding locking-taper systems,
most of the prostheses that were examined were
porcelain-fused-metal-fixed prosthetics, most commonly
GPCs [15, 20, 21]. Compared to the number of studies
on GPCs, far fewer studies have focused on metalacrylic
prostheses, and most of these studies have mainly
focused on complete dentures [22, 23]. The conclusion
that veneer chipping is the most common prosthetic
complication associated with titanium-acrylic complete
dentures has been confirmed in other studies [22–24].
In the current study, prosthetic complications, such
as abutment loosening and abutment fracture, occurred
much less frequently than technical complications such
as veneer chipping or decementation. This prosthetic
complication distribution is similar to that observed in
a previous retrospective study, in which only two abutment
fractures and one case of abutment loosening were
observed in the 80 subjects [10].
Screw-connected implant systems can have microgaps
of approximately 40–100 μm at the interface between the
implant and abutment [25, 26], which will accumulate
plaques and increase the probability of peri-implantitis
[6]. Locking-taper implant systems can greatly reduce
the microgaps (1–3 μm) compared to the former and
thus may decrease the probability of peri-implantitis [11].
The implant survival in this study is satisfactory. Several
other studies confirm that among all of the patients who
met the inclusion criteria, only three implant failures
occurred. All the three failed implants were peri-implantitis,
which supported single crown prostheses. Although
peri-implantitis occurred, the morbidity was greatly
reduced compared to screw-connected implant systems
[1, 27, 28], which may be ascribed to the minute microgap
of locking-taper implant systems. The present study
revealed a stable MBL, at 1 year, 5 years and 10 years. Due
to the high dropouts of the present study, the 10-year
MBL values are for reference only. The results of MBL in
the present study are similar to those of previous studies,
which indicates that the long-term clinical outcome of
locking-taper implants is satisfactory [16, 29]. The results
of MBL of the present study are similar to those of previous
studies, which indicates that the long-term clinical
outcome of locking-taper implant is satisfactory.
The results of the multifactor analysis are shown in
Table 7.According to a previous study, the use of Ceramage
can reduce the risk of veneer chipping in comparison
to that of conventional metal-based porcelain crowns
since its elastic modulus is close to that of natural teeth
[30]. However, in the present study, compared with the
GPCs, the survival time of the IAC crowns was significantly
shorter, which was consistent with the results of
the univariate analysis. The interfacial adhesion of titanium
and acrylic is mainly due to physical adhesion, and
some chemical adhesion is provided by coupling agents.
These types of adhesion are weaker than the chemical
adhesion between gold alloy and porcelain. We believe
that these different interfacial bonding forces are the root
cause of the results presented in this study. Similarly, a
recently published meta-analysis reported that the chipping
rate of porcelain-fused-metal-fixed prostheses is
9%, which is much lower than that of metal-resin prostheses
(27%) [31]. However, prosthetic complications,
such as abutment loosening and abutment fracture, were
presented by GPCs. These results may be the result of
the cushioning effect of the resin, which accommodates
some of the mechanical force that is applied to implant
components. IACs have unique advantages. The resin
exhibits excellent stress resistance, reducing damage to
the implant [32].The bonding of IACs is completed outside
of the mouth, reducing the potential irritation of the
periodontal tissue by the adhesive. Additionally, the fact
that IACs can be repaired in the mouth by clinicians can
greatly reduce procedure times. In contrast, the repair
of metal-based porcelain crowns, including alternatives
such as GPCs, can be difficult. The strength of the metal
base can be reduced by repeated firings, during which
tiny cracks may arise [33].
After removing the confounding factors, there was no
significant difference in the survival time of the prosthesis
in the maxilla and mandible, and the difference between
the two groups was further narrowed, which may indicate
that the effect of the jawbone density was not as large as
expected. The molar region presented higher complication
rates than that of the premolar region, and a significant
difference was observed (log-rank test p < 0.05).
Similarly, it has been previously reported that prosthetic
complications occur more frequently in the molar region
because of the mechanical force conditions in that area
[34]. Since the number of cases in the anterior tooth area
was too small, the results of the anterior tooth area in
this study were not statistically significant. A study have
showed that the incidence of complications in the anterior
tooth area was slightly lower than that in the posterior
tooth area [20]. This may be related to the inclusion
of both biological and repair complications in the study.
In contrast to the univariate analysis, there was a significant
difference in survival time between the sex groups
in the multivariate analysis. This may be because females
typically exhibit better adherence than females and
return more quickly for advice than men when complications
occur, or the result may have been affected by other
influencing factors.
This study was a retrospective survival analysis, and
the results will inevitably deviate from those of prospective
experiments. The sample size of some groups in this
study was small. For some variable groups, the differences
were rather significant, such as those between the
restoration type (FDPs: SCs = 107: 327), material (IACs:
GPCs = 139:295), and age (> 60 years: < 60 years = 72:
362). These differences may have impacted the statistical
results to a certain degree. Biological complications and
the survival rate require further prospective and longterm
follow-up studies.
Conclusions
Veneer chipping is the most common prosthetic complication
for both IACs and GPCs that are supported
by locking-taper implants. Over time, the incidence of
complications for IACs is significantly higher than that
for GPCs. Significant differences were observed between
the different prosthetic materials, placement positions
and sexes. The bone tissue level around the locking-taper
implant can maintain long-term stability.