Background
Dental caries is one of the most prevalent conditions
worldwide [1] and accounts for significant morbidity [2].
Importantly, the prevalence of untreated dental caries has
increased [1, 2]. While there is a direct effect of untreated
dental caries on oral health and associated quality of life,
identification of indirect associations between dental
caries (including untreated dental caries) and systemic
health are of potential interest but have received little
attention [3].
Associations have been more studied between periodontitis
and systemic diseases and the contribution of
oral inflammation and microbiota to diseases such as
atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, pneumonia, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) and Alzheimer disease (AD) [4–6]. In addition to
epidemiologic evidence, laboratory and animal studies
provide biological plausibility for periodontal-systemic
associations [7, 8].
While both dental caries and periodontitis are biofilm-
mediated diseases, the pathogenesis of dental
caries is complex and multifactorial and differs from
periodontal disease. Dental caries is a biofilm-mediated
disease with multiple contributing factors that drives
net localized demineralization of the teeth [9]. The
plausibility of systemic consequences from untreated
dental caries and mechanistic role of the associated oral
microbial-inflammatory process in these associations
requires further inquiry through human and animal
studies. The ability of oral microbiome to spread into
systemic circulation from dental caries is plausible and
would parallel mechanisms already studied for periodontal
disease. In dental caries, involvement of root
canal space or marginal periodontium are the most
likely pathways for direct systemic extension of oral
microbiota [10]. Host factors and pathogenic traits in
oral microbiota can promote dental caries and increase
the likelihood of oral-systemic spread. Such factors
would include diseases [11] and medications [12] that
result in reduced saliva production, adhesin expression
in S.mutans for collagen binding [13–15], dysbiosis of
the oral microbiota [16, 17], genetic factors that predispose
to dental caries and share common mechanistic
underpinnings with systemic diseases [18].
The hypothesis of systemic spread of oral microbiota
from carious lesions is reasonable but mechanisms
by which systemic diseases exacerbate dental caries
requires considerable future research. Metabolic diseases
such as diabetes and obesity share various common
environmental determinants with dental caries,
including hyperglycemic state and high-carbohydrate/
sugar-rich diet [19]. Our current understanding of
metabolic disease-dental caries associations and use
of animal models [20–27] can serve to expand understanding
of associations between dental caries and
other systemic diseases. Animal models allow for study
of systemic variables in dental caries due to the ability
to longitudinally study disease phenotype within a reasonably
short time frame.
This scoping review compiled and evaluated recent
evidence from animal and clinical human studies that
assessed associations between dental caries and systemic
diseases and potential mechanisms for such associations.
Specifically, a scoping review was undertaken to establish
areas in which evidence on associations between dental
caries and systemic diseases is available [28].
Methods
Data sources
An electronic search was conducted by a health sciences
librarian (ES) in June 2021 in PubMed, Embase and
Cochrane Central Register for Controlled Trials. Results
were limited to articles published from 2010 to 2020 in
the English language.
Search strategy
The following search strategy in PubMed utilized both
keyword terms in the title and abstract fields as well as
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) to identify possible
qualifying articles: (((((“dental caries“[MeSH Terms])
OR caries[Title/Abstract]) OR carious lesions[Title/
Abstract]) OR carious lesion[Title/Abstract])) AND
(((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((“neoplasms“[M
eSH Terms]) OR cancer[Title/Abstract]) OR metabolic
syndrome[Title/Abstract]) OR “metabolic
syndrome“[MeSH Terms]) OR obesity[Title/Abstract])
OR “obesity“[MeSH Terms]) OR cardiovascular
diseases[Title/Abstract]) OR cardiovascular disease[Title/
Abstract]) OR “cardiovascular diseases“[MeSH Terms])
OR myocardial infarction[Title/Abstract]) OR heart
disease[Title/Abstract]) OR heart diseases[Title/
Abstract]) OR diabetes[Title/Abstract]) OR “diabetes
mellitus“[MeSH Terms]) OR atherosclerosis[Title/
Abstract]) OR cerebrovascular disease[Title/Abstract])
OR cerebrovascular diseases[Title/Abstract]) OR
“cerebrovascular disorders“[MeSH Terms]) OR
asthma[Title/Abstract]) OR “asthma“[MeSH Terms])
OR pneumonia[Title/Abstract]) OR “pneumonia“[MeSH
Terms]) OR chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease[Title/Abstract]) OR “pulmonary disease, chronic
obstructive“[MeSH Terms]) OR allergies[Title/Abstract])
OR “hypersensitivity“[MeSH Terms]) OR “respiratory
tract diseases“[MeSH Terms]) OR arthritis[Title/
Abstract]) OR “arthritis, rheumatoid“[MeSH Terms])
OR Alzheimer Disease[Title/Abstract]) OR “Alzheimer’s
Disease” [MeSH Terms]) OR dementia[Title/Abstract])
OR “dementia“[MeSH Terms]) OR “inflammatory
bowel diseases“[MeSH Terms]) OR crohn disease[Title/
Abstract]) OR “osteoporosis“[MeSH Terms]) OR
osteoporosis[Title/Abstract]) OR “joint diseases“[MeSH
Terms]) OR systemic[Title/Abstract]).
This search was translated and updated for Embase
and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
accordingly.
Data filtering
The results obtained using search strategy described
above were deduplicated and further managed in an
online workflow management system for scientific
reviews (https:// www. covid ence. org/). After removal of
duplicates, titles were examined by one author (AS) and
articles unrelated to dental caries were removed. For
retained articles, after title-based filtering, their eligibility
was assessed by abstract-based filtering by two authors
(AS and FAS). If articles were considered unrelated
to scope of this review using criteria identified below,
they were excluded. Articles were removed for various
technical reasons such as wrong outcome measures,
inadequate statistical information, narrow participant
enrollment such as studies with one gender enrollment.
Articles that were published in potentially predatory
journals were also removed if the corresponding journal
was listed in Beall’s list (https:// beall slist. net/) and
was not listed in the Directory of Open Access Journals
(https:// doaj. org/). When articles were on the topic of
associations between dental caries and systemic diseases,
systematic and retrospective reviews and data analysis of
health records were excluded. Studies were also excluded
if dental caries was not the primary variable and was
studied as a subset of oral health and/or systemic disease
was studied as a subset of overall health. In addition,
infective endocarditis was removed from our search criteria
as it has been extensively reviewed previously.
Clinical human and animal studies were included
where associations between dental caries and a systemic
disease were explored or a potential mechanism was elucidated
and they did not meet any of the aforementioned
exclusion criteria. Using the filtering criteria above and
after full-text screening by two authors (AS and FAS)
studies were included in the summary tables and additional
studies were included in the review to support
evidence. If one author agreed to inclusion after full-text
screening, the corresponding article was included.
Individual studies were tabulated and brief description
of the following parameters were provided: name of first
author, year of publication, number of participants, country
of study participants, study groups (treatment and
control), study population (human or animal), objective
of the study, study design, outcomes including statistical
parameters and conclusions (Tables 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6).
Results
After deduplication, the initial search yielded 4817
results. 404 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility
and further 133 studies were excluded for various technical
reasons described above. The remaining 271 full-text
articles were assessed, and after excluding studies where
dental caries and/or systemic disease was not the primary
variable of interest, and excluding literature reviews and
data analysis of health records, 67 studies were included
in the summary tables.
Studies were included on the following systemic diseases:
coronary artery disease (Table 1), congenital heart
disease (Table 1), peripheral artery disease (Table 1),
hypertension (Table 1), diabetes (type I and II) (Table 2),
obesity (Table 2), metabolic syndrome (Table 2), cystic
fibrosis (Table 3), asthma (Table 3), ulcerative colitis
(Table 4), Crohn’s disease (Table 4), cerebral palsy
(Table 5), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(Table 5), rheumatoid arthritis (Table 6), systemic lupus
erythematosus (Table 6) and chronic kidney disease
(Table 6). A total of 56 human studies and 11 animal
studies were included in the summary tables. Relatively,
more studies on metabolic diseases (type I diabetes,
type II diabetes, obesity and metabolic syndrome) were
included in this review (40 total, 32 human and 8 animal)
when compared to evidence found in other disease
groups. Within 56 human studies included, 29 studies
were case-control, 17 were cross sectional and 10 were
longitudinal studies.
Discussion
Cardiovascular diseases and caries
Dental caries experience was not significantly different
when compared to controls in human studies of coronary
and peripheral arterial disease, but overall oral inflammatory
burden was significantly higher in cases due to
increased burden of periodontal disease [29, 31]. Additionally,
one study compared dental caries in patients
with congenital heart disease with and without heart
transplants, thus comparing the effect of immunocompromised
status on dental caries [30]. Interestingly, transplant
group had significantly lower caries experience
when compared to group without heart transplant. The
authors explained this difference based on the possibility
of increased attention to dental care in children with
heart transplants. While frequent antibiotic intake could
explain this observation, in this study it was an exclusion
criteria due to possible confounding of results.
Other studies have evaluated attitudes of dentists and
of parents of children who are at high risk for infective
endocarditis [87] including those with congenital heart
disease [88–90]. These findings suggest that specialists
in pediatric dentistry and general practitioners who
regularly treat children are more informed about appropriate
dental care for children with congenital heart disease.
There needs to be a concerted effort between the
dentists, medical providers and parents to encourage
prevention to achieve favorable outcomes in children at
high risk for infective endocarditis due to their cardiac
conditions.
More atherosclerotic plaque and presence of genomic
DNA from S.mutans was found in a group of ApoEnull
mice, infected by intravenous injection (tail vein) of
S.mutans and subjected to balloon angioplasty injury
compared to non-injured mice (controls) [33]. Immunohistochemically,
sections of atherosclerotic plaque
from injured group showed macrophage invasion in the
tunica adventitia of aorta and upregulation of TLR4. Further
studies demonstrated that collagen-binding protein
(cnm) is important for invasive potential of S .mutans
[13]. Specifically, it was found that serotype f strain
OMZ175 of S. mutans has this capability [91]. These
studies further explores the invasive nature of serotype f
strain OMZ175 of S. mutans in a model of cellular injury.
While experimental data on the invasive potential for
certain serotypes of S. mutans exists, expert panels do
not recommend antibiotic prophylaxis prior to all dental
procedures. The rationale behind such an approach
is that the likelihood of developing infective endocarditis
due to a bacteremia from dental procedure is significantly
lower than bacteremia from routine at-home
toothbrushing and flossing. Furthermore, it is not clear
if antibiotic prophylaxis prior to dental procedures will
prevent all potential for infective endocarditis secondary
to dental procedures. In this scenario, the risk-benefit
analysis appears to be of low benefit and high risk, taking
into account the potential for antibiotic resistance.
A recent meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
showed vesicoureteral reflux patients treated with antibiotic
prophylaxis were 6.4 times more likely to develop
a multidrug-resistant urinary tract infection [92]. It is
reasonable to use conclusion from this study and exercise
caution in frequent antibiotic prophylaxis for dental procedures
till directly applicable results are available in the
dental literature. While caution must be exercised, there
are exceptions and it is thought that patients in certain
high-risk categories may benefit from antibiotic prophylaxis
[93].
Ostalska-Nowicka et al. found association of dental
caries with primary hypertension in a case-control study
[32]. Authors found significantly higher salivary evening
cortisol levels, uric acid concentrations in participants
with caries and also found correlation between dental
caries and microalbuminuria. These biochemical parameters
are of importance in pathophysiology of hypertension
and indicative of activation of renin-angiotensin
system and reorganization of endothelium [32]. Considering
the multifactorial nature of dental caries and hypertension,
future studies that evaluate social determinants,
diet and systemic inflammation secondary to oral and
gastrointestinal dysbiosis may provide valuable input
into common mechanisms of dental caries and primary
hypertension [94–97].
Metabolic disorders and caries
Diabetes
Several human clinical studies and animal studies have
addressed the connection between dental caries and
diabetes. Outcomes other than caries were also studied,
including salivary composition, microbiology and periodontal
status. Hegde et al. found that caries active participants
who were diabetic demonstrated significantly
reduced salivary calcium and significantly increased
alkaline phosphatase when compared to caries active
non-diabetic participants [34]. Similarly, Al-Badr et al.
demonstrated that children with type 1 diabetes had significantly
lower salivary pH and higher counts of Lactobacilli.
Reduced salivary pH and higher lactobacilli
count are crucial factors for demineralization of teeth
and exacerbation of dental caries [38]. Reduction in salivary
pH and increase in counts of cariogenic microbiota
can occur secondary to cariogenic diet and poor plaque
control and was demonstrated as such by Kamran et al.
[39] and therefore, it is important to emphasize the multifactorial
and overlapping nature of dental caries and
obesity before drawing conclusions from study of select
variables. Furthermore, studies into the association of
diabetic control and other parameters of diabetes phenotype
with dental caries will increase our understanding of
risk stratification and consequently, prevention of dental
caries in diabetic patients [40, 41]. Two other studies
showed that lifestyle, dietary and oral care factors were
significantly different between groups with controlled
and uncontrolled diabetes measured by glycated Hb [35,
36]. Similarly, when pediatric cohort with phenylketonuria
and those with type 1 diabetes were compared, children
with phenylketonuria had significantly higher caries
experience [37].
Animal studies used rodent models of diabetes (primarily
type 1 diabetes) and hyperglycemia to study its
relationship with dental caries and other tooth-related
changes [20–27]. Changes in enamel, dentin, pulp and
salivary glands with alveolar bone loss were compared,
both to control groups and groups with intervention
using fluoride application and insulin administration.
Consistent results from animal models demonstrated
that hyperglycemia in diabetic rodents was associated
with increased dental caries [22–26]. In addition, these
studies showed that there were histological and morphometric
changes in enamel, dentin and pulp in diabetic
animals. There were reduction in volume of pulpal connective
tissue and enamel and dentin, along with excessive
wear of enamel [20, 21, 25, 27]. Salivary histological
change included vacuolization in acinar cells and functionally,
reduction in saliva production that resulted in
xerostomia [25, 27]. Carious lesions positively correlated
with gingivitis and periodontitis [23, 26]. Lastly, both
fluoride application and insulin administration interventions
resulted in reduction of dental caries, marginal gingivitis
and periodontitis [22, 24].
Obesity
Of all systemic diseases, an association between obesity
and caries was more robust than noted for other systemic
conditions, as documented in twenty-two human clinical
studies including eight longitudinal clinical studies.
Data from longitudinal studies did not consistently find
an association between obesity and dental caries and
studies with larger samples sizes did not find association
between dental caries and obesity [42, 43, 47, 48, 51–53,
57, 58, 60, 62, 63]. In studies where obesity and metabolic
syndrome were found to be associated with caries,
odds ratio ranged from 1.01 to 3.7 [42, 43, 49, 52, 63–65].
Interestingly, a relationship between low BMI and dental
caries was noted and an inverse relationship between
overweight status and caries was seen in some studies
[44, 46, 58]. Chala et al., through statistical modeling
found a U-shaped relationship between BMI and caries,
which means that caries was associated with both underweight
and overweight status [44] and this U-shaped relationship
between BMI and caries has been reproduced in
two recent studies. Untreated dental caries can impact
overall nutritional status and subsequently BMI. Further,
reduction in masticatory efficiency can promote intake
of softer foods and increase in dental caries burden [56,
61]. Longitudinal studies are needed to examine relationship
between onset and progression of dental caries and
their effect on BMI. A study showed significant weight
gain in children when teeth with severe dental caries and
pulpal involvement were extracted [98]. Mixed results on
the association of BMI and dental caries are also indicative
of the complex etiologic nature of dental caries. Various
factors including access and attitude to dental care,
socio-economic status, maternal education, oral habits,
diet, biological and microbiological factors interact in
caries etiopathogenesis [99]. Additionally, variable definitions
and surrogate markers used in association studies
further complicate consensus and ability to synthesize
reproducible conclusions [100]. An important implication
of the mixed results observed for caries association
with systemic conditions likely results in lack of reliable,
reproducible risk prediction tools for dental caries [101].
It appears that past and current caries experience along
with frequent follow ups and use of fluoride for caries
prevention remain the most effective tools for caries prevention
in clinical practice.
Respiratory diseases and caries
Asthma
Most human clinical studies were undertaken in pediatric
cohorts and were case-control in design, aimed at
comparing groups with asthma and caries to groups
with caries alone. Caries burden was typically measured
using DMFT/dmft and DMFS/dmfs indices along with
other variables, including microbiological (S. mutans and
Lactobacilli counts, oral microbiota assessment using
16 S sequencing) [68, 69, 74], medications [70], sugary
diet [71], salivary parameters [72, 74] and genetics [18].
Results reinforced previously discovered etiological factors
for dental caries in children; namely, consumption
of sugary drinks [71], higher S. mutans counts, higher
plaque index in caries active children [68], and lower salivary
flow rate and pH [72, 74]. Other factors related to
dental caries activity included tablet delivery of asthma
medication [70], the abundance of Veillonella sp. [69] and
SNPs of the ameloblastin gene (AMBN rs4694075) [18].
Heidari et al. explained the association of higher caries
burden with asthma to the use of tablet form of asthma
medication on grounds that tablet formulation delivers
a higher drug dose when compared to syrup and
spray forms of medications[70]. It is possible that these
patients presented with severe symptoms of asthma and
therefore required higher drug dose, but that information
was not clearly presented. Other studies have shown an
association between inhaled corticosteroids for asthma
and higher burden of dental caries [73, 102, 103]. Additionally,
while the duration of intake of medication was
not associated with severity of caries in this study, there
are other studies that found contrary results [68, 104].
Cherkasov et al. found an increased relative abundance
of Veillonella from dental biofilm in caries-affected children
when compared to caries-free children with asthma
[69]. While Veillonella is not considered a cause of dental
caries like S. mutans, these results are not surprising.
Veillonella can metabolize lactate which is produced
in abundance by cariogenic streptococci in dental biofilms
[105], and various studies have previously demonstrated
increased levels of Veillonella in carious lesions
[106–110].
Ergöz et al. found an association between AMBN
rs4694075 and dental caries in asthmatics, which is an
interesting finding. It should be noted that other genome
wide association studies (GWAS) studies and GWAS
meta-analyses arrived at differing conclusions [111, 112].
Additionally, Ergöz et al. did not mention any dental
developmental defects in their cases and so the potential
of these being confounding factors may not be applicable.
However, it may be argued that since mutations in
ameloblastin (AMBN) and other dental development
genes are related to dental developmental defects [113],
clinical information on absence of dental developmental
defects may be considered when evaluating and reporting
genetic association of dental development genes and
asthma.
While it appears that nature of the association of
asthma with dental caries is uncertain, it is prudent to
employ prevention strategies for dental caries in asthma
patients [114, 115].
Cystic fibrosis (CF)
Two human studies described an association between
dental caries and CF [66, 67]. These studies evaluated
caries, molar-incisor hypomineralization, oral hygiene,
diet and salivary factors in groups with and without CF.
Peker et al. noted lower caries experience (DMF-T) in CF
patients, and suggested this could be related to frequent
use of antibiotics [67]. Salivary factors studied were not
significantly different between the groups. Contrary
to human clinical studies, a CF mouse model showed
significantly higher caries experience and significantly
reduced salivary bicarbonate concentration in CF mice
[75]. Although human salivary studies of CF did not
show significant differences between controls and cases,
interest in exploring salivary biochemical composition
in CF patients is practical. CF is caused by mutations in
the CFTR gene (CF transmembrane conductance regulator)
which is a chloride and bicarbonate channel [116]
and CFTR mRNA has been localized in the ductal cells
of salivary glands [117]. In a mouse model with deletion
of phenylalanine 508, significantly increased counts
of S.mutans along with increased caries incidence and
severity were noted. In the same mouse model, salivary
bicarbonate concentration was significantly reduced
when compared to wildtype littermates [75]. However,
human studies on salivary parameters in CF patients do
not consistently show low pH and higher caries severity
and systematic review on this data has shown limitations
in study design and high risk of bias [118].
Gastrointestinal diseases and caries
Limited clinical studies were found assessing a connection
between caries and gastrointestinal diseases, including
studies of inflammatory gastrointestinal diseases
[76–78]. A human clinical study (case-control) showed
that pediatric participants with inflammatory bowel
disease had significantly more caries and periodontal
inflammation than healthy participants [76, 77]. Similar
results in an adult cohort has been shown previously
[119]. In another study, CD patients who had resective
surgery demonstrated a greater caries experience, cariogenic
microbiota, oral hygiene and poor diet when compared
to controls [78]. In other studies, CD patients have
demonstrated increased caries prevalence [77, 119, 120],
increased sugar intake [121, 122] and increased levels
of S. mutans [123], one of the bacterial species strongly
linked to caries activity. The presence of these factors
creates a conducive environment for accelerated caries
activity. Patients with IBD have shown increased odds
for dental caries in a recent study, confirming previous
results in aforementioned studies (4.27 for CD and 2.21
for UC) [77].
Kojima et al. undertook an interesting study using a
colitis mouse model to study effects of a serotype of S.
mutans. Results showed that serotype k of S. mutans was
able to evade host response in peripheral blood due to
variation in glucose surface side chains. Also, uptake of S.
mutans by hepatocytes, which was potentially facilitated
by collagen binding protein, aggravated colitis due to
production of IFN-γ by liver [79].
S. mutans can be divided into four serotypes (c, e, f,
k) and serotypes f and k predominantly carry the cnm
gene. The presence of cnm gene confers a collagen binding
property to specific S. mutans serotypes and has been
demonstrated to be essential for invasiveness into human
coronary artery endothelium [13]. In the study by Kojima
et al., significantly more IBD patients showed cnm encoding
S. mutans (serotype k or f). Of note, this study showed
hepatocyte involvement by S. mutans as a crucial step
in the colitis mouse model while S. mutans was undetectable
in samples from the gut [79]. This observation
suggests that oral microbiota may affect a disease state
in an organ that it does not invade directly by modulating
the inflammatory environment. These authors have
published follow up studies, investigating the relationship
between S. mutans serotype k and liver disease in
mouse models. These studies showed aggravation of nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis by a specific strain of S.mutans
through participation of cell surface proteins, including
collagen-binding protein [124, 125].
Neurologic diseases and caries
Cardoso et al. studied dental caries burden in patients
with cerebral palsy and noted that these patients had high
prevalence of dental caries and mean DMFT/dmft values
of 1.71 and 2.22 respectively. Further, they found that caregiver
awareness and education was associated with dental
caries experience in these patients (PR = 1.439) [80].
Control of dental biofilm in patients who are limited in
their physical and mental capability is challenging [126,
127]and becomes the collective undertaking of caregiver
and dentist and thus, education of the caregiver plays a
crucial role in achieving this collective goal [80]. Similarly,
enhanced preventive measures can be extended in
the geriatric population where compromised motor control
and masticatory efficiency results in a shift to a softer
diet and that along with exposed root surfaces further
increases possibility of dental caries [128, 129].
Delwel et al. raised an important point about composite
nature of DMFT index, wherein caries experience
(decayed component of DMFT) should be evaluated separately
to assess caries burden and for statistical comparison
between groups [130]. Overall, standardization in
dental indices and utilization of semantics and ontology
frameworks should enhance our ability for data analysis
and draw robust conclusions.
In a case-control study of participants with ADHD,
Paszynska et al. found significantly higher BMI in test
group and significantly higher ICDAS 5 and 6 scores
(teeth with advanced caries) in the primary dentition.
They also found that increased intake of sugary foods and
drinks were significantly higher in ADHD group[81]. It
appears that in studies determining associations of dental
caries with neurological and behavioral disorders,
standardized interviews for caretakers, food habits and
other social determinants will be crucial in order to draw
informed conclusions and not extrapolate mechanistic
links between systemic diseases and dental caries.
Other diseases and caries
In our review of literature, we found a few articles that
could not be categorized by organ system and/or were
not adequate in number to warrant their own section in
this review. These diseases included RA, chronic renal
diseases and systemic lupus erythematosus.
DMFT/DMFS were associated with RA as assessed
by disease activity score and serologic markers. Also,
S.mutans was significantly higher in RA patients and
indices for oral inflammatory burden and disease were
associated with serologic markers for RA. Furthermore,
the oral inflammatory burden was significantly higher in
early untreated RA when compared to chronic RA [82].
RA is a risk factor for both caries and periodontal disease
[3]. The plausible link between compromised plaque
control and joint dysfunction is reasonable but the contribution
of RA to overall inflammatory burden is also
an important consideration [131]. Active SLE patients
showed increased dental caries activity including smooth
surface caries when compared to inactive SLE. Furthermore,
salivary pH and flow were significantly reduced
and high counts of S.mutans were noted [84]. Another
study showed relationship between compromised biofilm
control, SLE severity and dental caries [85]. These
results raise the possibility of SLE being coincidental in
the direct relationship between poor oral hygiene and
dental caries. In one study that explored associations
between dental caries and chronic kidney disease (CKD),
disease group demonstrated significantly higher CFUs
of S.mutans and IgA response but significantly lower
filled teeth when compared to controls [86]. Importantly,
in this study, plaque index was similar between the two
groups. Other studies have demonstrated lower dental
caries in CKD patients [132, 133] and proposed the need
for longitudinal studies exploring association between
dental caries and CKD.
Although evidence of the association between SLE,
RA and dental caries is limited, risk stratification of
patients in consultation with rheumatologist may facilitate
preventive dental care. Determination of xerostomia
in patients with SLE or RA is advised since these
patients often have associated Sjögren’s syndrome (secondary
Sjögren’s syndrome) and may experience higher
dental caries burden secondary to xerostomia, requiring
preventive measures [134]. Sjögren’s syndrome is
a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease that usually
involves exocrine glands including salivary glands
[135]. Additionally, other risk factors such as past caries
experience, ability to maintain oral hygiene if limited by
joint dysfunction and root exposure commonly noted
in elderly patients may help with development of a customized
dental caries preventive care plan. Similarly,
diet in patients with CKD tend to be carbohydrate rich
and that along with poor oral hygiene can increase risk
for dental caries [132]. In the caries prevention plan for
patients with CKD, oral hygiene should be maintained
meticulously through proper home care and periodic
dental appointments.
The oral cavity has evolved with a symbiotic and
diverse microbiota which serves under some circumstances
as a safeguard against numerous environmental
challenges [136]. Conditions that disrupt this balance
include breach in mucosal defenses and acquisition
of pathogenic species, or pathogenic traits by certain
commensal microbiota. Examples of acute local infections
that occur secondary to breach of mucosal barriers
and/or colonization by pathogenic microbiota
include dental abscess and lymphadenopathy. Dental
caries may also influence a systemic response through
direct extension of pertinent microbiota or resulting
inflammation. A systemic exposure to effects of caries
is also plausible through marginal caries that extends
to the periodontium or by pulpal involvement. The systemic
influence of dental caries both by direct extension
of oral microbiota and creation of a pro-inflammatory
state are reasonable hypotheses. However, the obvious
challenge is to prove such hypothetical mechanisms by
human studies. The chronicity of caries as a disease and
the ethical challenges imposed by not treating dental
caries are significant challenges for future studies.
We expect that mechanistic explanations of dental
caries-systemic disease associations in future studies will
likely come from animal models. Also, animal models
can inform human studies on variables of interest. In this
regard, longitudinal studies that are aimed at evaluating
oral and systemic variables of interest in periods of accelerated
dental caries in the human host will prove useful.
This study is a scoping review and provides an overview
of available evidence on the topic of associations between
dental caries and systemic diseases. It has a wider scope
and does not limit the analysis to one systemic disease.
This analysis is not as rigorous as that offered by systematic
reviews and meta-analyses and the information
presented should be used in complement to systematic
reviews and meta-analyses on this topic.
Conclusions
Limited clinical evidence was found connecting several
systemic diseases and dental caries. When adequate
clinical results were available, it offered mixed evidence
of such associations. Interesting animal studies were
noted that could generate clinical hypotheses and further
investigations in rodent models for cardiovascular injury
and hyperglycemia. Best evidence from human and animal
studies described the association between metabolic
diseases and dental caries. Animal studies using
rodent models demonstrated significant changes in dental
tissues following hyperglycemia. Also, an association
between hyperglycemia and dental caries was consistently
noted in animal studies. Inadequate data was found
to suggest any modifications to current clinical practice
or prevention guidelines.