Backgrounds
Class II malocclusion, which is associated with a convex
soft tissue profile caused by either mandibular
retrognathism or excessive growth of maxilla, constitutes
a significant diagnostic percentage of the patients
seeking orthodontic treatment [1–4]. Among the various
treatment modalities employed, intermaxillary
traction generates a pulling force via ligatures and has
been one of the most widely used techniques [5, 6].
Intermaxillary traction should be used with caution,
especially for those patients with high-angle Class II
malocclusion, since this approach is frequently accompanied
by anchorage loss, namely, unexpected movement
of the permanent mandibular molar [7].
Previous studies have characterized the geometry and
size effects of orthodontic arch wires on the ultimate
orthodontic treatment outcomes [8, 9]. Brackets and
arch wires are the main components of fixed appliance
systems, in which the arch wire serves as a means of
originating and delivering force. Pandis et al. reported
that the characteristics of wire were more pronounced
than the ligating mechanism of brackets in force–
deflection curves [10]. During orthodontic treatment,
different cross-section arch wires can be chosen and
sequenced based on the periodical goal [11]. The initial
phase is often conducted with an undersized round
cross-sectional arch wire to provide continuous lower
forces and for fastening during the alignment process,
whereas the larger edgewise arch wire is selected in the
adjustment period to enhance torque effectiveness.
Compared with contemporary edgewise wires, the
cross-section of ribbon arch wires represents an inversion
of height and width. Historically, the ribbon arch,
the first orthodontic appliance coupled with brackets,
was considered the progenitor of edgewise appliances
and earned popularity in the 1920s [12]. The utility of
the ribbon arch has diminished since the introduction
of edgewise wire. Although attempts have been made to
increase ribbon arch usage, especially in lingual treatment,
very few studies have involved ribbon wires in
general orthodontic applications [13].
In addition, there is a paucity of data from investigations
into the role that the cross-sectional shape plays
in maxillomandibular traction. The reason for this lack
of data could be the great challenge in identifying tooth
movement and deformation under the coexistence of
sophisticated anatomical structures and various orthodontic
elements [14]. Finite element analysis (FEA),
which is an engineering and mathematical method for
reaction prediction, has been suggested to be a reliable
method in orthodontic research through craniofacial
complex remodelling [15, 16].
The aim of this study was to comprehensively compare
the influence of the cross-sectional shape of ribbon
arch wires with edgewise and round wires on
intermaxillary traction in Class II malocclusion treatment
using FEA simulation.
Methods
The study protocol was designed in compliance with the
Helsinki Declaration and approved by the ethical committee
of the Fujian Medical University Union Hospital.
Through medical history interviewing and oral examination,
a 20-year-old healthy male volunteer with a healthy
craniofacial structure and complete dentition with
normal crown root ratio and a normal occlusion, was
selected for this study. Before inclusion in this study, this
volunteer signed an informed consent form.
The finite element (FE) model was based on the computed
tomography (Discovery CT750HD, GE, Boston,
USA) data, which referred to the sectional images of the
volunteer from the upper rim of the condyle to the lower
edge of the mandible in digital imaging and communications
in medicine (DICOM) format. The CT data were
collected and imported to the processing software (Mimics
17.0, Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) to further obtain
a virtual model of the maxilla and mandible in Geomagic
Studio (Raindrop Geomagic, Morrisville, USA). Along
with the outer surface of the mandible, the periodontal
ligament (PDL) was constructed at 0.25 mm thickness.
The central area of alveolar bone was cancellous bone
surrounded by 1.5 mm thick cortical bone.
Rectangular wire (0.017 × 0.025-in. and 0.019 × 0.025-
in., 3 M Unitek, Monrovia, USA) and round wire (Φ
0.018-in. and Φ 0.020-in., 3 M Unitek, Monrovia, USA)
were scanned and these scans were entered into software
(Unigraphics NX 8.5, Siemens PLM Software, Plano,
USA). Using the same method, the matching brackets,
buccal tubes and slots were modelled virtually. The ribbon
wire (0.025 × 0.017-in. and 0.025 × 0.019-in.) was
constructed based on the rectangular wire with height
and width inverted. The rectangular wires and round
wires were coupled with a 0.022 × 0.028-in. slot, whereas
the ribbon wire was inserted into the 0.028 × 0.022-in.
slot, which was designed for the purpose of fitting the
upright arch wire. An anterior hook of 2.5 mm height
was built and positioned between the maxillary lateral
incisor and canine while the tubes were placed in the first
mandible molar and second premolar. In addition, stainless
steel ligature wires were tied to the brackets from the
second premolar of the mandible right to the left second
premolar. Those orthodontic appliances were assembled
appropriately on the buccal side of dentition and are
shown in Fig. 1.
A nonlinear elastic finite element analysis was performed
in Ansys Workbench 15.0 (Ansys Inc., Canonsburg,
USA). The Coulomb friction coefficient between
the ligature and brackets was assumed to be 0.2 with
reference to other experimental data. Each anatomical
component and orthodontic appliance was simulated
with ten-node tetrahedral elements and assumed to have
isotropic homogenous linear elastic characteristics. The
sizes of the elements in the PDL, tooth and bone were
set as 0.5 mm, 1 mm and 2 mm, respectively, in order to
simplify the finite element model, which included both
small element size in the PDL and a large volume of the
bone and the teeth. The FE model with different arch
wires consisted of 616,006–650,197 nodes and 321,732–
325,321 elements in total while the numbers of nodes/
elements were 56,376/30,327 for teeth, 243,141/120,459
for the PDL, 199,834/111,827 for bone and 116,655–
150,846/58,534–67,280 for the remaining components,
including tubes, brackets and different arch wires.
Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of cortical bone,
cancellous bone, teeth, PDL, arch wires, brackets and
tubes were determined from previous studies [14, 17–23]
and are shown in Table 1.
A traction force of 1.5 N was applied from the maxilla
anterior hook between the canine and lateral incisor to
the hook of buccal tubes in the mandible first molar. The
application of retraction force would initiate the movement
of teeth, which could be defined by the displacement
rotation of teeth, and the stress redistribution of
the PDL. All the movement was suppressed for the nodes
located in the bottom of the mandible segment.
There were two coordinate systems utilized in this
study. For a single tooth, the x-axis, was referred to the
mesio-distal direction (+ mesial, − distal), the y-axis
referred to the buccal–lingual direction (+ lingual, − buccal)
and the z-axis to the vertical direction (+ apical,
− occlusal). For other large volume components (mandible,
dentition, PDL and buccal/lingual line), the displacement
of teeth was recorded on the basis of a standard
coordinate system with the x-axis as the anterior–posterior
direction, the y-axis as the medial–lateral direction,
and the z-axis as the superior–inferior direction, whereas
the anterior, medial, and superior directions were defined
as the + x, + y, and + z directions, respectively. Rotation
movement was decomposed into three planes of motion
(sagittal, frontal and occlusal), and the corresponding
directions (posterior, medial and mesial) were predetermined
as positive.
The buccal cusps of the mandibular posterior teeth and
the edge of anterior teeth were lined virtually as buccal
lines, while the lingual cusps of mandibular posterior
teeth and the cingulum of anterior teeth were connected
as lingual lines. The movement of the lingual line and
buccal line was recorded.
Results
Displacements of anchorage teeth
The results of 46 teeth in terms of force component distribution,
displacement and rotation movements in three
directions are shown in Table 2. Regarding the force distribution
of 46 teeth, very similar results were found for
the 0.017 × 0.025-in. and 0.019 × 0.025-in. wires. The
force components of the X-axis, Y-axis and Z-axis were
1.36 N, 0.31 N and 0.45 N, respectively. Compared with
the rectangular wire and round wire groups, the ribbon
wire group had the lowest force component in three
directions, and the force of the 0.025 × 0.017-in. group in
the X-axis, Y-axis and Z-axis was 1.31 N, 0.29 N, 0.43 N,
respectively. The round wire group displayed the highest
X-axis force and Z-axis force (1.39 N and 0.48 N,
respectively).
For the rectangular wire group, with increasing
wire size, there was a descending trend in the displacement
in the Y-axis and Z-axis. The displacement
of the 0.017 × 0.025-in. wire in the Z-axis direction
was 9.17 μm and that of the 0.019 × 0.025-in.
wire was 9.13 μm. Among the three groups, ribbon
wire (0.025 × 0.017-in. and 0.025 × 0.019-in.) exhibited
the lowest displacement in the X-axis (12.61 μm
and 12.77 μm, respectively) and Z-axis (8.99 μm and
9.06 μm, respectively). However, the 0.025 × 0.017-in.
ribbon wire showed the highest Y-axis displacement.
The Φ 0.018-in. round wire also showed higher Z-axis
displacement (9.44 μm) and Y-axis displacement
(5.96 μm) than Φ 0.020-in. round wire (9.20 μm and
4.40 μm, respectively).
In the rectangular wire group and ribbon wire group,
the rotation motion for 46 teeth in the sagittal, frontal
and occlusal planes was − 0.002°, 0.020°, and 0.021°,
respectively. In the ribbon wire group, the frontal rotation
was higher than that in the rectangular and round
wire groups, especially the 0.025 × 0.017-in. group,
which exhibited 0.042° of rotation. In the round wire
group, Φ 0.020-in. wire displayed less rotation than Φ
0.018-in. wire, where the sagittal, frontal and occlusal
rotation of Φ 0.020-in. wire was almost half that of Φ
0.018-in. wire.
von Mises stress distribution of the mandibular PDL
Figure 2 illustrates the buccal view and occlusal view
of the PDL von Mises stress distribution. In the posterior
zone, the PDL of the first molar endured the
most stress, especially in the distal root, and stress
decreased gradually in the mesial direction. In the
anterior zone, there was an increasing trend in stress
from the canine tooth towards the central incisor.
As shown in Fig. 2, there was a very slight difference
caused by the cross-sectional area in the PDL stress
distribution among the study groups, and the maximum
stress was was in the range of 9.87–11.06 kPa.
Displacements of mandible dentition
The detailed displacements (X-axis, Y-axis and Z-axis) of
mandible teeth after the application of 1.5 N retraction
force is shown in Fig. 3. In the X-axis direction, all the
teeth were inclined mesially due to the retracting force.
As the cross-sectional area enlarged, the displacement of
mandibular dentition in the X-axis was reduced in ribbon
wire group and rectangular wire group and round
wire group. In the Y-axis direction, the posterior teeth
were tipped to the lingual side, whereas the anterior teeth
exhibited a labial-oriented motion. In the Z-axis direction,
the first molar moved in an upward direction, but
the central incisor had an opposite trend, indicating that
the anterior teeth might intrude vertically since the posterior
teeth tilted inward. The largest vertical displacement
among mandible dentition was exhibited by the
mandibular first molar, where the ribbon wire group
exhibited the least vertical movement and the round wire
group showed the highest displacement.
Displacement of the buccal line and lingual line
The displacements of the buccal line and lingual line in
different groups are shown in Fig. 4 (red refers to the
buccal line, and blue refers to the lingual line). From the
observation of the curve contour, the tendencies of the
buccal line and lingual line in different arch wire groups
showed some similarity. The displacement was dramatically
increased in the first molar region, followed by a
slight decrease in the premolar zone before subsequently
rising in the anterior teeth region.
In the rectangular wire group (0.017 × 0.025-in. and
0.019 × 0.025-in.), the maximum displacements of the
buccal line and lingual line were 15.98 μm and 15.91 μm,
respectively. The movement of the first molar region was
intermediate between the ribbon arch group and the
round wire group. In the ribbon arch group, the lingual
line displacement in the first molar region was 0.008 mm,
which was also the lowest among the corresponding
results of all the studied groups. Notably, the values of
the 0.025 × 0.017-in. arch wire displacement, which were
higher than those of any other group, peaked at 18.55 μm
in the central incisor region with a spike-like shape. In the
0.025 × 0.019-in. group, the displacements ranged from
the first molar to the central incisor of the buccal line,
and the lingual line was lowest among the studied groups.
In the round wire group, the displacement ranging from
the first molar to the central incisor of the buccal line and
lingual line was higher than those of the rectangular and
ribbon arch groups. The movement induced by the Φ
0.020-in. wire was 16.11 μm, which was lower than that
induced by the Φ 0.018-in. wire (17.18 μm).
Deformation of the arch wire
The deformation range between maximum deformation
and minimum deformation in different groups after
the application of 1.5 N retraction force is summarized
in Fig. 5. The rectangular wire group and ribbon wire
group displayed a relative stress concentration in the
anterior zone. The deformation range of the Φ 0.018-in.
wire group was the largest (25.27 μm) in this study while
the deformation range in 0.025 × 0.019-in. group was the
lowest (6.94 μm).
Discussion
The high prevalence of Class II malocclusion in patients
prompted the wide usage of intermaxillary elastic traction.
However, scarce data and few documented details
are available regarding the influence of arch wire geometry
during the maxillomandibular traction procedure.
In the present study, we principally aimed to simulate
the dentofacial structure via FEA to explore the effect of
arch wire cross-sectional shape on Class II intermaxillary
traction.
Often, the changes in vertical and horizontal vectors
caused by Class II intermaxillary traction involve anchorage
loss [7, 24, 25]. There was an average growth of
5.0 mm of the lower face height after an average duration
of 1.3 years for the fixed appliances and Class II elastics,
with which mandibular growth could surpass maxilla
growth by 1.1 mm [4]. Since maxillary growth was suppressed
by intermaxillary traction, Jason et al. observed
a 1.2 mm mesial movement of the mandibular first molar
[5]. Nina el al. found that there was an open bite in half
of the high-angle Class II patients who received bimaxillary
surgery and mandibular skeletal relapse in 40% of
the patients [26]. The adverse effect of anchorage loss
tended to clockwise rotation of the occlusal plane and
aggravate the treatment difficulty of high-angle Class II
malocclusion.
Based on the FEA model in this study, differential
results were observed in the arch wire group with different
cross-sections in terms of mandibular first molar
movement. The mechanics of arch wires have been recognized
as one of the contributing factors of anchorage
loss but have not been fully investigated [5]. Theoretically,
the moment of inertia (I) of the rectangular wire is
equal to “h3w/12” (where “h” refers to the height of the
cross-section and “w” refers to the width); I of the round
wire is equal to “πr4/64” (where “r” refers to the radius of
the cross-section) [11]. When the diameter of the circular
wire is enlarged by 20%, the bending stiffness is slightly
more than doubled [27]. In addition, the magnitude of
the height in the cross-section of the rectangular wire
was far greater than the width. The formula indicated the
possibility of creating a more rigid rectangular wire by
only changing only height and without changing the total
area. In this study, the ribbon wire group exhibited the
lowest vertical and horizontal displacement, followed by
the rectangular wire group and round wire group.
In this FE study, the remarkable execution of the ribbon
wire in minimizing the vertical and horizontal displacements
provided the basis for reviving the ribbon wire.
The good performance of the ribbon wire in anchorage
control could be attributed to the relatively greater height
of the arch wire cross-section. A greater height tended
to enlarge the moment of inertia and provide more rigid
support to the occlusal plane. To our knowledge, only
Inami et al. reported a minimum vertical bowing effect
with a ribbonwise lingual appliance [28]. However, they
also remarked on insufficient control of the ribbon wire in
lingual tipping due to the thinner geometry, and a palatal
bar was needed to keep the tooth upright. The drawback
was consistent with the FEA results in this study since
the ribbon wire group displayed greater Y-axis displacement
and frontal rotation than other groups.
There were very similar results displayed by different
arch wire groups in which the PDL around the distal
root endured the most stress. Previous studies also
revealed the relatively high occurrence of root resorption
in the distal root of the mandibular first molar in
orthodontic treatment [29]. In the present FE study,
the elastic characteristics of the PDL were assumed to
be isotropic homogenous linear elastic, rather than the
nonlinear viscoelastic, to facilitate the FE reconstruction
process. After testing 4 different FE modelling strategies,
Hohmann et al. has pointed out that the PDL is insensitive
to the modelling and reconstruction techniques for
low orthodontic forces [30]. Xu et al. combined the optical
measurements and numerical simulations to determine
the elastic modulus of the PDL and they reported
a range from 0.01 to 0.08 MPa (0.04 ± 0.02 MPa) in the
initial elastic phase [31]. Therefore, the elastic modulus
(E = 0.667) in this study could be interpreted as
acceptable.
The displacement results of the buccal line and lingual
line as well as the displacements of mandibular dentition
also demonstrated that there was an association between
cross-sectional geometry and mandibular tooth movement
in Class II intermaxillary traction. Monlasser et al.
stated that the importance of the arch wire cross-section
in mechano-therapy should be appreciated since the
force level in the vertical direction was amplified from
16 to 120% when the 0.014-in. arch was replaced by the
0.016-in. [32]. In the present study, with the same shape,
a larger cross-sectional size would resulted in mandibular
dentition movement. The increasing interspace between
the bracket and arch wire induced less friction and less
slack in the root controls, which might be detrimental to
the en masse retraction of maxillary anterior teeth [33].
Similarly, the displacement ranges from the first molar to
the central incisor of the buccal line and lingual line were
higher than those of the rectangular and ribbon arch
groups.
Arch deformation is directly correlated with the
resistance to sliding, and permanent wire deformation
heavily encumbers tooth movement efficiency
[34]. From the perspective of the second moment of
inertia, the ribbon arch wire group (0.025 × 0.017-in.
and 0.025 × 0.019-in.) had greater bending resistance
than the rectangular wire group (0.017 × 0.025-in.
and 0.019 × 0.025-in.) since the width and height were
inverted. Compared with that of the rectangular wire
group, the vertical displacement of anchorage teeth in
the ribbon wire group was reduced, but the possibility
of buccal tipping of mandibular anterior teeth was also
increased. The 0.025 × 0.017-in. ribbon arch wire group
showed a spike-like shape peak in the central incisor
area, indicating inferior control of the mandibular
anterior region, as mentioned previously. Studies have
concluded that round arch wires exhibit lower friction
than rectangular wires [35, 36]. However, in this study,
the round arch wire, especially the Φ 0.018-in. wire,
displayed greater arch deformation than the edgewise
groups. The reason might be ascribed to the relatively
lower bending stiffness of the round arch wires. The
wire deformation of the rectangular arch was close to
that of the ribbon arch group.
There were some limitations in this study because this
experiment was conducted entirely using computer software.
For instance, the setting of biological characteristics
may differ from the real properties in vivo. Future
studies, especially clinical trials, should be conducted to
investigate the effect of arch wire geometry in vivo.
Conclusions
Within the limitations of this FEA, the cross-section of
the arch wire exerted an influence on force delivery in
Class II intermaxillary traction. With the same shape,
a larger cross-sectional size led to smaller mandibular
dentition movement. For the rectangular arch wire and
ribbon arch wire groups, since the height and width
were inverted, the vertical displacement of anchorage
teeth in the ribbon wire group was reduced, but
the possibility of buccal tipping of mandibular anterior
teeth also increased.