Introduction
Patient satisfaction has gained increasing attention
from dental health providers and the medical industry.
Consequently, different methods and strategies
have been developed and implemented to measure
and improve patient/customer satisfaction. Nevertheless,
evidence shows that more work in this field is still
needed [1]. Patient satisfaction can be estimated effectively
through two important methods: interviews and
questionnaires [2].
By asking patients the right questions, there is almost
limitless and useful information that can be collected.
In some cases, relying on observation or clinical examination
to collect the needed information is not a practical
approach. Instead, it is preferable to ask a valid
and reliable set of questions. A questionnaire is a type
of communication medium between the participants
and the researcher [3]. The role of a questionnaire is to
provide a standardized approach across all participants
[3]. In self-administered questionnaires, questions
are asked in the same way and in a format that both
matches the needs of the study and is convenient for
participants. If these conditions are not met, it will be
challenging for the researcher to interpret the answers.
First and foremost, survey instruments should have
special psychometric properties when they are selfadministered.
Annie G. defined the psychometric
properties of an instrument as “the construction and
validation of the measurement instrument” [4]. These
properties reflect the instrument’s reliability and validity
[5]. Patient satisfaction is a subjective assessment
[6]. Therefore, the psychometric properties of the
instrument should be tested before inviting patients
to express their opinions. If the study fails to satisfy
this necessity, the collected data will be questionable,
and the survey conclusion cannot be trusted [7]. That
is, testing the validity and reliability of the questionnaire
helps the researcher estimate the level of accuracy
and consistency of the collected data. Under these two
components, there are several subtypes: face validity
and construct validity, on the one hand, and reliability
and internal consistency, on the other hand.
Face validity may best be understood as reflecting
the extent to which the instrument measures what it is
intended to measure [8]. Face validity, which is a form
of content validity, plays an essential role in constructing
and testing the questionnaire [9]. This type of validity
can be tested through expert assessment of items
and interviews [10, 11].
Construct validity reflects how far the questionnaire
or the index truly evaluates the hypothesis, theory or
themes under examination. It should reveal that the
‘items’ (questions) scores on a specific domain anticipate
the theoretical trait it claims to predict [12]. One of the
good and most widely used methods to estimate construct
validity is confirmatory factor analysis [13].
Instrument reliability means that the instrument consistently
reflects the construct that it is measuring by giving
the same score if used over time or across multiple
administrations. The stability of scores over time requires
that all other things be equal [14]. This means that in our
study, no adjustment or changes occurred intraorally or
to the removable dentures (RDs) between the first and
second assessments. Intraclass correlation coefficients
(ICCs) are an important element for test–retest reliability
assessment [15].
Internal consistency, as described by Revelle, is the
degree to which all items quantify the same construct
[16]. One of the widely used methods for estimating the
internal consistency of a questionnaire or index is Cronbach’s
alpha. It helps quantify the reliability of a score and
summarize the data from multiple questionnaire items
[17].
Although patient satisfaction is an important subject,
we could not find in the dental literature a valid and reliable
instrument in the Arabic language that measures
patient satisfaction with RDs.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the validity and
reliability of new instruments in the Arabic language
that measure patient satisfaction with all types of RDs.
The Arabic version was translated from valid and reliable
German instruments [7].
Method and materials
The study is in full accordance with the World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki. The medical ethics
committee at Ajman University approved the study. All
participants gave their written informed consent to all
study procedures.
The participants included in the study were Arabicspeaking
patients who had a partial or complete RD. RDs
can be tissue-, teeth-, implant- or combined-supported
dentures. The participant should be adapted and wearing
their RDs for at least two months. If patients had intraor
extraoral pathological findings, were not wearing their
RDs regularly or were classified in one of the ten main
groups of the international classification of diseases or
mental and behavioral disorders [18], they were excluded
from the study. All the patients included in the study
were treated at Ajman University between 2015 and 2019.
The study went in three steps (Fig. 1).
Step one
Two bilingual translators (one was a prosthodontist)
translated the eight-item German questionnaire for the
upper jaw and the second eight-item questionnaire for
the lower jaw to the Arabic language (forward translation).
The Arabic version was translated back (backward
translation) to German by two new bilingual translators
(one was a prosthodontist). In accordance with Guillemin
et al.’s recommendation, only one in every couple
was aware of the questionnaire’s intended concepts [19].
This helps in detecting subtle differences with the original
questionnaire. Any discrepancies, misunderstandings
or unclear wording at the end of the forward or backward
translation landed in the hands of the expert panel. The
expert panel reviewed the translation, resolved the discrepancies
and finalized the Arabic version.
A 5-point Likert scale was used to capture the participants’
responses for every item (question). The scale
range was very good (1), good (2), neither good nor bad
(3), bad (4) and very bad (5). The sum of all items represents
the satisfaction index with the RD; the higher the
index value, the less satisfied the participant was. At the
end of this step, two pilot questionnaires for measuring
patient satisfaction with their upper and lower RDs were
constructed.
Step two (laboratory test)
In steps two and three, we follow the methodology used
to develop the German instruments [7].
For the second step, two dentists were trained to conduct
cognitive interviews: one as the interviewer and
the second as the observer. They reported the interview
results separately to the study coordinator.
Step two aimed to test the face validity of the questionnaires.
Three rounds were sufficient to test the face
validity using the cognitive interviewing approach with
43 participants. The approach is described in a previous
paper [7]. The interviewer read the questions to
the participants in the first round. In the second and
third rounds, he handed the questionnaires to the participants
so they could read aloud and answer the items.
During the interview, the interviewer tried to assess the
degree to which the questionnaire subjectively measured
the domains that it was supposed to be measured.
He assessed whether the items were clear and whether
the patient answered what truly needed to be answered.
He also tried to estimate the appropriateness and suitability
of the items. To achieve that, two methods were
used: think aloud and verbal probing. The most commonly
used probes were overt encouragement, silent
probe, repetition, comprehension, elaboration, asking
for clarification and paraphrasing. The observer primarily
reported the interview quality. He described whether
the interviewer was able to extract the needed information
without misusing the probes or using leading
statements. He also described the interaction between
the interviewer and the participants and how seriously
the participants engaged in the interview. At the end of
every round, the interviewer and observer reports were
handed to the study coordinator. The reports were subjected
to data analyses to form the main report. Three
main reports were made. The main report was discussed
with the expert panel. All members of the expert panel
were aware of the study methodology and the construct
of interest. Two of them were bilingual, and one was a
developer of the original German questionnaires. They
reviewed the interviews’ results (the main report) and
confirmed the needed adjustments in the pilot questionnaires,
which were suggested by the interviewer, observer
and study coordinator. Subsequently, the form and the
type of questionnaire adjustments were decided before a
new round of interviews was begun. The adjustments in
the questionnaires aimed mainly at improving face validity
and participants’ acceptance of the instruments.
Step three (field test)
This step aimed at estimating the construct validity and
reliability of the upper jaw and the lower jaw satisfaction
questionnaires and test the two indexes’ validity and
reliability.
To achieve that, 235 questionnaires were distributed to
133 participants. After one week, the participants were
asked to complete the questionnaires again.
Factor analysis was used to assess the construct validity
and to detect the factors that underlie the study dataset.
Factor analysis was also used to construct the two
indexes. The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and
Cronbach’s alpha were used to estimate the reliability and
suitability of the items in the index. A p-value below 0.05
was considered statistically significant. The statistical
analysis was performed using IBM® SPSS 25.0 (SPSS Inc).
Results
Step one
The result of the two-way translation of the tested German
version was two pilot questionnaires, one for the
upper jaw and the second one for the lower jaw. Every
questionnaire contained eight items. The first item concerned
patient satisfaction with RD in general. The other
seven items cover the following domains: eating, speaking,
esthetics, cleanability of the removable partial denture
(RPD) and RPD retention, support and stability.
Step two (laboratory test)
Fifteen participants (8 males) engaged in the first round
of interviews. The participants were wearing 21 RDs: six
CDs, seven RPDs with metal framework, and two acrylic
RPDs. Ten of the 21 RDs were in the upper jaw.
The interview duration ranged from 15 to 25 min.
At the end of every interview, the interviewer and
the observer reports were subjected to data analyses
(Table 1). Subsequently, the main report, which was discussed
with the expert panel, was written. After the first
round of interviews, one of the 15 participants faced
minor difficulties in understanding what we truly needed
him to understand in items two, three, and four. Adjustments
in the items, which measured patient satisfaction
with RD retention, support, and stability, were made by
adding elaboration.
The second round of interviews included 13 participants
(7 males). Nine of the 18 RDs were in the upper jaw.
The participants were wearing 5 CDs (upper and lower),
seven RPDs with metal framework, and one acrylic RPD.
Interviews revealed that all participants were able to
understand the items. Data were analyzed, and the main
report was formulated. The expert panel held a meeting
to discuss the results of the interviews, and a decision
was made to make no additional major changes,
except for bolding the items’ keywords to increase their
readability.
The last round of interviews included 15 participants (7
males) wearing 21 RDs. The participants were wearing 6
CDs (upper and lower), seven RPDs with a metal framework
and two acrylic RPDs. Twelve of the 21 RDs were
in the upper jaw. The second- and third-round confirmed
that all the participants comprehended all items, and
both questionnaires were self-administered instruments
with good face validity.
Step three (field test)
Two hundred thirty-five questionnaires were distributed
to 133 participants with a mean age of 65. At the time of
examination, the mean usage of the RDs was 21.5 months
(Table 2).
The correlation matrix between the items (Table 3),
Bartlett’s sphericity test and Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin test
(KMO) were used to estimate whether the dataset
was suitable for factor analysis. The correlation matrix
between the items was acceptable, not very high or very
low, with a determinant equal to 0.005. Bartlett’s test
results were statistically significant. The KMO results
for the upper jaw and lower jaw questionnaires were
0.87, which is considered meritorious according to some
researchers [20]. Therefore, it was confirmed that the
dataset is suitable for factor analyses.
Eight linear components were identified for every questionnaire
(Table 4). The analysis of the dataset revealed
that for every questionnaire, only one factor could be
retained. The retained factor had an eigenvector over
1.0 (Table 4). The factor explains 60.95% and 63.06 of
the upper jaw and lower jaw questionnaires’ total variance,
respectively. The component matrix shows that the
items’ loadings onto the extracted factor were high, > 0.6
(Table 5). Therefore, the one-factor model was reliable
[21, 22]. Subsequently, the items’ scores could be
summed to form an upper jaw index and a lower jaw
index for measuring patient satisfaction with their RD
[22, 23].
Cronbach’s alpha (α) was used to assess the internal
consistency of the questionnaires [22]. Cronbach’s alpha
for the upper jaw questionnaire was α = 0.91. For the
lower jaw questionnaire, it was α = 0.92 (Table 6). This
reflects excellent instruments internal consistency [24].
Eighty-seven participants (47 male, 54%) wearing
102 RDs (52 upper jaws) completed the questionnaires
again. The RDs were nine acrylic RDs, 44 RDs with metal
framework and 49 complete dentures. The participants
answered the second questionnaire one week after filling
out the first questionnaire. The ICC (test–retest) values
ranged from 0.72 to 0.95 (Table 7). Therefore, the level
of reliability can be considered “moderate” to “excellent”.
[25]
Discussion
The Arabic version of the upper jaw questionnaire and
the lower jaw questionnaire to measure patient satisfaction
with RDs proved reliable and valid. Factor analysis
identified a single factor with an eigenvalue above 1. The
items in every questionnaire shared the same cluster and
could be summed to form an upper jaw index and lower
jaw index that reflected the level of patient satisfaction
with their RDs. This cluster contained eight items covering
the following domains: speaking, eating, appearance,
cleanability, RPD movement in three directions (retention,
stability and support) and overall patient satisfaction.
The two indexes proved to be reliable with excellent
internal consistency.
Quality control and quality assurance processes were
applied throughout the study steps. The first level was
the interview observer. The second level was the study
coordinator, who compared the interviewer report with
the observer report. He documented any discrepancy
between the reports before performing the data analyses
and drafting the main report. The third level was the
expert panel, which continually monitored the study until
the end by holding regular meetings with the investigators
to track progress and assess how much the investigators
adhered to the given study guidelines. This layering
of control helps improve the quality of the study and
strengthen the confidence in the study conclusion.
However, the study had several limitations. It was not
a multicenter study, and all data were collected from
patients treated at Ajman University. COVID-19-related
shutdowns reduced the number of participants and interrupted
the study flow. The authors discarded the questionnaires
that were returned from the participants who
were asked to complete the questionnaires again if they
sent it after 5 weeks of completing the first questionnaire.
At the end of the second round of interviews, all 13
participants expressed a full understanding of the items.
According to previous studies [26, 27], to reach data
saturation in qualitative studies, 12 is considered the
minimum sample size. Subsequently, 13 can be viewed
as sufficient for the data analysis. Nevertheless, a third
round with 15 participants was performed to emphasize
the results that both questionnaires were self-administered
instruments with good face validity. No additional
interviews after the third round were conducted because
the participants stopped adding new contributions to the
existing findings and holding more interviews was considered
repetitious of comments and themes [28].
The plan was to collect 300 questionnaires. Unfortunately,
the COVID-19-related shutdowns forced the
researcher to close the study at a sample size of 235. A
sample size of 200 should be considered fair [29]. Moreover,
some researchers believe that a sample size between
100 and 200 can be good enough if there are communalities
after extraction in the 0.5 range [30]. Others stated
that a sample size of 100 is not recommended, unless the
loading is greater than 0.51 [30, 31]. In the current study,
all items had a loading ≥ 6 (Table 5). Therefore, the study
sample size can be considered acceptable.
Many studies have been conducted to determine
the different aspects of patient satisfaction with RDs.
These aspects can be categorized into two groups. The
first group is RPD-related aspects, such as fit, chewing,
speech, appearance, denture cleanliness, occluding
teeth, distribution of chewing forces, type of RPD and
RPD location (upper or lower jaw) [32–36]. The second
is patient-related aspects, such as the patient’s personality,
socioeconomic status, emotional status, expectations,
patient-doctor relationship, prior experience with
RPDs, age, sex, natural tooth problems, oral cavity status
and general health status [36–39]. Although the importance
of the previous aspects cannot be denied, not all
of them were covered by the study questionnaires. Only
the aspects in the first group were considered in the
study questionnaires. The other aspects are confounders
or not directly related to patient satisfaction with RDs.
Some aspects require more extended and time-consuming
instruments to be measured. However, we aimed to
develop a relatively quick-to-complete questionnaire
that was easy to understand and walk through. Moreover,
we tried to make the questionnaire more suitable
for elderly individuals, who represent the majority of RD
wearers. [40] Accordingly, the 5-point Likert scale can be
considered a good choice because it supports the questionnaire’s
simplicity. Additionally, it is the scale used in
many well-known instruments, such as the OHIP-14 or
OHIP-EDENT.
Factor loadings help estimate the relative contribution
that an item makes to a factor and represent the
correlation of each original item with the selected factor.
A loading greater than 0.3 is considered necessary
by some researchers [22]. Others consider 0.4 the cutoff
point [31]. All the items in the two questionnaires had
a loading of ≥ 0.6 (Table 5). Therefore, the factor can be
considered reliable [21], and all items are of substantive
importance to the one-factor model, and none of them
should be ignored [22]. This underlying one dimension
(factor) reflects constructs that cannot be measured
directly, which is patient satisfaction with their RD. However,
this factor can be estimated by summing the eight
items to form a patient satisfaction dimension that creates
satisfaction with the upper jaw RD index and satisfaction
with the lower jaw RD index.
The ICC was used to compare participants’ estimation
of their satisfaction with RD at different times. The
assessment of the questionnaire or index reliability was
conducted at the item level and the index level. For ICC
calculation, we considered the index scores and the order
of item scores as well as their relative values (absolute
agreement). The data were analyzed using a single measurement.
The analyses showed that the upper jaw questionnaire
and index test–retest reliability was “good” to
“excellent”, and the lower jaw questionnaire and index
test–retest reliability was “moderate” to “excellent”.
Cronbach’s alpha was used to measure the instruments’
internal consistency and scale reliability and to determine
the degree to which all the questionnaire items measured
the same construct. Cronbach’s alpha was 0.91 and 0.92
for the upper jaw and lower jaw, respectively. These values
indicated that the scale was reliable. Table 6 shows
that we attempted to improve the reliability (increasing
the α value) by removing the unfitted item from the
index. The results showed that all the items fit in their
instrument, and none should be removed to raise the α
value above 0.91 for the upper jaw or 0.92 for the lower
jaw. This point is supported by the fact that the items
are well correlated with their index. These findings
strengthen the previous argument that the instruments
have a high internal consistency.
Because RD is relatively one of the cheapest prosthodontics
treatment modalities for individuals who cannot
afford dental implants, the RD is widely used in developing
countries [41, 42]. There is a disagreement between
the studies regarding the level of patient satisfaction with
RDs [34, 43, 44]. Moreover, patient perception and expectations
have a noticeable impact on patient satisfaction
[45, 46]. For example, denture comfort and mastication
ability are critical factors for some individuals, but aesthetics
and retention are the essential factors for others
[47]. A considerable number of studies proved that many
factors impact patient satisfaction. The most common
sources of discomfort in the RD patients are bad fit of
RPD (33.6%), chewing ability (29.5%), natural tooth problems
(26.3%), overall patient perception (26.2%), intraoral
cleanliness (20%), speaking (18%), aesthetic (17.8%), and
RD cleanliness (15.3%) and unpleasant odor (13.2%) [34,
35]. Some researchers believe that the most common reasons
for patients’ dissatisfaction with partial dentures are
the abutment teeth: condition, number, and position in
the arch [48]. Also, the type of denture material, support,
and major connectors impact the level of patient satisfaction
[48]. Because many variables may impact patient
satisfaction, small sample size is insufficient to reach the
needed certainty. In other words, a large sample size may
be necessary for more precise estimation, generalize the
results, and reduce uncertainty. [49, 50]
Different methods and strategies were developed
to collect the data. Patient satisfaction could be estimated
effectively through one of two forms; interviews
and questionnaires [2]. In a structured interview, the
interviewer asks the questions in a standard method
using one of three approaches: face-to-face, telephone,
or computer-assisted personal interviews. The most
used approach is a face-to-face interview [2, 51]. In this
approach, the interviewer can establish a friendly atmosphere.
Therefore, he will be able to improve the participants’
cooperation and raise the level of survey response
rates [2, 51]. Above that, he can clarify what the participants
may think ambiguous question, resolve any
vague participant’s answer, or, if possible, seek more indepth
information or follow-up clarification [2, 3]. On
the other hand, the face-to-face interview is relatively
expensive and time-consuming. Sometimes, it is not
applicable when large sample size is required or when
the participants are far from the interviewer. Therefore,
telephone interviews or computer-assisted personal
interviewing can be considered a better approach [52].
These approaches are less time-consuming and give the
researcher the ability to increase the sample size. However,
they have limitations and disadvantages. [52] For
example, not all the targeted participants can be reached
through the telephone or do not have computer or computer
knowledge or typing skills. Subsequently, the
results produced from the collected data may be considered
biased [52]. On the other hand, the valid and reliable
self-administered questionnaire can be used directly in
the clinic or sent via mail or email to reach more participants.
Above that, there is no need to arrange interview
appointments, and the participant can fill out the questionnaire
at their convenience. Therefore, it can increase
the sample size with less bias and lower cost and effort.
Dental literature suffers a lack of valid and reliable
instruments in the Arabic language that estimate patient
satisfaction with different types of dental treatment, and
further studies are needed in this regard.
Conclusion
The Arabic version of patient satisfaction with the upper
RD questionnaire and index and patient satisfaction with
the lower RD questionnaire and index are self-administered
instruments with good face validity, good construct
validity and moderate to excellent reliability. The four
instruments can be used in clinical studies to investigate
patient satisfaction with any type of RD.
An electronic copy of the German instruments and
their translation into English is available under this link:
https:// qi. quint essenz. de/ qi/ downl oads/ qi_ alJag hsi_
appen dix. pdf. An electronic copy of the Arabic version is
available in the Additional files 1 and 2.