Background
The treatment of carious lesions has changed over time,
and conventional approaches involving total removal
of the decayed tissue have been replaced by minimally
invasive approaches aiming to mainly prevent disease
progression and preserve pulp vitality [1]. However
the development of cost-effective caries prevention and
arresting techniques is still a major challenge [2, 3].
Since the COVID-19 virus was announced by the
World Health Organization (WHO) to be a worldwide
pandemic whose transmission occurs mainly by droplet
infection, which can be caused by rotary instruments
in dental practice [4], dental public healthcare workers
have been continuously searching for effective, simple
and aerosol-free methods that maximize caries prevention
while minimizing the spread of infection [5]. In
addition, the use of nonsurgical/nonrestorative cavity
treatment (NRCT) as emergency management for dental
caries was adopted [6].
NRCT is a treatment option for dentinal caries in primary
teeth in which the cavity margins will be exposed
to enable good oral hygiene measures. Silver diamine
fluoride (SDF) application is recommended as a support
method for NRCT for cases of active caries or for
patients with high caries risk [7].
NRCT can be as effective as restorations in the management
of carious lesions in deciduous teeth [8, 9].
However, in some cases, restorations should still be
performed after ensuring the successful arrest of the
lesion for the comfort of the patient and promoting oral
health until the exfoliation of the primary tooth [10].
Several approaches have been developed over the
years to arrest caries and preserve pulp vitality [1],
including the use of chemotherapeutics including metal
ions [11], antibiotics [11], fluorides [12] and probiotics
[13]. Chemotherapeutic silver preparations, including
silver nitrate, SDF, and ammonium hexafluoro silicate,
are also used to arrest active caries, particularly in primary
teeth [14].
In 2014, SDF was approved for dental use in many
countries [15]. The recent suggestion of SDF as an appropriate,
nonsurgical and nonaerosolizing management
paradigm for painless and painful carious lesions without
pulpal involvement during the COVID-19 pandemic has
prompted its further study [5].
SDF is a safe, minimally invasive, low cost, portable
material that can be used in variable community settings
by members of a healthcare team [5, 6]. It is known for
its antibacterial effect [16], as well as its caries-arresting
effect [17], and it is one of the best treatment approaches
for controlling dental caries in primary dentition [18].
However, it may not eliminate the need for a restorative
approach if the lesion fails to arrest or increases in size
and/or depth. In this case, the main function of SDF is to
slow down the progression of the disease and bridge the
time gap until a definitive treatment can be administered
[19].
Similarly, SDF can be used alongside the atraumatic
restorative technique (ART), thus preventing irreversible
pulpitis or dental infections of sealed dental lesions in a
technique known as silver-modified ART (SMART) [20].
For SDF to be acceptable on a wider scale as a treatment
modality for primary teeth, unfavorable adverse
effects, such as staining of the tooth structure and adjacent
tooth-colored restorations, should be managed [18,
21], since this is a considerable concern of patients and
parents [22, 23].
Several materials have been used to mask the unfavorable
tooth discoloration from SDF (for example, KI can be
applied immediately after SDF), suggesting that discoloration
of carious lesions can be masked without reducing
the caries-arresting effect [24, 25]. However, studies
quantifying tooth discoloration after SDF application, as
well as the masking effect of KI [26], have been predominantly
conducted on permanent teeth, as described in a
recent systematic review by Roberts et al. [27].
The contraindications of KI use in patients undergoing
thyroid gland therapy or in patients with allergies
to potassium or iodine increases the need to evaluate
other discoloration masking techniques [19]. In their
review, Roberts et al. [27] found only one in vitro study
comparing white restorative materials and their subsequent
impacts on tooth lightness in permanent teeth
[28]. However, the literature regarding the masking effect
of tooth-colored restorations such as CMP and GI on
the tooth discoloration associated with SDF application
is still deficient, especially in primary teeth. Hence, this
in vitro trial aims to quantify the color change associated
with the application of SDF on extracted carious primary
molars; the potential masking of this color change by KI,
CMP, and GI; and the effect of aging on this color masking
effect.
Methods
Study setting
A total of 52 extracted primary molars with occlusal
caries extending to the dentin were collected from the
outpatient clinic at the Department of Pediatric Dentistry
and Dental Public Health, Faculty of Dentistry, Ain
Shams University. All extracted teeth were nonrestorable
and were collected from children between 4 and 7 years
of age from both sexes with no previous history of systemic
diseases.
All experimental protocols were approved by the
Research Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Dentistry
of Ain Shams University, Egypt (FDASUREC), under the
number FDASU-RECID111610. The authors followed
the institutional and international guidelines mentioned
in the Declaration of Helsinki for the use of human body
material in medical research. In accordance with the
requirements of the Research Ethics Committee, both
verbal and written informed consent were obtained from
the legal guardian of the child before the collection of the
extracted teeth. The methodology applied followed the
checklist for reporting in vitro studies (CRIS Guidelines)
[29].
The study was carried out in the Department of Operative
Dentistry, Dental School (Carolinum), Goethe University
Frankfurt, Germany, over a period of 6 months.
This was a laboratory study in which balanced block randomization
with an allocation ratio of 1:1 was used.
Tooth preparation
First, plaque was thoroughly cleaned from the teeth
using a polishing brush and a nonfluoridated prophylactic
paste (Clean Polish, Kerr, Switzerland) in a low-speed
handpiece (Dentsply Sirona, Germany) at a speed of
4,000 rpm. Then, the teeth were mounted in acrylic resin
(Technovit® 4000, Kulzer, Germany) cylinders 3 cm in
height and 1.5 cm in diameter to facilitate their cutting
and handling. Afterwards, they were stored in distilled
water at room temperature.
The enamel surrounding a carious lesion was ground
with water-cooled carborundum discs (6911 HK, Komet
Dental, Germany) attached to a low-speed motor (Ultimate
450, NSK, Germany) at a speed of 6000 rpm, creating
a flat occlusal surface with exposed dentin. Carious
dentin slices (5 × 5 mm) were then cut out of the tooth
with the same disc. To ensure size standardization of the
sample, pink wax was cut into small squares (5 × 5 mm),
placed over the carious lesion during cutting and then
removed immediately thereafter. Molars were then randomly
divided into four groups (13 teeth each) according
to the materials tested: Group A, SDF 38%; Group B, SDF
38% + KI; Group C, SDF 38% + CMP; and Group D, SDF
38% + GI. Figure 1 shows the experimental setup.
Addition of the tested materials
A baseline reading was recorded for all the samples before
the addition of any of the tested materials. One drop of
SDF (Riva Star, SDI GmbH, Germany) was applied to all
specimens for 1 min, and then the specimens were rinsed
with water for another 30 s and dried with air. Group B:
KI was applied to the tooth directly after SDF according
to the manufacturer’s instructions until the white precipitate
totally disappeared. Group C: After the application
and rinsing of SDF, a universal self-etching adhesive
(Scotchbond™, 3 M ESPE, USA) was applied. A 4 mm
layer of universal composite restorative material, shade
A1 (Filtek Z250, 3 M ESPE, USA), was added in 2 increments
of 2 mm each and then light cured by an LED
polymerization lamp (blue phase, Ivoclar Vivadent AG,
Schaan, Liechtenstein) for 20 s with a power of 1100 mw/
cm2 and a wavelength of 500 nm. Group D: The dentin
was conditioned (Dentin Conditioner, GC Corporation,
Japan) for 20 s and then rinsed, and a fast-setting glass
ionomer restoration, shade A1 (Fuji IX Gp, GC Corporation,
Japan), was added in 4 mm increments, followed
by a topcoat (G-Plus, GC Corporation, Japan), which was
light cured for 20 s with the same LED polymerization
lamp. The color was recorded for all specimens directly
after applying the tested materials. All specimens underwent
aging using a Suntest aging device (Suntest CPS + ,
Atlas Material Testing Technology GmbH, Linsengericht,
Germany) with a xenon arc lamp (150,000 lx, wavelength
> 370 nm) for 24 h in water at 37 °C according to
EN ISO 7491, and the color was recorded [30].
Color measurement
Color was recorded by a spectrophotometer (X-Rite
SP62, X-Rite GmbH, Cologne, Germany). The device was
adjusted on a D-65 standard illuminant and calibrated
once daily on both white and black calibration tiles. Each
specimen was dried and centered over the 4 mm diameter
aperture of the device, and the mean of 4 recordings
was taken for each reading. Three readings were recorded
for each specimen as follows: 1 = baseline, 2 = directly
after the application of the tested material, and 3 = after
Suntest aging. The L*, a*, and b* values (L* = lightness,
+ a* = red, − a* = green, + b* = yellow, − b* = blue)
were measured to calculate ΔL, Δa, and Δb. Then, the
extent of the color change (ΔE) was assessed using the
following equation [31]:
Outcome
The primary endpoint of this study was to identify and
assess the ability of the factor “material” to mask the
color change produced by the application of SDF on primary
dentin.
The secondary endpoint of this study was to determine
the direction of this color change in an attempt to better
understand the masking effect and hence provide better
esthetic outcomes.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted with SPSS 24 (SPSS,
IBM, USA). A proposed sample size of 52 primary molars
(13 in each group) was considered sufficient to detect
an effect size of f = 0.4 with a power of 70% with a significance
level of 5% [32]. The means and standard deviations
were calculated.
Samples were numbered and placed in identical containers
by one operator and allocated to the different
E = (L1 − L2)2
+ (a1 − a2)2
+ (b1 − b2)2
groups by a computer-generated program to create a balanced
block randomization with an allocation ratio of 1:1
using random block sizes of 4 and 8 [33], while the implementation
of the experiment itself was done by another
operator.
The primary endpoint was analyzed using multivariate
analysis of variance (MANOVA) to test the effect of the
factor “material”. The Scheffé post hoc test was applied
for multiple comparisons among the different treatment
groups. The first comparison was among all the tested
groups to evaluate the differences between T0-T1, while
the second compared the tested groups to evaluate the
differences between T1-T2. Statistical significance was
considered at p < 0.05 for all tests.
In addition, a descriptive statistic including the means
and standard deviations for the values L*, a*, and b* was
used to interpret the direction of color change in different
groups at different time points (T0, T1, and T2) to
fulfill the secondary outcome.
Results
The primary analysis included all samples that were randomized.
MANOVA revealed the significant influence
of the factor “material” (p < 0.001). SDF was reported to
cause an obvious color change compared to the color of
carious dentin (ΔE = 17.2) when observed by the naked
eye.
As observed in Table 1, the ΔL results from T0-T1
revealed a color shift that was significantly different
among all treatment groups (0.001 < p < 0.008) except
groups C and D (p = 0.28). After Suntest aging, this difference
was significant among all groups, including
groups C and D (p = 0.04).
Regarding the red/green scale (Δa), SDF resulted in
a color shift that was significantly different for groups
B (p = 0.001) and C (p = 0.001). Moreover, group B
showed a significant difference in color shift in comparison
to group D (p = 0.001). A significant difference in
the color shift was also observed between groups C and
D (p = 0.001). Suntest aging produced the same results,
with the exception that the color shift of group B was
significantly different from that of group C (p = 0.001)
instead of group D (p = 0.64).
With respect to the blue/yellow scale (Δb), the color
shifts of all tested groups varied significantly from one
another (with significance ranging from p < 0.001 to
p < 0.04). After aging, there was no difference in color
shift between group D and either group A (p = 0.67) or
group B (p = 0.10).
The secondary analysis also included all randomized
samples. To interpret the origin and direction of the color
change, L*, a*, and b* values were calculated descriptively
and summarized in Table 2. The L* values suggest
that directly after application of the tested materials,
SDF resulted in a tooth color that was darker than the
color of carious dentin, while all treatment materials (KI,
CMP, and GI) resulted in a lighter tooth color, with CMP
resulting in the lightest, followed by GI and KI. Aging
decreased the L* values in all the groups (shift to darker
colors) compared to the values directly after material
application; CMP was the only material that maintained
a value corresponding to a color lighter than the tooth
baseline color.
The a* values of all groups decreased from T0 to T1,
meaning a reduction in yellow or even a color shift
towards green for the KI groups. This result became
more accentuated in the SDF and GI groups but subsided
in the CMP and KI groups with aging. However, KI
resulted in the greenest values.
Immediately after the application of SDF, Group A
showed a decrease in the b* value towards a less yellow
color, and this value decreased even more from T1 to T2.
In contrast, the b-values of KI and GI increased towards
yellow from T0 to T1, and this yellow color subsided
from T1 to T2. Regarding CMP, the b* value decreased
directly after its application and then increased with
aging to give a yellow color, which was less observable
than the baseline reading.
Discussion
The COVID-19 pandemic has drawn the attention of
dental healthcare workers to the existing gap in the dental
infection control standards implemented to prevent the
transmission of airborne pathogens. Thus, SDF application
is now recommended as one of the most important
alternative nonaerosolizing management of dental caries
[5, 6]. It supports an immediate and likely long-standing
need to reduce aerosol-generating procedures in the dental
therapy to minimize patient-to-patient transmission
of SARS-CoV-2, to protect dental health care workers
from harm, and to address in the long term a movement
toward minimizing aerosol-generating procedures in
dentistry, as required by Raskin et al. [5].
SDF has been extensively researched in children, and
based on a recent systematic review by Jabin et al., the
superiority of the effect of 38% SDF solution over 12%
SDF solution and over placebos on primary dentition
has been proven in vivo. Thus, SDF has been confirmed
as one of the best treatment approaches in the control
of dental caries in primary dentition [18]. However, at a
1-year follow-up, the survival rate of SDF treated teeth in
patients aged 0 to 64 treated in community dental clinics
was reported by Raskin et al. to have increased from 76
to 84% when covered by a restoration on the same day as
SDF application [5]. This underlines the benefit that can
be obtained by restoring teeth after SDF treatment and
underscores the need for further research in this area.
Different restorative materials, such as self-cured GI
(SCGI), resin-modified GI (RMGI) and CMP, have been
used to restore cavitated teeth following SDF treatment
(with or without KI). In their systematic review, Roberts
et al. assessed the effectiveness and extent of staining
reduction achieved when SDF was followed by KI
application, showing that the application of KI after SDF
might reduce staining [27]. Only one of the included
studies, conducted by Nguyen et al., compared the
impact of different white restorative materials on the
lightness of tooth structures treated by SDF or SDF + KI
[28]. However, the study was conducted on permanent
teeth. Hence, its results cannot be generalized for primary
teeth.
Color acceptance is a critical factor for the usage of any
restorative or preventive material [21]. However, how to
reduce the discoloration associated with the application
of SDF in primary teeth remains unclear. Several studies
have tried to measure the parental acceptance of SDF
application in children [22]. One reported that only 53.3%
of parents considered SDF treatment for their children
acceptable due to discoloration problems [23]. Sabbagh
et al. showed that parental acceptance of SDF treatment
was significantly higher for posterior teeth than for anterior
teeth [22]. Hence, this study aimed to quantify the
color change produced by SDF in primary molars as well
as the masking effect of the KI bleaching agent and CMP
and GI restorations. Our study also followed up on these
color changes after Suntest aging, which was shown to be
a relevant method for testing discoloration [30].
This study is a laboratory trial, which limits the extrapolation
of the results to the oral environment [27]. To
prevent undesirable reactions between SDF and artificial
saliva, as reported by Patel et al. [34], the specimens used
in this study were stored in distilled water before the
experiment, while in the experimental phase, dry specimens
were used to show the absolute staining potential
of SDF, meaning that the degree of staining in an oral
environment may be slightly different from the results of
our study due to the presence of saliva.
The randomization in our study was performed using
the block technique, yet blinding was another limitation
of our study [35]. Blinding was impossible since the color
change caused by the SDF itself was evident. Moreover,
the different compositions and colors of the added materials
made them easily distinguishable from one another
by the naked eye.
A spectrophotometer was used for the color measurement
in this study, as it uses low light intensity to
measure the full visible spectrum presented in the LAB
system. This might have affected the reproducibility of
the readings due to difficulties in positioning the sample
exactly in the same place each time. A slight right
or left shift of the sample can lead to changes in the
lightness [36]. Therefore, 4 measurements were made
for each reading, and their mean was used in the data
analysis to minimize the percentage error.
This study was conducted on primary molars with
carious lesions extending to the dentin of children aged
4–7 years of both sexes, suggesting that the results can
be generalized to all dentinal lesions in primary molars.
The measured (ΔE) value did not provide enough
information to interpret the color masking effect of
the treatment groups due to a lack of expression of the
direction of color change in the mathematical equation.
However, the interpretation of the differences in the
individual color parameters was more useful.
The color shift of SDF-treated dentin can be attributed
to its chemical reaction, which suggests, as shown
in Eq. (1), that SDF produces not only the free fluoride
ions responsible for the remineralization of dentin and
enamel but also a black silver precipitate causing discoloration
[26].
KI, as shown in Eq. (2), reverted the discoloration
of SDF by reacting with the excess silver ions to produce
silver iodide, which is yellowish in color and easily
rinsed away with water [28].
Patel et al. reported no significant differences in gray
values following SDF + KI application compared to
baseline carious lesion values in primary molars [34].
In contrast, our results suggested a significant color
shift of the KI group compared to the baseline color of
the carious lesion, yet both studies found that KI can
decrease the effect of staining caused by SDF. This difference
in results may be attributed to either the differences
in measuring techniques used, as Patel et al. used
standardized time-lapse photography while we used
spectrophotometry, or due to differences in the extent
of caries and accordingly the baseline color of the carious
lesions, since both studies used carious primary
molars.
Changes in ΔL represented as the darkening of all
treatment groups after aging could be explained by the
photosensitivity of SDF. Zhao et al. reported that black
metallic silver reproduction is accelerated by heat and
light exposure, which was the case here after Suntest
aging by a xenon lamp [37]. Lou et al. reported that silver
iodide ions are photosensitive, which explains why
the KI-treated group also showed darkening and discoloration
with aging [38].
The L* value of CMP increased by aging in relation to
the baseline reading; thus, CMP was the only material
that maintained a color lighter than the tooth baseline
color, which can be explained either by the increased
color stability of CMP compared to that of conventional
GI or by the more detrimental effect of SDF than
of CMP on the L* scale of GI [39].
The difference in lightness (ΔL) between CMP and GI
was not significant directly after their application, since
both were the same shade (A1) and were subjected
to light curing immediately after their application to
polymerize either the CMP or the topcoat of GI. Hence,
color changes due to light factors in the CMP and GI
groups started directly after their application, while the
other two groups exhibited such changes after aging.
This finding was similar to the results in a systematic
review by Roberts et al., which reported that restorative
materials that require light curing, such as composites
and resin-modified glass ionomers, show immediate
grayish discoloration when applied after SDF. However,
in contrast to our results, the color changes of those
restorative materials were minimal over time, which
can also be explained by the use of different aging
methods independent of light sources [27].
A more in-depth analysis of ΔL revealed that GI produced
a lighter tooth color directly after its application
than did KI but resulted in a dramatic color change
during aging that made GI less color stable than CMP
and KI. This finding confirms the results of Hamama
et al. [25], who stated that SDF can cause massive discoloration
of GI restorations [25], with GI producing a
darker color than both KI and CMP after aging.
Our results suggest that directly after their application,
KI, CMP, and GI all had a satisfactory masking
effect on the color change associated with the application
of SDF, but the significant differences in the color
shift after aging indicated that only one material was
successful in masking the color change produced by
SDF after aging: CMP.
According to our results, more studies should be
conducted to test the ability of combinations of KI and
GI/CMP to mask the color changes produced by SDF.
Moreover, other GI alternatives, such as light-cured GI
and reinforced GI, should also be tested.
Conclusions
Within the limitations imposed by the experimental
design used in this in vitro study, the following conclusions
can be drawn:
1. Treatment with SDF caused obvious discoloration of
carious dentin.
2. The factor “material” influenced the masking of the
color change produced by the application of SDF on
primary dentin.
3. Directly after SDF application, all materials (KI, CMP,
and GI) could effectively mask the color change associated
with the application of SDF.
4. CMP was the only material whose color masking
effect was not completely reversed by aging.
5. Aging had a significantly different effect on the color
shifts of all treatment materials and hence their
masking effects, with the greatest effect being on GI
and the least on CMP.
6. KI has good potential to mask the color changes
associated with the application of SDF, but further
studies are needed to test its masking effect in combination
with CMP.