Background
Traditional views hold that one’s prior experience of dental
treatment plays a key role in shaping dental fear/anxiety
[1–3]. Clinical evidence supports the notion that fear
of dental treatment is closely associated with previous
negative treatment experience [4–7]. A recent cross-sectional
study reported that the experience of past dental
appointments may influence patients’ intentions of future
appointments, highlighting the importance of patients’
evaluation and anticipation for their intentions of dental
attendance [8]. Notably, patients’ anticipation of fear and
pain towards coming treatment may not reliably reflect
their actual experience of treatment. Individuals may
expect a stimulus to be more painful than what they actually
perceived [9, 10]. Moreover, individuals may ‘overestimate’
the fear of pain of the dental treatment that they
who have not experienced, compared to those they have
experienced in the past [11]. Such an ‘overestimation’ of
fear of pain may be associated with trait dental anxiety
[11].
Critically, fear and anxiety are not only associated
with pain but also avoidance of dental treatment.
Around 15% to 20% of the adult population avoid
or delay visiting dentists [12–14], which results in a
‘vicious cycle’ of oral health [12]. While individuals may
magnify their fear of the treatment that they have not
received [11], it has remained unclear if individuals also
show an intention of avoidance (IA) towards the treatment
that they have not experienced (i.e., non-experienced
treatment). The current study aims to investigate
the association between fear/IA of experienced and
non-experienced conditions of dental treatment in
adults.
Because dental treatment consists of a variety of
procedures, which show different anxiety-stimulating
effects [15], fear and IA of 12 conditions about common
dental procedures were investigated in the study.
Among these procedures, some of them have been
widely investigated for their association with anxiety
and pain during treatment, such as extraction of
wisdom tooth [16–18] and endodontic treatment [9].
Notably, even for a non-invasive procedure of regular
treatment (e.g., restoration and dental scaling), patients’
anxiety was markedly associated with their treatment
experience. For example, in patients receiving dental
scaling, increased pain was associated with increased
dental anxiety [19]. In patients receiving restorative
procedures, higher dental fear was associated with
increased pain during treatment [20]. Here, three major
hypotheses were tested:
Hypothesis 1: Based on the previous findings of
overestimation about fear of dental pain [11], it is
hypothesized that fear/IA ratings are higher for the
non-experienced vs. the experienced conditions of
treatment.
Hypothesis 2A: Due to the close relationship
between fear and avoidance [13], it is hypothesized
that one’s fear of experienced treatment is
positively correlated with not only the IA of experienced
treatment but also the IA of non-experienced
treatment. Hypothesis 2B: Anxiety refers
to a future-oriented state responding to an anticipated
threat [21]. Therefore, it is hypothesized that
individual scores of trait dental anxiety are positively
correlated with their fear/IA of non-experienced
treatment.
Hypothesis 3: Different dental procedures have different
anxiety-stimulating effects [15]. Some dental
procedures may show a greater magnification factor
(i.e., a greater discrepancy in the fear/IA of nonexperienced
vs. experienced conditions). It is hypothesized
that individuals would magnify fear/IA to
a lesser degree for the conditions that more people
have experienced (i.e., with a higher prevalence).
Methods
Participants
Study samples (N = 402) were recruited independently
from two sites for the current study: 201 participants
from a local community recruited via advertisement and
201 dental patients from the outpatient clinic of Taipei
Veterans General Hospital (Table 1). The inclusion criteria
were: (a) aged between 20 and 90 years and (b) having
an ability to verbally communicate with the experimenters.
The exclusion criteria were: (a) having a history of
major physical or psychiatric disorders and (b) feeling
stressed for answering the questions (which are related
to the negative experience of dental treatment). The participants
provided written informed consent, approved
by the Institutional Review Board of National Yang-Ming
University (ID: YM106095E) and Taipei Veterans General
Hospital (ID: 2018-12-003AC) before all the assessment
started. In addition, to assess the test–retest reliability
of the questions of dental treatment experience, 26
healthy adults were recruited to complete the questionnaire
of dental treatment experience twice at a onemonth
interval. This group of participants also provided
written informed consent, approved by the Institutional
Review Board of Taipei Veterans General Hospital (ID:
2013-12-002AC).
Experimental procedure
Dental treatment experience
The questionnaire for dental treatment experience was
customized with descriptions about 12 conditions of
common dental procedures (Table 2), based on the previous
study [22] and an earlier study [11] that adopted a set
of selected dental procedures. To ensure that the conditions
are common to most patients, the procedures about
complicated orofacial surgery or orthodontic therapy
were excluded. Trait dental anxiety was assessed using
the Chinese version [18] of the Index of Dental Anxiety
and Fear (IDAF-4C+) [23]. The IDAF-4C+ consists
of eight questions, which assess the physiological, emotional,
cognitive, and behavioral aspects of dental anxiety
and fear [23]. Previous findings based on an Australian
population norm revealed that the IDAF-4C+ score was
associated with the avoidance of dentists and pain and
anxiety related to dental visits [24]. The score was also
associated with the distress related to anxiety-stimulating
dental procedures, such as the postoperative pain of wisdom
teeth extraction [18].
For each condition of dental treatment, the participants
were asked to indicate (a) whether they have experienced
that condition of treatment in the past (i.e., history of
treatment, HT), the degree of (b) fear of the condition
(Fear), and (c) intention of avoidance of the condition
(IA), respectively, according to the following instruction:
‘If you have previously experienced a condition
about the treatment, please rate the degree of fear
and intention of avoidance about that condition, by
recalling your prior experience about it.’
‘If you have never experienced a condition about the
treatment, please rate the degree of fear and intention
of avoidance about that condition, by anticipating
what you would feel about it, according to what
you know about the treatment.’
All the ratings were scored based on a 10-point numerical
rating scale, ranging from 1 (the least degree of fear/
IA) to 10 (the maximal degree of fear/IA). The scores
of HT, fear of experienced treatment (ExpFear), IA of
experienced treatment (ExpIA), fear of non-experienced
treatment (NExpFear), and IA of non-experienced treatment
(NExpIA), were calculated by including the ratings
from all the 12 conditions, according to the following
methods:
The conditions that subjects have experienced were
indexed by the value ‘1’ and those they have not experienced
were indexed by the value ‘0’. The average HT
was the mean of the 12 values, denoting the proportion
of conditions that a subject has experienced.
ExpFear and ExpIA were calculated as the mean of
Fear and IA, respectively, across the conditions that
subjects have experienced (i.e., the conditions valued
as ‘1’ for HT).
NExpFear and NExpIA were calculated as the mean
of Fear and IA, respectively, across the conditions
that subjects have not experienced (i.e., the conditions
valued as ‘0’ for HT).
Statistical analysis
Analysis of descriptive statistics
The analysis of descriptive statistics was conducted for all
the variables (age, sex, and the average of HT, IDAF-4C+,
ExpFear, ExpIA, NExpFear, and NExpIA), across all subjects
(n = 402) and respectively for the community and
the clinical groups (n = 201 for each). Normality of the
score distribution was assessed using the Shapiro–Wilk
test, with p < 0.1 indicating non-normality.
For each of the 12 conditions of treatment, the analysis
descriptive statistics was also conducted for the following
variables: IDAF-4C+, ExpFear, ExpIA, NExpFear,
and NExpIA. For each condition, the prevalence of experiencing
a condition was calculated as the mean HT
averaged across all subjects. The magnification factor is
calculated as the percentage increase of fear/IA (i.e., the
discrepancy between the fear/IA of non-experienced and
the fear/IA of experienced conditions) normalized by the
fear/IA of experienced conditions. The factor was calculated
for fear and IA, respectively, as follows:
Magnification factor of fear = 100% × (NExpFear –
ExpFear)/ExpFear
Magnification factor of IA = 100% × (NExpIA –
ExpIA)/ExpIA
Analysis 1: comparison between experienced
and non‑experienced fear/IA
To test Hypothesis 1, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was
performed for comparing the scores between ExpFear
and NExpFear as well as the scores between ExpIA and
FearIA, across all subjects. The choice of non-parametric
method is based on the non-normality of the distribution
of the scores (Table 1).
Analysis 2: association between dental anxiety, experienced
and non‑experienced fear/IA
To test Hypotheses 2A, the strength of association
between (a) ExpFear and ExpIA and (b) between Exp-
Fear and NExpIA were assessed, using the Spearman’s
rho coefficient. To test Hypotheses 2B, the strength of
association between (a) IDAF-4C+ and NExpFear and (b)
between IDAF-4C+ and NExpIA were assessed.
Analysis 3: association between the magnification factor
of a dental condition and the prevalence of experiencing it
To test Hypothesis 3, the strength of association between
(a) the prevalence of experiencing a condition and its
magnification factor of fear and (b) the association
between the prevalence and its magnification factor of IA
were assessed, using the Spearman’s rho coefficient.
All the statistical analyses were performed using IBM
SPSS Statistics (v. 24). For all the statistical tests, the level
of statistical significance (alpha) was 0.05.
Psychometric properties of the questionnaire for dental
treatment experience
For the reliability of the questionnaire, test–retest reliability
was estimated according to the response from an
independent group of subjects, who have completed the
questionnaire at two time-points. The 26 healthy adults
completed the questionnaire for dental treatment experience
twice with an interval period of one month. Notably,
in this version of the assessment, subjects only responded
to the questions regarding their fear of dental treatment
experience. The 12 conditions of dental procedures
assessed are the same as those used in the main study.
To evaluate the test–retest reliability of the questionnaire,
Spearman’s rho coefficients were analyzed between
the scores of the first and the second assessments. To
evaluate the agreement between the scores, Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests from a comparison between the scores
from the first and the second assessments. The analyses
were performed for the 12 conditions of dental procedures,
respectively.
Two additional analyses were performed to assess the
validity of the questionnaire. First, an analysis of discrimination
validity was performed by comparing the
subjects who would visit a dentist when having toothache
(non-avoiders) with those who would not visit a dentist
(avoiders). Based on the conclusion from previous studies
[12, 24], it is hypothesized that the avoiders showed
a higher ExpFear and ExpIA, compared to the avoiders.
The comparison was performed using the two-tailed
Mann–Whitney U test. Second, an analysis of criterionrelated
validity was performed to examine the association
between the IDAF-4C+ score and ExpFear as well
as ExpIA. Based on the conclusion from previous studies
[12, 13], it is hypothesized that the correlation between
the IDAF-4C+ scores and ExpFear as well as ExpIA
would be both statistically significant.
Estimation of the sample size
The minimum sample size was calculated using the
power analysis based on G*Power 3.1 [25]. As noted in
the previous section, to validate the questionnaire of fear
and IA of dental treatment of experience, the comparison
was made between the subjects who visited a dentist and
those who did not, respectively for fear and IA, using a
two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test. A moderate effect size
from the comparison (i.e., d = 0.45) was expected, with
control of type I error and type II error at alpha = 0.05
and beta = 0.15, respectively. By these settings, the minimal
number of study samples is 188. Because the study
samples were recruited from two sites, 402 subjects
(i.e., 201 subjects per site) were recruited, based on the
calculation.
Results
Descriptive Analysis
The results of descriptive analyses were shown in Table 1.
The proportion of sex was not significantly different
(two-tailed chi-squared test with the Yates’ continuity
correction, p > 0.05) and age, IDAF-4C+ score, ExpFear,
ExpIA, NExpFear, and NExpIA were not significantly
different (two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test, p > 0.05)
between the two groups.
Table 2 revealed that the conditions “root canal treatment”
and “extraction of a wisdom tooth” showed the
highest scores of both ExpFear and NExpFear. The conditions
“extraction of primary tooth” and “failure to relieve
postoperative pain” showed the highest scores of ExpIA.
In contrast, the conditions “receiving local anesthesia”
and “root canal treatment” showed the highest scores of
NExpIA and also the highest magnification factor of IA
(Table 2).
Analysis 1: comparison between experienced
and non‑experienced fear/IA
In consistent with Hypothesis 1, NExpFear was significantly
higher than ExpFear (two-tailed Wilcoxon signedrank
test, p < 0.001) and NExpIA was significantly higher
than ExpIA (two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
p < 0.001) (Fig. 1a).
Analysis 2: association between dental anxiety, experienced
and non‑experienced fear/IA
In consistent with Hypothesis 2, there was a positive
correlation between ExpFear and ExpIA (rho = 0.62,
p < 0.001) as well as a positive correlation between
ExpFear and NExpIA (rho = 0.51, p < 0.001) (Fig. 1b).
Additionally, there was a positive correlation between
NExpFear and NExpIA (rho = 0.64, p < 0.001) as well
as a positive correlation between ExpIA and NExpIA
(rho = 0.67, p < 0.001). In consistent with Hypotheses 2B,
there was a positive correlation between IDAF-4C+ and
NExpFear (rho = 0.53, p < 0.001) as well as a positive correlation
between IDAF-4C+ and NExpIA (rho = 0.49,
p < 0.001) (Fig. 1c). Additionally, IDAF-4C+ was positively
correlated with ExpFear (rho = 0.63, p < 0.001) and
ExpIA (rho = 0.59, p < 0.001).
Additionally, the association between the discrepancy
between non-experienced (NExpFear) and experienced
(ExpFear) ratings, i.e., the magnification factor of fear,
and dental anxiety, was assessed. The analysis showed
a significant negative correlation between the magnification
factor of fear and IDAF-4C+ (rho = − 0.14,
p = 0.008) (Fig. 1d). The correlation between the magnification
factor of IA and IDAF-4C+ did not show a significant
result (rho = 0.05, p = 0.3) (Fig. 1d).
Analysis 3: association between the magnification factor
of a dental condition and the prevalence of experiencing it
First, the association between ExpFear and NExpFear
as well as the association between ExpIA and NExpIA
was assessed, across the 12 conditions. As shown in
Fig. 2a, the scores of experienced and non-experienced
conditions showed a significant positive correlation for
fear (rho = 0.85, p < 0.001) but not for IA (rho = 0.54,
p = 0.07). Critically, The correlation was not statistically
significant between the prevalence and the magnification
factor of fear (rho = 0, p = 1.0) or between the prevalence
and the magnification factor of IA (rho = 0.29, p = 0.37).
The results thus disconfirmed Hypothesis 3. However,
an additional analysis revealed that the prevalence is
only negatively correlated with ExpIA (rho = − 0.63,
p = 0.027) (Fig. 2b). The correlation between the prevalence
and ExpFear, NExpFear, or NExpIA, was not statistically
significant.
Psychometric properties of the questionnaire for dental
treatment experience
For the reliability of the questionnaire, 26 healthy (12
male and 14 female subjects, mean age ± standard deviation
= 47.2 ± 13.7 years) participated in the assessment
of test–retest reliability of the questionnaires for dental
treatment experience. The interval period between the
first and the second assessments is 31.5 ± 0.9 days. For
the correlation between the scores from the first and the
second assessments, all conditions showed a statistically
significant correlation, with rho ranged from 0.89 to 0.99
(all p < 0.001). For the comparison between the scores
from the first and the second assessments, none of the
conditions showed a statistically significant difference
(two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p > 0.05). The findings
suggested adequate reliability of the questionnaire.
For the validity of the questionnaire, the avoiders
showed a significantly higher ExpFear (median = 3.7),
compared to the non-avoiders (median = 3.0) (Mann–
Whitney U test, p = 0.031). The avoiders also showed a
significantly higher ExpIA (median = 2.6), compared to
the non-avoiders (median = 1.1) (Mann–Whitney U test,
p < 0.001). The IDAF-4C+ score was significantly correlated
with ExpFear (rho = 0.63, p < 0.001) and ExpIA
(rho = 0.59, p < 0.001). The findings support both discrimination
validity and criterion-related validity of the
questionnaire.
Discussion
Major findings from the current study
The current study aims to investigate the association
between fear/IA of experienced and non-experienced
conditions of dental treatment in adults. The major findings
are:
NExpFear was significantly higher than ExpFear.
Likewise, NExpIA was significantly higher than
ExpIA (Fig. 1a).
ExpFear is positively correlated with ExpIA as
well as NExpIA (Fig. 1b). The individual IDAD-
4C+ scores are positively correlated with NExpFear
and NExpIA (Fig. 1c). Moreover, they are negatively
correlated with the magnification factor of fear
(Fig. 1d).
Among conditions of dental treatment, ‘extraction
of a wisdom tooth’ and ‘root canal treatment’
showed the highest ratings on ExpFear and NExpFear
(Table 2). The prevalence of experiencing a condition
is negatively correlated with ExpIA (Fig. 2b).
Association between fear and intention of avoidance
It has been widely observed that prior experience of
receiving dental procedures is associated with the fear
of dental treatment [4–7]. For example, patients with
negative experience about dental injections would report
stronger pain and anxiety during treatment [10]. Fear
and pain are also associated with patients’ memory about
receiving a procedure [17]. Notably, fear is considered a
critical factor of avoidance of dental treatment [12–14,
26]. The findings revealed that fear may be associated
with the intention of avoidance of dental treatment,
even if individuals have not experienced the treatment.
The findings implied that apart from prior experience,
other factors may play a key role in avoidance. Apart
from personal experience, social learning via language
communication or observation also contributed to the
development of fear [27]. Furthermore, pain can be
potentiated by imagination [28] or the iconic impressions
described by mass media [29].
Personal factors, such as trait dental anxiety, may
play a key role in fear/IA of non-experienced conditions
of treatment. Increased anxiety is associated with
the response towards a future-oriented and anticipated
threat [21], consistent with the condition when patients
receive a procedure they have never met before. Critically,
an increased trait dental anxiety, indexed by the
IDAF-4C+ score, was associated with a decreased magnification
factor of fear (Fig. 1d). The finding echoed the
conclusion from van Wijk and Hoogstraten’s work, which
reported that the ‘overestimation’ of fear of pain was
reduced in the sample of highly anxious patients, relative
to the non-anxious group [11]. Extending this finding,
the current study reveals that some subjects with a
higher trait dental anxiety still tended to rate the fear of
the procedures not experienced higher than the fear of
the procedures they have experienced (Fig. 1d). The findings
highlight that trait dental anxiety not only reflects
increased pain [30] but also signifies a greater risk for
patients to fear the procedures even they have never
experienced.
Fear of dental treatment of common procedures
The current findings revealed that the experience of
more invasive procedures (e.g., root canal treatment and
extraction of a wisdom tooth) were fearful for both the
subjects who have and have not experienced it (Table 2
and Fig. 2a). Consistently, the study by van Wijk and
Hoogstraten has reported that surgical procedures (e.g.,
“Having a lump cut open in the mouth”, “Being drilled
in the jawbone”, and “An incision in the gums”, tooth
extraction, and root canal treatment, as the conditions
with a high degree of overestimation in fear of pain [11].
The current results also echoed the findings from Oosterink
et al., which revealed that root canal treatment and
extraction of a molar as the dental experiences with the
highest anxiety-provoking score (#3 and #5 in the ranking,
respectively) among 67 dental stimuli [15].
By extending these findings, the current study identified
a positive correlation between ExpFear and NExp-
Fear, across the conditions (Fig. 2a). The findings may be
interpreted from two aspects. First, the fear perceived by
the patients who experienced a treatment (i.e., ExpFear)
may be disseminated to people who have not experienced
it, probably, via media or social networks, because fear
can be acquired by social learning [27]. This interpretation
is consistent with the findings that these two conditions
are not rare to the subjects (with a prevalence of
68% and 38%, respectively) (Table 2). A second interpretation
is that a negative impression (e.g., “Tooth extraction
must be scaring!”) has already existed, and therefore,
people have already expected a greater fear towards the
treatment (i.e., a greater NExpFear) and the patients who
experienced it just re-confirmed that impression (i.e., a
greater ExpFear). The hypotheses regarding the causeeffect
relationship between ExpFear and NExpFear may
require further investigation.
Intention of avoidance of dental treatment of common
procedures
Do the fearful experience of dental treatment make people
avoid receiving further dental treatment? Results
from the current study have shown some critical clues
regarding the fear-avoidance association. First, ExpFear
was positively correlated with NExpIA (Fig. 1b), suggesting
that prior experience may play a key role in the IA
of the non-experienced treatment. Second, the IA scores
are generally lower than the fear scores. As shown in
Table 1, the median for ExpIA and NExpIA is 1.2 and 1.8,
respectively, but the median for ExpFear and NExpFear
is 3.1 and 4.3, respectively. The findings suggested that
even though stronger fear is associated with a higher IA,
in general, people are likely to attend dental treatment,
evidenced by the relatively lower IA scores. In terms of
the Health Belief Model [31], patients may see dentists
because they perceive the symptom more severe (e.g.,
symptomatic pulpitis), even with a greater fear about the
treatment (e.g., receiving root canal treatment). Also,
the low IA may be associated with a decreased barrier of
dental attendance. The approachability and availability to
see a dentist in Taiwan (especially in the urban area) [32]
and the lower financial burden of dental treatment due
to National Health Insurance [33] may contribute to the
lower IA of dental treatment.
Limitations of the study
The results from the study need to be interpreted with
several considerations from the study design. First, the
dental experience questionnaire adopted only focuses
on 12 conditions related to common dental procedures.
Therefore, the findings cannot be generalized to the
treatment associated with complicated or elective procedures,
such as orthodontic, prosthodontic, or cosmetic
therapies. Second, due to the non-normal distribution
of scores, more sophisticated analyses (e.g., multivariable
analyses) was not performed for investigating the
relationship between each variable. Third, it is noteworthy
that patients’ intention of attendance of dental visits
is associated with positive expectations, such as getting
pain relieved or improving mastication. The interplay
between the negative (fear) and positive expectations
would need further investigation.
Clinical implications
Based on the novel findings presented here, three aspects
for further considerations are suggested for clinical
practice.
A. Individuals with a higher trait dental anxiety may
tend to show the fear of the procedures that they
have not experienced. Therefore, the assessment of
dental anxiety will be helpful for predicting patients’
dental-visiting experience.
B. Extraction of a wisdom tooth and root canal treat
present the highest fear regardless of individual prior
experience. Therefore, dentists may pay attention if
a negative impression about the treatment has been
cast on patients, leading to their fear and avoidance.
C. Finally, recent evidence has gradually disclosed
the biological mechanisms of dental fear, including
its association with genetic variations [34] and
brain activation [22, 35]. The biological mechanisms
underlying fear/avoidance towards non-experienced
stimuli would require further investigation.
Conclusion
The novel findings suggest that individuals may develop
a high degree of fear and intention to avoidance toward
the conditions of dental treatment they have not experienced.
Individual variations in trait dental anxiety play a
key role in the fear of non-experienced treatment.