Introduction
Women’s soccer has increased in popularity and participation
during the last decade [1]. Fédération Internationale
de Football Association (FIFA), in the last report,
estimates that there is close to one million of under-18
(U-18) players in Europe, having increased the number of
licenses in just one year by more than 10% [1]. So, nowadays,
there is an increase of studies and research in this
population due to the growth of this sport at early ages.
In soccer, speed is considered a main determinant of
performance [2, 3] and it is the most dominant action
when scoring goals in young players from 13 to 16 years
[4]. Therefore, the measure of straight sprinting could
in part detect if someone continue a career as a professional
or amateur player in adulthood. Despite increasing
the popularity of soccer among female adolescents, there
is a little information about the possible effect of age on
sprint performance in this population.
Soccer is considered a contact sport and demands a
wide variety of skills at different intensities [5, 6]. The
ability to perform high-speed actions is an important
prerequisite to successfully perform different actions
in soccer [2, 7]. Several studies with soccer players have
shown that the improvement of high-speed components
such as acceleration [8, 9] and maximum running speed
[10–12] are related to match performance. Usually, this
quality is associated with a successful performance on
soccer match play [13]. The ability to accelerate is a skill
that manifests itself in short distances [2], specifically,
it is divided into the initial acceleration in the first 5 to
10 m [14] and maximum running speed likely reached
after 20 to 40 m [15, 16]. However, concerning the distance
of sprint, Valquer et al. [17] observed that 96% of
sprints during a match are shorter than 30 m, with 49% of
them being shorter than 10 m. So the ability to accelerate
and maximum running speed are crucial in game performance.
For this reason, coaches should take into account
the development of these abilities relative to the age [18]
and their stage of maturation [19–21].
Biological maturation is a gradual process over time in
which modifications are presented at the anatomical and
physiological level. Hormones are stimulated during the
period of puberty until full maturity is reached [22]. The
increase in circulating hormonal levels improves neural
function, coordination andpower and also produces both
oxidative and non-oxidative changes in the metabolism
[21, 22]. Any inappropriate stimulus could cause some
alteration in the development of the adolescent and that
is why, the training loads should adapt to the speed of
subject’s maturation [23]. Several studies have observed
the contribution of chronological age, biological maturation
and anthropometric characteristics to sprinting
performance in young soccer players [16, 20, 24]. For
example, Malina et al. [24] showed that height, body
mass and maturity status are determinants of sprintrunning
performance. Emmonds et al. demonstrated that
anthropometric and performance characteristics develop
with increasing age in high-level youth female soccer
players [25]. These differences in anthropometric parameters
are attributed to increased maturity, biological,
hormonal and neurological changes [25]. As such, this
scarce information makes it challenging to provide solid,
evidence based recommendations on the contribution of
these characteristics to sprint performance in adolescent
female soccer players.
Thus, the aims of this study were: 1) to investigate age
related differences in sprint performance in different age
groups of adolescent female soccer players (U14 to U18)
and, 2) to examine the influence of body mass, body
mass index (BMI) and biological maturation on sprint
performance.
Material and method
Selection of study groups
Eighty female soccer players (U14, U16 and U18) belonging
to the same female soccer division club academy
squad (Iberdrola Women’s First Division) participated
in this study (age: 14.9 ± 1.5 year; height: 158.6 ± 6.7 cm;
body mass: 53.3 ± 7.8 kg; body mass index (BMI):
21.1 ± 2.35 kg m−
2). All players were training in a soccer
club for at least 4 years. Physical sessions of different
teams consisted of speed, agility, quickness training,
injury prevention or coordination exercises allowing
to maintenance physical fitness level. At the time of the
study, all players were competing at national and regional
level (i.e., Spanish Female Soccer National League,
Aragón Female Soccer Territorial League). According to
the soccer federation rules the players were grouped on
the basis of chronological age into 2 years age categories
[U14 (12–13.9 year), U16 (14–15.9 year) and U18 (16–
17.9 year)] rather than biological maturation. Female
players were divided by age group, in the same way as
they are pooled during training and competition.
Participants were healthy and they did not suffer
any disease or injury that could affect the results at the
moment of the study. Parents/guardian informed consent
for all players involved in this investigation were
obtained. The study was conducted according to the Declaration
of Helsinki (2013), and was approved beforehand
by the Ethics Committee of Clinical Research from the
Government of Aragón (CP19/039, CEICA, Spain).
Procedures
Participants were assessed within a single testing session
on linear sprinting at the end of the second third of
the competitive season (March). Test sessions in different
teams were taken by the same group of investigators
during the entire study to avoid inter-observer variability,
at the same time of the day (6 PM to 8 PM) and under
the same environmental conditions (~ 22ºC and ~ 20%
of humidity). One week prior to the commencement of
the study, players performed two familiarization trials to
elude any learning effect. Before performing all the tests,
a warm-up, consisting of jogging (3 min), lower-limb
dynamic strectches (4 min) and high intensity activities
(4 min), was performed. Players wore soccer boots in the
field tests on artificial grass.
Anthropometric data
Anthropometric variables included were height, body
mass and sitting height. A portable stadiometer with
2.10 m maximum capacity and a 0.1 cm error margin
(SECA 225, SECA, Hamburg, Germany) was used to
measure height. Moreover, sitting height was evaluated
with a purpose built table (SECA 225, SECA, Hamburg,
Germany) [26, 27]. A portable body composition analyser
with a 200 kg maximum capacity and a ± 0.1 kg error
margin (TANITA BC-418 MA; Tanita Corp., Tokyo,
Japan) was used to measure body mass. BMI was calculated
by dividing weight (kg) by squared height (
m2).
Maturity status
Pubertal timing was estimated according to the biological
age of maturity of each individual as described by the
non-invasive method of Mirwald et al. [28]. The age of
peak linear growth (age at peak height velocity (APHV))
is an indicator of somatic maturity representing the time
of maximum growth in stature during adolescence. Biological
age of maturity (years) was calculated by subtracting
the chronological age at the time of measurement
from the chronological peak-velocity age [12, 20]. Thus,
a maturity age of -1.0 indicates that the player was measured
1 year before this peak velocity; a maturity of 0 indicates
that the participant was measured 1 year after this
peak velocity.
Sprint testing
Running speed was assessed by 40 m sprint time with
10 m, 20 m and 30 m split times. Players commenced
each sprint from a standing start with their front foot
0.5 m behind the first timing gate. Time was recorded
with photoelectric cells (Microgate, Bolzano, Italy). One
pair of the electronic timing system sensors mounted
on tripods was set at 0.75 above the floor and was positioned
3 m apart facing each other on either side of the
starting line [29]. Players started when they wanted, thus
eliminating reaction time. Also, they were instructed,
and verbally encouraged, to give a maximal effort during
each sprint. Two trials were separated by at least 3 min
of recovery with the best performance used as the final
result [30].
Acceleration (s) was evaluated using the time to cover
the first 10 m of the 40 m sprint test. Maximum running
speed (s) was assessed using a flying 20 m sprint (i.e. last
20 m of the 40 m sprint effort) [11].
Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS for MAC
(Version 20.0; SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Descriptive
statistics (means ± standard deviations) are reported.
For the first part of this study, all analyses of variance
(ANOVA) were performed on log-transformed data to
reduce bias arising from non-uniformity error. A posthoc
Bonferroni analysis was used to determine the origin
of any differences. Between-group differences according
to age category in sprint performance were assessed
using analysis of covariance (one-way ANCOVA). Body
mass, BMI and APHV were used as covariates in the present
study [16]. Cohen’s d effect sizes (ES) were also used
to compare magnitude differences in sprint variables and
covariates between ages categories. The criteria to interpret
the magnitude of the ES were: > 0.2 (small), > 0.6
(moderate), > 1.2 (large), and > 2.0 (very large) [31]. Pearson
correlation analyses (r) were applied to determine
the relationships between age, anthropometrics (height,
body mass, BMI), maturation and sprint variables. The
significance level was set at p < 0.05.
Results
Descriptive statistics for anthropometric characteristics
of the 80 adolescent female soccer players of the U14
to U18 age categories are presented in Table 1. Age and
APHV except for BMI, showed significant age differences
(U18 > U16 > U14; p < 0.05). There were significant differences
in height among the U18, U16 and U14 (p < 0.05)
and body mass between the U14 and U18 age groups
(p < 0.05).
The test of between groups effect, regarding the
chronological age, showed significant differentes in
10 m, 20 m, 30 m and 40 m times except for 20 m flying
(Table 2). Posthoc analysis revealed better performance
in all split sprint times of older soccer players
(U18 and U16) compared with younger category (F:
3.38 to 6.17; p < 0.05; ES: 0.64 to 1.33). On the contrary
in all split sprint times, there were no significant
changes between U16 and U18 (p < 0.05; ES: 0.03 to
0.17). Furthermore, 20 m flying showed no age-related
differences (p > 0.05); ES: 0.30 to 0.92). An ANCOVA
was applied to account for the influence of maturation,
body mass and BMI on between group differences in
the sprint variables (Table 2). There were significant
differences for all variables when APHV was controlled
for (F: 3.98 to 18.1; p < 0.05). However, body mass and
BMI were no significant covariates (p > 0.05) for all
variables between age groups, except for 20 m flying
within U14 and U18 when body mass were statiscally
controlled for (F: 5.73; p < 0.05).
From the data pooled across all age groups, the relationships
between age, anthropometric (height, body
mass, BMI), maturation and sprint variables are shown in
Table 3. BMI were significantly related to 40 m (p < 0.05;
r = − 0.27). Body mass produced significant correlation
(p < 0.01; r = − 0.38) with 20 m flying. The rest of sprint
variables (10 m, 20 m or 30 m) were not significantly
related to any of age, anthropometrics ormaturation variables
(p > 0.05; r = − 0.25 to 0.09).
Discussion
The aim of this investigation was to determine differences
among speed qualities relevant for soccer performance
at different ages, and to examine what possible
factors determining sprint performance in adolescent
female soccer players. In general, players improved their
anthropometric characteristics and their results in sprint
test as older they are. Outcomes demonstrated that BMI
and body mass were significantly correlated with 40 m
sprint and 20 m flying, respectively. Furthermore, in the
present study, significant differences were found among
groups, specifically in 10 m, 20 m, 30 m and 40 m times.
However, when the effect of body mass and BMI was
removed, all of the differences disappeared. Conversely,
differences between group did not disappear in sprint
running performances when adjusted for APHV.
An analysis of the differences between groups revealed
improvements in anthropometric characteristics and
sprint performance (Table 1 and 2). The current findings
demonstrate that these characteristics are developed
as age increases. Previous literature has also reported
improvements in anthropometric and sprint performance
in adolescent female soccer players [25] likely due
to biological development and skill acquisition for participation
in sport specific soccer training [32]. All split
times were faster in older players. The greatest significant
changes in speed were observed within U14 and U16/
U18. This is probably caused by an increases of height and
hence, an increase of stride lenght, just as central nervous
system adaptation, which happens around this age
[33]. In addition, age related enhancements in sprint performance
likely to be associated with the grater glycolitc
capacity, type II fibres recruitment capacity and peak lactate
concentrations during adolescence [34]. However,
insignificant differences were observed between U18 and
U16 groups in sprint times. It seems logical to assume
that the performance of females players reach a plateau
around the age of 13 years (puberty) [35], for this reason
it can be a similar performance in sprint times between
U16 and U18 groups. Therefore, soccer coaches’ concers
about how to train sprint ability, which is related to
determinant actions during match (e.g. to score a goal),
should be emphasized during adolescence.
Previous studies have evaluated the possible role of
growth (i.e. weight, height or body mass) and maturation
on different running speed qualities relevant to
soccer performance in soccer players [16, 19, 36]. In the
present study, all between groups differences in sprint
performance disappeared when the body mass and BMI
was statiscally controlled. Notwithstanding, the inclusion
of the estimation of maturity status (i.e., APHV) as
a covariate is significant. These results demonstrated that
sprint differences between groups do not exis when the
body mass and BMI effect is removed, which can mean
that sprint differences are related to anthropometric
characteristics. Several studies have observed that male
soccer players are being chosen due to their maturity
level instead of their physical performance or anthropometric
characteristics [16, 37], but this is the first study
to analyse it in adolescent female soccer players. Malina
et al. [38] showed that anthropometric factors (weight
and height) compared to sexual maturity, are significant
contributors to sprint in male soccer players between 13
and 15 years. Mendez-Villanueva et al. [16] showed that
maturation explained a greater proportion of age-related
differences in speed capacities than body dimensions in
young male soccer players. This discrepancy in observations
for male players is likely related in part with maturing
measure used. The estimated maturity was assessed
by stage of pubic hair and APHV, respectively. The use
of the Mirwald equation to assess maturity status has
been previously questioned due to its potential associated
error of ± 6 months [39]. Therefore, caution must
be taken into account when comparing both methods.
So, it is not currently clear what covariates explain agerealted
differences in speed and what method is the gold
standard. This suggests that the age-related differences
in sprint running performance in the present study were
more related to differences in anthropometric rather than
differences in maturation factors per se.
Different studies have analyzed anthropometric profile
of soccer players [40, 41], they found that height and
body mass were relevant factors in soccer performance.
specifically, height and body mass were associated with
sprint performance in youth soccer players [16]. The
results indicated that BMI and body mass were significantly
correlated with 40 m sprint time (p < 0.05) and
20 m flying (p < 0.01). These findings were consistent with
previous investigations in young soccer players [42–44].
Mathisen et al. and Wong et al. observed significant correlations
between body mass with 10 m and 30 m sprint
performance among adolescent male soccer players [42,
43]. Moreno et al. found that body fat, which should be
connected to BMI, correlated significantly with sprint
performance [44]. Conversely, previous studies observed
insignificant relationship between anthropometric and
sprint performance [7, 45, 46]. Therefore, our results can
be explained by antropometric characteristics, which
might suggest that sprint performance is related to variation
in body mass and BMI. However, there are limited
data in adolescent female soccer players and there is a
lack of consisten results for sprint performance.
A possible limitation of the present study was that
the results have a cross-sectional character and concern
a number of age groups with a relatively small
size. Second, it is possible that resistance training can
affect speed development, however, resistance training
has not been controlled during the training courses.
Furthermore, the results concern adolescent female
soccer players. Consequently, they cannot be directly
extrapolated to male players and athletes at other skill
levels. In addition, female players were grouped by
chronological age and comparisons among groups did
not take into account the biological maturity of female
players. Finally, the playing position of sample were not
assessed within the study. Future studies should analyse
possible differences in sprint and other performance
capacities in regard to maturational status of players,
tactical position and playing positions in female soccer
players.
Conclusions
To conclude, this study emphasized that players may
improve their anthropometric characteristics and their
results in sprint tests as older they are. Also, significant
differences between younger and older age categories
were observed because younger players were far to
their age of peak competitive performance. We suggest
that the age effects on running speed qualities during
growth in the current cohort of female adolescent soccer
players were likely related to anthropometric factors
rather than biological maturation per se. This idea
is also reinforced by the fact that when body mass and
BMI are considered as covariates, all sprint variables
were very similar among the studied groups.