preferences, needs and values [2]. Breast cancer patients
are, however, increasingly confronted with complex
information, as scientific advances continue to reveal
the heterogeneity of breast cancer, leading to many subtypes
with various treatments options [3, 4]. To make
individual, well-balanced, decisions, patients need to be
informed not only about the incurability of their disease,
but also about the available treatment options and their
potential advantages and disadvantages.
Full information-provision is, however, not always
achieved; nor may it always be desirable. More specifically,
patients are not always explicitly informed about
the incurability of their illness [5, 6], or about all available
treatment options and potential side effects [5–7]. Doctors
sometimes omit the option of no anti-cancer therapy
[5–7], and the possibly negative effects of treatment
on condition and social functioning [5, 8]. Although the
lack of full information-provision can limit informed
decision-making, some patients are also reluctant to
receive all information [9, 10], especially as their illness
progresses [11, 12]. In order to inform patients without
overwhelming them, we need to shift our focus beyond
current practices and preferences, to a deeper understanding
of the challenges oncologists and patients perceive
in information-provision (about disease status,
available treatment options, and side effects), and possible
strategies to address these challenges.
Moreover, specific ways to facilitate information-provision
need to be explored. Promising techniques include
communication strategies based on placebo-effect principles,
such as positive expectations and empathy. Positive
expectations can decrease patients’ pain perceptions [13,
14], while empathic behaviors (e.g., reassurance, attentive
silence) can decrease anxiety and increase recall [15–19].
The potential of positive expectations and empathy to
facilitate information-provision has yet to be explored.
Against this background, the aim of this project is to
explore, in the setting of advanced breast cancer, oncologists’
and patients’ views on (i) the challenges of information-
provision and (ii) possible strategies to address these
challenges, while (iii) exploring the possible facilitating
role of positive expectancies and empathy in addressing
the challenges. Addressing these aims will help achieve
optimal information-provision and person-centered care.
Methods
Design
Qualitative study, using semi-structured interviews with
breast cancer patients and oncologists.
Ethical considerations
All study-procedures were submitted to the Medical
Ethical Committee of the Netherlands Cancer Institute
(NKI-AVL), which exempted the study from formal ethical
approval (P18LVW). In addition, the Ethical Committee
of Leiden University, Psychology Department,
approved the conduct of the study. The participating hospital
(St Antonius) approved recruitment in their hospital
(Z18.031).
Sample
Patients
Female patients (> 18 years) with incurable breast cancer;
sufficient command of Dutch language; cognitively able
to provide consent and be interviewed.
Oncologists
Providing care for women with advanced breast cancer in
a Dutch hospital.
Recruitment and procedures
Patients
We followed principles of purposeful sampling, aiming a
variety in participants’ age, disease characteristics, geographical
location, education, cultural background.
Participants were recruited – June-Sept 2019 – through
the Dutch breast cancer patient advocacy organization
and a patient organization for migrant women, involved
patient-representatives, snowballing procedures. Via personal
contacts and oncologists within the participating
hospital we purposefully recruited patients with a non-
Western migrant background and/or low educational
levels. Patients contacted the research team, who provided
more information via telephone and checked inclusion
criteria. An information letter/consent form and
questionnaire were sent, and interviews were scheduled
at patients’ homes or at Leiden University. Written consent
was obtained pre-interview and the questionnaire
collected/completed. Patients were informed they could
always stop the interview.
Oncologists
Recruitment occurred via personalized emails, or – for
one hospital – via a medical psychologist. Oncologists
interested in participating contacted the research team
(LV), who provided more information (via email). The
information letter/consent form, and questionnaire were
sent and the interview was scheduled at the oncologist’s
hospital or by telephone. Written consent was obtained
pre-interview and the questionnaire collected/completed
(or sent by post).
Participants were reimbursed only for travel. Transcriptions
were offered for comment/corrections.
Topic list
A topic list was created (Additional file 1), in collaboration
with patient-representatives. The topic guide
focused on i) the challenges of informing patients about
treatment options, aims and side-effects; ii) strategies
how these challenges can be overcome; iii) the possible
facilitating role of empathy and positive expectations in
reducing these challenges.
Outcomes
Patients
Sociodemographic/ disease characteristics were assessed.
Oncologists
Sociodemographic and professional characteristics, and
self-perceived confidence in discussing disease status
(treatment aims), options and benefits/side effects in
advanced cancer were assessed (self-created 1–4 scale).
Data collection
Interviews were held by one – trained/experienced
female – researcher (LV – communication/palliative
care/psychology background, or MM – communication/
psychology background), for many interviews both were
present.
The audio-recorded interviews were transcribed verbatim,
and personal identifiers removed. Data-analysis was
part of a cyclical process of data collection and analysis.
Data collection was stopped when data saturation was
achieved.
Analysis process
Analysis was performed using Thematic Analysis [20].
Firstly, two researchers (LV, MM) (re)read the transcripts
to familiarize themselves with the interview data
and independently wrote a memo of the most striking
findings of each interview (step 1). These memos were
subsequently compared and discussed, and initial codes
were given to relevant interview fragments (step 2).
Using further discussion of memos and initial codes,
the two researchers generated themes, which were
displayed in a draft figure (step 3). At several points,
themes and interim analyses were reviewed and discussed
with co-authors (backgrounds in psychology/
medicine/nursing/communication) (step 4). Gradually,
themes were further defined and named, and again discussed
with co-authors (step 5). Lastly, the results section
was written and the research question answered
(step 6). Input was received from co-authors, and the
final figure, displaying the main themes identified, was
drawn. Steps 2–5 were supported by software program
Atlas.ti. COREQ guidelines for qualitative research
were followed for reporting.
Results
Participants
Table 1 shows the background characteristics of the 14
patients and 10 oncologists included; Fig. 1 shows the
recruitment process.
Themes
From the analysis of oncologists’ and patients’ data, three
main themes were identified, concerning challenges in
the discussion of disease status, treatment options, and
side effects. Patients often started by mentioning little
challenges, mainly focusing on their preferences. Oncologists
identified challenges, but considered informing
patients a core task. Figure 2 displays themes and possible
relations between them.
Challenge 1: How to handle unrealistic disease (status)
beliefs
Oncologists mentioned the challenge of handling
patients’ unrealistic disease beliefs. This focused on
patients not expecting or accepting the disease’s incurability,
and having overly optimistic/pessimistic
expectations.
Strategy chosen by oncologists: informing & accepting
To address this challenge, oncologists try to provide
information – especially concerning the disease’s incurability
– and to keep an open dialogue, actively exploring
patients’ perceptions. Simultaneously, they seem to
accept – temporary – denial of the incurability of the
disease. If necessary, e.g. with disease progression or if
decision-making is hampered, this may be re-discussed.
What we often see in clinical practice is that as a
coping mechanism people say “I hear you [that the
disease is incurable, red], but I don’t want to accept
it yet (…). So I’ll say (…) you need to know this to
make well-informed decisions, but we don’t need to
keep discussing that you’re dying. (4005).
Patients’ preferences: informing
Patients stressed the importance of being clearly
informed about their disease status; the incurable status
is devastating but essential to know.
You’ve got two children; so you don’t want to hear it
[that the disease is incurable, red]; nobody wants to
hear that. But well [it needs to be said clearly, ed];
they cannot keep avoiding it. (3013).
Challenge 2: How to approach discussing available
treatment options
A second challenge involves discussing treatments
options, specifically whether to discuss all options or a
selection, and whether to include the option of no anticancer
therapy.
Strategy 1 chosen by oncologists: medical expertise
and selection is duty
Oncologists, though acknowledging patients’ right to
know all options, seemed to agree that medical expertise
and selection is needed. They often select the most effective
options (in terms of e.g. efficacy, limited side effects);
some select options that differ (e.g. in terms of side
effects or hospital visits needed); some actively enquire
about patients’ priorities/expectations.
I generally make a selection. I think most people
benefit from your advice; that’s why they’re there. I
generally discuss the most effective treatment (…).
If there are two equal options, then you discuss the
pros and cons of the different options. (ID 4028).
Patients’ preferences: medical expertise and selection
is trusted
Patients often expressed faith in oncologists’ medical
expertise and appreciated them selecting treatment
options. Most did not want to carry sole responsibility
for decision-making, arguing that they lacked medical
expertise.
I don’t know about all the treatment options there
are so I trust that the oncologist will give me the best
treatment (…). He will discuss it with the team; he
confers with other oncologists and doctors. That’ll
lead to a specific treatment option, and I assume he
knows what he’s doing. ( 3034).
Still, some women were keen to make their own decisions
and/or wanted an oncologist to respect their
decisions.
You can also have chemo in tablet form, but because
I already wasn’t responding well to it, I said I’m not
doing chemo. And she didn’t try to persuade me,
which I appreciated. (3025).
Strategy 2 chosen by oncologists: option of no anti‑cancer
treatment is a sensitive issue & is used to influence patients
The discussion of ‘no anti-cancer treatment’ was a sensitive
issue. Some oncologists always mention it, as it is
a realistic option. Others acknowledged that it was not
always a logical option to discuss, especially for young
patients with hormone-sensitive tumors. The option of
no anti-cancer treatment was explicitly discussed where
the burdens of anti-cancer treatment might outweigh
the gains (e.g., with older patients, limited prognosis,
sole option of chemotherapy). Introducing the option
(or not introducing it) was used to influence patients’
decision-making.
For patients with hormone-sensitive tumors, you
can usually find a treatment with relatively few
side effects. Then it’s less obvious to me to suggest
the option of no anti-cancer treatment. So I don’t
know if I always mention it (…). But I do if I have a
treatment in mind that won’t be symptom-free (…),
or if the costs and benefits could be out of balance.
(4009).
Patients’ preferences: option of no‑anti‑cancer treatment
is a sensitive issue
Patients’ – sometimes strongly expressed – views varied
on whether this option should be discussed. For some it
was a realistic option that should always be mentioned;
for others it equaled the end of available treatments. For
most, this option was not relevant at that time. They
knew, however, that it was an option, which should
be discussed in detail later in their disease trajectory
(e.g. when fewer options are available, or quality of life
becomes impaired).
I do think we should have a choice. Those drugs have
a lot of side effects (…), so it has to be a choice (3042).
We didn’t discuss it [the option of no anti-cancer
treatment, ed.], because I had already said that
wasn’t an option. I want to continue as long as possible.
(3010).
Challenge: How to approach discussing side effects
A last challenge is how to discuss possible side effects.
Strategy chosen by oncologists: different routes to complete
information
Oncologists described several approaches, but ultimately
favored full side-effect insight. Most oncologists mentioned
common and alarming side effects (more would
be overwhelming); a few mentioned all possible side
effects (to inform the patient fully and protect against
later complaints); some always mentioned specific side
effects (e.g. nausea). Oncologists considered it important
for patients ultimately to be fully informed – possibly
through specialized nurses/written information – to
make well-informed decisions. The impact of treatments
on patients’ daily functioning was also sometimes mentioned,
but patients’ priorities were seldom explored.
We try to mention the most important things. In the
case of chemotherapy, they also talk to a nurse who
informs them about almost all possible side effects,
and often provides the information on paper as well.
(4007).
And I always add a bit about what I often see. And
how hard people usually find it (…). And I always
discuss the important things, like when they should
contact us, or dangerous side effects (…). When it
comes to choosing treatment A or B, I also discuss
the risk of side effects that will really impact quality
of life. (4025).
Patients’ preferences: variety in preferences
regarding complete information
Patients’ view on the ‘right’ approach for side-effect information
also varied. Most patients wanted to be informed
of alarming side effects. Preferences varied about
whether all side effects should be mentioned, or the most
common, personally relevant, or only a limited number.
The opportunity to contact the hospital was important;
written information and concrete advice on handling
side effects was seen as less essential. Most patients were
reluctant to receive statistical side-effect information
which might not apply to the individual.
I think they should provide clear guidelines for when
it is red alert (…). If you experience this, call immediately
and go straight to hospital (3020).
If they had given me the whole list of what could
happen I would have never started it, and in hindsight
I’m glad I did. (3051).
That’s why I say: every person responds differently
(…). I um, no I don’t really believe in numbers.
(3034).
The facilitating role of expectancy
When introducing the topic of positive expectations,
patients and oncologists stressed the importance of realism.
Still, positive expectations can facilitate addressing
the challenges encountered, by influencing decision-making,
easing patients’ disease burden, and creating space.
Influencing decisions: oncologists
Oncologists spoke about how they use positivity to influence
treatment decision-making by highlighting benefits,
(dis)advantages, and side effects. For example, potential
positive outcomes are stressed early in the disease trajectory,
while disadvantages are highlighted when oncologists
think it might be better to stop intensive treatments.
If you feel you have little faith in the treatment,
you’re perhaps more inclined to highlight how hard
it is, whereas if you feel it’s a very important treatment,
you indicate more that it’s not that bad.
(4018).
Easing disease burden: oncologists
Some oncologists acknowledged that positive expectations
can influence how patients cope and experience
symptoms and side effects. Positivity was sometimes
explicitly used to motivate patients, e.g. to start/continue
treatments.
If people are nauseous from chemo, and I give them
a remedy, I’ll add that it works really well. Because I
know this can give just that extra placebo effect that
stops them feeling nauseous. (4009).
Especially chemotherapy – many patients really
dread it. So I explain that there are many sorts of
chemo, and this one really isn’t so bad usually.
(4025).
Creating space: oncologists
Oncologists seldom explicitly mention that positive
expectations can create space, but focus on balancing
between discussing potential positive and negative outcomes/
side effects.
So I talk about side effects, but immediately add
that almost nobody has all side effects, and it varies
– from people with almost none to people who do
experience many side effects. (4039).
Creating space: Patients
Patients focused on how positive expectations can create
space. They often mentioned the importance of receiving
information about possible positive treatment outcomes
and limited side effects. For some this needed to be balanced
against potential negative outcomes (more realistic);
others preferred a focus on positivity (something to
aim for); some acknowledged they realized themselves
things might not go well.
…that they inform you it may not have much effect,
or may not agree with you; but possibly you will
respond very well; we just have to try it out, because
it differs per person. (3025).
Maybe a doctor can help at that point. Maybe it
would work, (…). Without fibbing. Just saying ‘it’s
possible’. Who knows, let’s just try. (3028).
Hearing about possible anti-cancer treatment options
was described as ‘positive’, especially knowing that there
are options available if the present treatment fails.
Say the tumors start growing, or the blood levels
aren’t good, or whatever… that there are still drugs
they can try. This drug isn’t the end of the road. And
I like that she keeps repeating that, let’s say. (…)
That [creating space, ed.] is really important for me.
(3042).
The facilitating role of empathy
Oncologists see empathy (see Table 2 for the faces of
empathy) as the basis for their communication, while
acknowledging that it depends on the patient, situation,
and doctor-patient relationship.
It is easier to feel empathy with someone you find
likable than someone who actually evokes irritation.
(4018).