Background
Advance care planning (ACP) is a discussion of: care
options; patient beliefs, values and preferences; mental
and physical prognoses; and care decisions not
restricted to goals of care and resuscitation directives
[1, 2]. ACP can occur over multiple interactions with
healthcare providers as patient beliefs, values and preferences
may change with time [3, 4]. Physician-led discussions
of ACP with older adults (> 65 years old) are
associated with increased quality of life and mood,
longer survival, decreased use of non-beneficial medical
care near death, decreased expenditures, enhanced
goal-consistent care, and positive family outcomes [5,
6].
Canadians want more information about ACP from
their healthcare providers [7]. A national survey of older
patients from Canadian family practices reported that
68% of older patients have thought about their medical
care preferences if they were sick and in hospital, but
only 9% of them had engaged in discussion with their
primary care physicians about their end-of-life care preferences
[8]. Despite patients wanting to engage in ACP,
such conversations are infrequently had or recognized
in primary care settings. A structured literature review
determined that the prevalence of general practitionerled
ACP conversations with older adults is approximately
21% globally [1].
Primary care providers have mixed perceptions of ACP
and experience challenges in implementing this activity
into practice. A national survey of Canadian primary
care providers (PCPs) reported that PCPs are very confident
and willing to have ACP conversations with their
patients, yet reported low participation rates [9]. The
same survey also identified key barriers to successful
ACP implementation in primary care such as insufficient
time and busy clinical schedules, lack of ACP knowledge
or training, and patient end-of-life care literacy
[10]. Despite these mixed perceptions, primary care is
an ideal healthcare setting to initiate ACP conversations.
PCPs share longitudinal relationships with their patients,
which may make ACP conversations possible before critical
illness or hospitalization, and free to span multiple
encounters.
The Serious Illness Care Program (SICP), developed at
Ariadne Labs in Boston, Massachusetts, is a communication
intervention developed to identify oncology patients
with a high risk of death in the next year and to train
oncologists in having ACP conversations using the structured
Serious Illness Conversation Guide (SICG) [11].
The SICP has also been used in primary care settings
with evidence of acceptance and benefit [12]. This training
involved the use of standardized patients, observation
and providing feedback to participants. Apart from quality
improvement initiatives in two primary care clinics
affiliated with the Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston
[12]. SICP implementation has not been evaluated in
primary care settings extensively. As a result, there is an
impetus to evaluate SICP implementation in Canadian
primary care settings.
ACP conversations can sometimes feel difficult for providers
and patients, and as a result, communication training
must include comfortable language to initiate ACP
conversations with patients. However, addressing the
need for serious illness communication training among
PCPs is only one of the strategies that will be needed to
foster the implementation of ACP in primary care settings.
Successfully implementing ACP in any healthcare
setting involves steps such as the identification and
preparation of appropriate patients and ensuring time is
made available during appointments, that roles are clear,
and that clear documentation of conversations occurs.
The Normalization Process Theory (NPT) is a theory of
action that is used for understanding and evaluating how
complex interventions are implemented and embedded
in the everyday work of health care [13]. NPT can assist
with explaining success or failure of implementation, and
highlight the specific constructs that are impeding implementation
[14]. The core constructs are coherence (work
that defines and organizes the objects of a practice); cognitive
participation (work that defines and organizes the
enrolment of participants in a practice); collective action
(work that defines and organizes the enacting of a practice);
and reflexive monitoring (work that defines and
organizes the knowledge upon which appraisal of a practice
is founded) [13].
As part of a quality improvement initiative, our goal
was to explore the perceptions of clinicians in an interprofessional
academic family practice regarding implementing
ACP into routine care through using an adapted
SICP and SICG. guided by NPT.
Methods
This was a quality improvement project informed by
a mixed-methods design, where both quantitative and
qualitative data was collected, and interpretation of the
data from both methods was done concurrently. This
project was conducted at the McMaster Family Health
Team; an academic interprofessional family medicine
group consisting of two clinics with 40 primary care
physicians, diverse allied health professionals and
approximately 80 family medicine residents. The clinics
provide care to approximatey 40,000 patients in Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.
Program implementation and evaluation
From March to May 2018, all PCPs (physicians, registered
nursing staff, and social workers) at the McMaster
Family Health team were invited to three training
SICP sessions through clinic communication channels.
Thirty-four PCPs, consisting of 13 physicians, 12 residents,
4 nurse practitioners, 3 registered nurses, and 2
social workers, attended the training sessions, of whom
76% were women. Participants attended a training session
consisting of group-based discussions about the
principles of serious illness communication, followed by
simulated conversations with standardized patients using
the SICG, and receipt of real-time observation and feedback
from trainers. The event followed the same 2.5-h
format and used the same materials as those employed in
a study in a hospital in the same city, focusing on skills
practice with cases acted by simulated patients [15].
The primary care cases were those adapted by the program
SICP developers for primary care [12]. Trainers had
attended training themselves previously, from the team
who developed the SICP. Upon completion, participants
were asked to complete pre-and post-training self-assessment
surveys using Likert scale responses (1 = Not at all
skilled, 5 = Extremely Skilled) to evaluate their perception
of their skills (Additional File 1).
Evaluating the implementability of ACP in primary care
Following the training sessions, PCPs were approached to
use the SICG to conduct conversations with two to three
patients aged 65 or older with any diagnosis of a chronic,
progressive illness or frailty that is expected to decrease
life expectancy. PCPs agreed to participate in research
and refer consenting patients and their substitute decision-
makers to complete surveys evaluating their conversation
experience. Upon completion of conversations
with three patients, PCPs were to complete surveys evaluating
their conversation experiences.
Surveys and interviews were used to measure PCP perceptions
of ACP and the SICP in primary care, as per the
NPT framework. We chose NPT to guide the evaluation
because it is a theory of implementation that focuses on
people and their behaviours both individually and collectively
as part of a social system, [14] and it can provide
empiric evidence of where there are gaps in implementation
and progress over time [16, 17]. The constructs of
NPT align well to implementing the multi-step emotionally
laden process of ACP in a complex interprofessional
environment such as primary care. We felt that NPT, and
specifically the measurement tool NoMAD, would be the
most informative approach to evaluating implementation
that would highlight specific areas for improvement
and importantly, where additional attention would not be
needed. NPT has been used successfully to plan, monitor
and improve new interventions in primary care [16, 17].
The NoMAD survey is a customizable 23-question survey
based on the NPT constructs, used for gauging implementation
processes from the viewpoint of healthcare
professionals directly implementing new interventions
[18, 19]. The survey has been psychometrically validated
and demonstrates good internal consistency (Cronbach’s
alpha = 0.89), and good face and construct validity [19].
The survey was used to evaluate participants’ perceptions
of implementing ACP in their practice (Additional File
2). Surveys were administered three months following
the final workshop to participating trained PCPs, to allow
time for patient encounters to occur where an ACP conversation
would be relevant. Surveys were administered
in-person or by e-mail, with bi-weekly in-person or email
reminders for survey completion.
A sub-group of participating PCPs were invited to
participate in one-on-one qualitative interviews identify
perceived barriers and facilitators to successful implementation,
and suggestions to improve implementation.
Interviewees were identified through convenience sampling,
among participants who completed a NoMAD
survey. With the knowledge that implementation had
not launched after the training, the interview questions
were focused on the NPT concepts of coherence and cognitive
participation. We asked about perceptions of the
SICG, how it was being used and if not used what were
the barriers, and how patients could be best identified for
initiating conversations. Interviews were conducted by
a senior male primary care physician and a junior male
research assistant. Interviews were conducted in-person
or by telephone, 4 months following the final workshops.
Interviews were audio recorded but were not transcribed.
Recordings and notes were not anonymized in order to
identify differences in experiences due to clinical role.
Analyses
Shapiro–Wilk tests determined that the pre- and postworkshop
self-assessment scores were not normally distributed.
Wilcoxon Sign-Rank tests were conducted to
examine pre-and post-workshop self-assessment scores
to assess changes in conducting ACP due to the training
workshops. Means, frequencies, and proportions
were calculated to describe NoMAD survey responses
to describe participant perceptions of implementing
ACP into primary care using the SICP and SICG. Statistical
significance was assessed by a two-tailed p-value
of < 0.05. Analyses were completed using IBM SPSS Statistics
for Windows, Version 26.0.
Interview recordings and notes were independently
analyzed by two junior research assistants to identify barriers,
facilitators, and suggestions for successful implementation.
The first male analyst was involved in the
interview process, while the second female analyst was
given orientation to the data and asked to independently
conduct thematic analysis. Identified themes were classified
to NPT constructs and components. Neither analyst
was a healthcare professional, and both have been
involved in research on the topic previously. Due to the
brevity and focused nature of the interviews to elaborate
on processes of implementing ACP, interviews were
not transcribed, and coding of text was not undertaken.
Thematic analysis was undertaken, using the interview
questions as a framework. After independently identifying
themes, the researchers met to discuss their analysis
together to reach consensus on final themes and
their alignment to NPT constructs, with a senior female
health researcher reviewing final findings. The interviews
augmented the results of the NoMAD survey by
providing more specific insights into the next steps of
changes in the clinic to remove barriers to having ACP
conversations.
The Hamilton Integrated Research Ethics Board
granted an ethics exemption to evaluate this training
on the basis of quality improvement, waiving the need
to consent clinician participants and allied health professionals.
The research ethics board required that we
obtain informed consent from participating patients and
substitute decision makers.
Results
Training evaluations
Thirty out of 34 trained PCPs completed a pre-and posttraining
self-assessment evaluating their perception of
the impact of the training session on their confidence and
abilities to conduct ACP. Eighty-nine percent reported
the training to be effective in improving their skills in
conducting serious illness conversations, and 96% recommended
the training to other healthcare providers. PCPs
reported improvements in every assessment category following
the training session and all pre- and post- training
assessment differences were statistically significant
(Table 1). The largest improvements were reported in
asking patients about their sources of strength, inquiring
about views on critical abilities, exploring views on
trade-offs, and overall confidence in having serious illness
conversations.
Twenty-five trained PCPs agreed to use the adapted
SICG to conduct ACP conversations with their patients
and subsequently refer them to study researchers, however,
4 PCPs withdrew from the project and only 3
patients were referred to researchers by December 2018.
As a result, patient ACP conversation experiences were
not evaluated.
NoMAD survey and interview findings
Fourteen PCPs completed surveys evaluating their perceptions
of implementing ACP into practice. Seventy-one
percent of respondents were female, 50% were physicians
and 50% had more than 6 years of clinical experience.
When asked to rate how familiar they felt about conducting
ACP in primary care, respondents reported a mean
score of 6.8 (0 = Feels very new, 10 = Feels completely
familiar). Respondents reported mean scores of 5.9 and
8.0 (0 = Not at all, 10 = Completely) when asked if ACP is
currently part of their work and if they feel that ACP can
become part of their work.
Respondents reported mixed opinions towards ACP
in primary care (Table 2). All participants agreed on
the potential value of conducting ACP in their professional
role and the belief that participating in ACP is a
legitimate part of the PCP role. All respondents agreed or
strongly agreed that they are open to working with colleagues
in new ways to make ACP possible in primary
care and will continue to support ACP implementation in
primary care. However, 58% did not agree that they can
easily make ACP part of their clinical routine. Fifty-four
percent lacked confidence in their colleagues’ abilities
in conducting ACP, and 57% lacked confidence in their
patients’ abilities to engage with them when discussing
ACP. While 86% of respondents believed that enough
training can be provided to staff to implement ACP, 50%
believed that available resources are not adequate to support
implementation.
All 25 participating PCPs were invited for interviews,
but only 7 PCPs (3 physicians and 4 allied health professionals)
agreed to participate. Physicians identified busy
clinical schedules as a barrier, noting difficulty in having
opportunistic ACP conversations with their patients.
Other barriers identified by physicians included patient
preparedness to engage in ACP conversations, and discomfort
or lack of confidence in having ACP conversations.
Allied health professionals (i.e., nurse practitioners,
registered nurses, and social workers) identified discussing
prognosis with patients as a barrier, emphasizing
that prognostication is outside their scope of practice.
Another barrier identified by allied health professionals
included identifying appropriate patients for ACP
conversations. Physician identified barriers resonated
with the cognitive participation construct, while allied
health identified barriers resonated with the coherence
construct.
Interviewees did not identify facilitators to successful
program implemented, and instead, identified the following
suggestions to increase the quantity and quality of
ACP conversations in primary care: conducting conversations
over multiple appointments, increased collaboration
between physicians and allied health professionals,
providing patients ACP resources to improve engagement,
and more training to normalize conversations as
a standard of care for health care providers regardless of
clinical role or specialty. Table 3 presents the identified
barriers and suggestions to successful implementation
according to the constructs of NPT, along with illustrative
quotes.
Discussion
Key findings
In this quality improvement project where 34 PCPs were
trained to have serious illness conversations through an
adapted SICP and SICG, we examined training assessments
and perceptions of the implementability of ACP
in primary care. Overall, PCPs rated the SICP training
workshops as highly effective in improving their skills
and confidence in having ACP conversations in primary
community-of-practice approach, that aims for gradual
change over one to two years with ongoing knowledge
sharing. Lastly, future research is needed to evaluate
patient and substitute decision-maker experiences of
ACP conversations and the effectiveness of conversations
in primary care.
Conclusions
Overall, our findings suggest physicians and allied health
professionals working in primary care are very receptive
to the idea of ACP but are less optimistic about the
feasibility of implementing ACP into clinical practice.
Attention to specific implementation concerns may
help identify improvements for future iterations of ACP
implementation.