Background
In January 2019, the Patient Autonomy Act of Taiwan
(hereafter, “the Act”), the first of its kind in Asia, officially
went into effect, allowing Taiwanese citizens to establish
a legally binding advance decision (AD). An AD
enables someone to refuse specified medical treatment
in the future when they may lack the capacity to consent
to or refuse medical treatment [1]. According to the Act,
a patient must complete an advance care planning
(ACP) consultation with a medical team before documenting
their wishes with a formal AD. The aim of this
consultation is to ensure that the wishes, values, and
preferences of a patient concerning future care and
treatment are documented in their AD and will be
respected when needed [2, 3].
Our hospital (a medical center in southern Taiwan) is
one of the seven trial hospitals entrusted by the Ministry
of Health and Welfare for the implementation of the Act
since it was passed at the end of 2015 and announced in
January 2016 (a three-year preparation period accompanied
the Act). Observations suggest that Taiwan citizens
had a strong desire for self-determination in endof-
life medical decisions but were limited by insufficient
knowledge of medical treatments, clinical scenarios, education,
and legal literacy. There is a great deal of clinical
knowledge and legal terms that have to be explained and
presented in a way that the general public can understand.
In the past, medical options have typically been
written on handout forms provided to patients with a
short conversation between medical teams and patients
before patients made their choices. However, imagining
medical treatments and future disease status merely
based on reading materials and verbal communication is
likely insufficient for patients to truly clarify their preferences
for end-of-life decisions [4] To improve this situation,
several video decision tools have been introduced
to ACP to improve the accuracy and certainty of end-oflife
decision making, and have been found valuable in
helping patients increase their knowledge of medical
treatments and allow them to clarify their medical decision
preferences with more certainty [5–7].
A previous neuroscience study has shown that video
decision tools enable patients to be more informed and
confident about their medical decision making, because
the visual cortex under video-watching prompts the
brain in decision making [8]. We developed a virtual
reality (VR) video in 2017 to supplement the standard
way of decision making before ACP and to determine
more realistic and accurate perceptions of patients as
they explore their values and preferences for end-of-life
treatment. Virtual reality (VR) is a computer technology
that provides users with a simulated and immersive experience.
The lifelike and realistic environment of VR
can facilitate emotional responses [9]. The impact of
emotion in decision making is well-recognized [10, 11].
VR may make it easier for users to understand aspects
of life-sustaining treatment (LST), and to arouse emotions
that will make their decision making more aligned
with their true values. VR technology has been recognized
by several studies as an effective tool in therapy
for rehabilitation, clinical surgical training, pain management,
and diagnostics [12–16]. However, none of the
video decision tools for ACP are currently designed with
VR technology. This research aims to apply VR video as
a patient decision tool for ACP in order to supplement
the traditional handout forms. In this study, we examined
whether VR video can help users make end-of-life
decisions and clarify their preferences by comparing
their choices for end-of-life medical treatment before
and after experiencing the VR video and collecting their
feedback on the research experience.
Methods
Participants
This study had a total of 160 participants, 40 of whom
were randomly assigned to the control group and 120 of
whom were randomly assigned to the intervention group
with the VR video. Participants were at least 20 years old
and capable of reading and understanding the information
provided in the written handout on the legal
process of making an advance decision. The one who
could read the words and understand the general healthcare
knowledge were recognized as capable of reading
and understanding. The reading and understanding capacity
were assessed by the research assistants face to
face. Recruitment occurred between January 23, 2019
and May 10, 2019 by flyer in a medical center, one longterm
care facility, and activity centers in the community
in Tainan, Taiwan. Eligibility criteria of participants included
being over the age of twenty and capable of reading
and verbally communicating. Written informed
consent was obtained from all eligible participants after
receiving explanations concerning the study’s purpose,
methods, protection of anonymity, and freedom to withdraw.
Institutional Review Boards from Chi-Mei Medical
Center approved all study procedures (IRB approval
number: 10710–008).
Design
The language used in the handout and questionnaires
was traditional Chinese. Participants were asked to
complete written questionnaires about sociodemographic
information, past experiences of medical
decision-making, and preference for different kinds of
treatment options for when they meet the clinical conditions
prescribed by the Act, namely terminal illness, irreversible
coma, permanent vegetative state, severe
dementia, and other incurable acute and critical diseases
that will be announced by theMinistry of Health and
Welfarein the future. The sociodemographic data included
gender, age, and level of education. The past experiences
questionnaire included knowledge of AD and
do not resuscitate orders (DNR), self-reported completion
of DNR, experiences of caring for loved ones with
terminal illness, and experiences of making medical decisions
for them on whether to use life-sustaining treatment
and artificial nutrition and hydration at that time.
Five treatment options were included: CPR, lifesustaining
treatment, antibiotics, blood transfusion, and
artificial nutrition and hydration. Participants who were
unable to decide whether to use treatments if they fell
under specific clinical conditions, or were unconscious,
or unable to clearly express their wishes could choose
“uncertain.” The questions regarding individual preference
for treatments were intended to observe differences
among participants’ decisions after the intervention. The
process of the VR video watching intervention group is
shown in the diagram below (Fig. 1).
Participants were asked to read a handout published
by Hospice Care Foundation of Taiwan with clear information
including the introduction of the Act and an illustration
of the legal process for making an effective
AD to help the participants understand their fundamental
right to make medical choices for themselves.
Participants then viewed a six-minute VR video that
was produced by the palliative care team of our hospital
on a portable VR headset. The 360-degree VR video was
filmed and developed by members of the palliative care
center with experts from different professional backgrounds
including physicians, nurses, senior social
workers, and psychologists to ensure the comprehensiveness
of the presented clinical information and scenarios.
Technical expertise was provided by a commercial company
that specializes in VR techniques. The designed
video used a first-person perspective of a patient with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to allow
participants to immerse themselves in the complete
clinical process of typical end-of-life care, starting with
CPR in the intensive care unit, followed by withdrawn
LST, hospice ward care, and hospice home care. The
video also displayed the soul of this patient at the end of
this film to reflect spiritual care. The displayed film features
physicians, nurses, psychologists, and relatives, so
that in addition to medical scenarios in different settings,
the process involved consensus among family members.
Participants then completed the post-test questionnaire.
Identical questions were reassessed regarding individual
preference for treatment options when they are
under specific clinical conditions, unconscious, or unable
to clearly express wishes, followed by a feedback survey
about the benefits of the decision tool using a 5-point
Likert scale (strongly agree, agree, neutral, disagree,
strongly disagree). The nine feedback questions were developed
on the basis of research by Hossler et al. (2011)
[17], and evaluated the effect of VR video on preparing
oneself to open a discussion with doctors, family and
others, choosing a spokesperson, clarifying one’s value
and preference regarding medical treatments, equipping
one’s understanding of medical scenarios and AD as well
as making end-of-life decisions. Validity of the whole
questionnaire was established by using a panel of experts
including two palliative doctors, one oncologist, one
judge, and one chair professor of the Chi-Mei medical
center to review the wording, content, and constructs.
Statistical analysis
Participants’ characteristics and past experiences in
medical decision-making were described using descriptive
statistics with frequency distributions. Participants’
feedback about the VR based decision tool
after the intervention was summarized using means
and standard deviation. The impact of the intervention
change was evaluated with a one-sided McNemar’s
exact test. Data were organized using SPSS 22
and analysis was performed using R software (version
3.6.0) and R package “exact2x2” (cite: Fay MP (2010).
“Two-sided Exact Tests and Matching Confidence Intervals
for Discrete Data.” R Journal, 2(1), 53–58.
https://journal.r-project.org/.) The significance level
was α = .05.
Post-hoc power analysis was performed for the primary
aim of detecting the difference in uncertainty of
the five medical options before and after VR intervention.
A sample size of 120 in intervention group achieved
79% (96, 67, 80 and 94%) power to detect the difference
that was reported in results section in uncertainty of using
CPR (life-sustaining treatment, antibiotics, blood transfusion,
and artificial nutrition and hydration), respectively
before and after VR intervention using a one-sided McNemar
test with a significance level of 0.05.
Results
Study participants
Baseline characteristics of participants are presented in
Table 1.
DNR means the “Do Not Rescue Form,” a form
signed by a patient or their closest relatives including
the options about refusal of CPR and LST during the
predying status under severe illness or injury.
Preference for treatment options
Figure 2 illustrates the control group’s change in the
percentage of individual preference for the five medical
treatments before and after participants read the
handout. Figure 3 illustrates the results of the intervention
group after participants read the handout and
viewed the VR video.
Table 2 shows the results of the statistical analysis for
the pre-test questionnaires. After the VR video intervention,
preference to refusal of CPR, LST, antibiotics,
blood transfusion (BT), and artificial nutrition and
hydration (ANH) increased significantly. Uncertainty
about using CPR, LST, antibiotics, blood transfusion,
and artificial nutrition and hydration decreased significantly.
This trend was not observed in the statistical analysis
of the control group.
Feedback on the VR decision tool
Across the 9 items collecting feedback from participants’
experience (where 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly
agree), the highest rated item was “After the intervention,
you thought that it increased your knowledge about
advance decision” (4.41 ± 0.54). The lowest rated item
was “After the intervention, you thought that it helped
you choose a spokesperson” (4.28 ± 0.64). Overall, the
intervention was generally recognized by participants for
its help in making decision (See Fig. 4).
Discussion
This study provides an innovative VR video approach to
assist with ACP. To my knowledge, this study represents
the first decision tool for ACP using VR technology.
When facing the possibility of meeting one of the five
prescribed clinical conditions under the Act, approximately
a quarter of participants were uncertain about
the decision of whether to use or refuse LSTs before
watching the VR video. However, for each treatment the
percentage of people who were uncertain decreased to less
than 20% after watching the VR video. Meanwhile, preference
for not using these medical treatments had the opposite
trend after watching the videos. The findings of our
research were consistent with previous research that
aimed at enriching patient understanding of worsening
health states and informing their decision making with the
use of a video decision tool [6]. According to our demographic
data (Table 1), there were no significance differences
between the different education levels, which means
that this intervention can be adopted for people with different
education and health literacy levels.
End-of-life decision making has never been an easy
task for people, especially in Asian cultures where it is
taboo to talk about issues of death and palliative care.
The Hospice Palliative Care Ordinance of Taiwan
(HPCOT) was passed in 2000, with the aim to promote
hospice palliative care and dying with dignity and to respect
the wishes of patients with terminal illness and
their right to personally decide about medical treatment.
Although Asian culture still regards talking about death
as taboo, HPCOT has had a significant impact on DNR
rates (Fig. 5) [18]. The DNR numbers have a rapid
growth since 2011 after the third amendment of
HPCOT. Almost four-fifths of participants had heard
about DNR orders. Before watching the VR video, the
largest proportion of participants refused to use LST
and CPR, which may be the result of people in Taiwan
becoming more familiar with these terms due to
HPCOT. Preference for not using these medical treatments
significantly increased after viewing the VR video.
The decrease in the number of participants who could
not make a decision after watching the VR video indicates
that our decision tool may help users make decisions.
These results achieve the purpose of our research
and are consistent with prior studies about video decision
tools for ACP in patients with cancer [6].
The use of decision tools for medical decision making
has been proved helpful in improving people’s knowledge
regarding treatment options in previous studies
[19]. The complexity of medical scenarios makes it relatively
hard for people to imagine and clarify their real
needs and make concrete choices about them. In response
to this, we set a storyline for our video, and the
scene changed from the ICU to a hospice home care setting
from the first-person perspective. The way doctors
spoke in the film followed the disease progression with
the option of hospice care. According to the feedback,
the VR video significantly helped equip users with a better
understanding of medical scenarios. Developing a
storyline with patient-centered ACP in a video has also
been recognized as highly meaningful for patients and
family members preparing for major surgery [20]. In
addition, during development we collected professional
opinions from medical staff as well as members of an
interdisciplinary team including psychologists and senior
social workers. Participants said that the VR video
helped prepare them to discuss their wishes with their
family and doctors.
Feedback collected from participants about this tool
was positive, suggesting that it is a useful tool for preparing
the users for ACP, insofar as study participants
report being in agreement with how this VR video
helped them 1) prepare to discuss issues with their family,
medical team and others, 2) make end-of-life decisions
3) choose a spokesperson, 4) clarify their
preferences for medical treatments and their values, and
5) have better understanding of medical scenarios and
increased knowledge of advance decision.
Limitations
Firstly, having no qualitative information collected to explore
what participants thought these terms meant and
further exploration is considered to confirm that the
participants realized these terms correctly. Secondly,
only one scenario was shown of the possible scenarios:
“irreversible coma, permanent vegetative state, severe
dementia, etc.” There is a strong degree of bias in influencing
participants’ decisions by only showing one outcome
(e.g., patient survives with reduced level of
function). Providing only one type of scenario and one
kind of outcome seems to have ethical considerations,
but the VR video is produced and used as a decision
tool, not for all of ACP and our consultation team discusses
the pros and cons of any end-of-life care medical
option to overcome this consideration. Thirdly, participants
were mostly highly educated younger adults with
no chronic or life-threatening illnesses, and their choices
may be different from older participants with chronic
life-limiting diseases. Fourthly, the emotional impact of
viewing the video was not explored, but we can observe
that the VR video induced the connection of memory
about the tester’s end-of-life care experience about their
close family members and we conducted a qualitative
interview for these participants that we will explore further.
Lastly, we cannot conclude that VR video is better
than conventional videos from the results of this study,
and the cost of making a VR film is higher than the cost
of making a conventional video. However, according to
the literature review, VR video can achieve better longterm
retention of learned information [21]. The benefits
of VR video need to be further explored to determine if
VR video cost is mitigated by its effectiveness.
Conclusion
Previous studies have revealed a gap between ADs and
the real wishes of patients in palliative care. The traditional
way for presenting ACP information to patients
includes verbally communicating the given scenario between
the medical team and patients [22]. Visual impact
on decision-making has been mentioned in previous
studies and the emotion, understanding, and motivation
for discussing end-of-life care preferences are important
issues in Taiwan’s society. ACP involves far more than
merely establishing an AD for certain treatments; additional
factors include family dynamics, emotional response,
and the values of patients. These elements were
emphasized in the VR film, but the real impact of VR
video needs further study. Participants reported the
highest satisfaction rating regarding the helpfulness of
the VR video to increase knowledge about AD, which
supports the fact that this study was effective in its
purpose.
This is the first national study to explore the effectiveness
of VR video as a decision tool in end-of-life care issues
since the passing of the Act in Taiwan. This study
revealed the VR video’s influence on the certainty in
choosing and decreased preference of CPR, LST, antibiotics,
blood transfusion and artificial nutrition and hydration.
This decision tool also proved to be an effective
tool for clarifying values and helping figure out and discussing
end-of-life care preferences with others. In response
to the implementing of the Act, we recommend
this decision tool to promote this Act as well as preparing
users for ACP.