Background
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders,
globally as well as in Thailand. The prevalence rate
of epilepsy in Thailand was approximately 7.2 per 1000
population [1]. Anti-seizure medications (ASMs) are the
mainstay of treatment. The drugs have various effect and
adverse effect profiles, as well as mechanisms of actions.
Among other things, they cause cognitive impairment
[2].
Additionally, vitamin D deficiency is another known
adverse effect of ASMs [3] Essentially, 90% of the vitamin
D in the human body is synthesized in the skin following
exposure to sunlight, particularly to ultraviolet B
with a wavelength of 209–305 nm, which is most abundant
in sunlight between 10 am and 2 pm. Substrates in
the skin are then converted to vitamin D3
(cholecalciferol).
Foods such as cod liver oil, milk fat, butter, animal
liver, and egg yolk are another source of vitamin D, in the
form of vitamin D2
(ergocalciferol). Both vitamin D3
and
vitamin D2
are metabolized in the liver and converted
by 25-hydroxylases into calcidiol (25[OH]D), a prehormone
that is the major circulating form of vitamin D
and is used to determine an individual’s vitamin status.
Circulating 25(OH) D is eventually metabolized in the
kidneys to a more biologically active form known as calcitriol
(1,25(OH)2D), which serves various functions such
as increasing calcium and phosphorus absorption in the
intestines, inhibiting the secretion of parathyroid hormone,
and modulating the formation and development of
bones and teeth [4].
Anti-seizure medications can reduce vitamin D levels,
increase parathyroid hormone levels, and cause hypocalcemia
and hypophosphatemia, resulting in an increased
risk of bone fracture in patients with long-term ASM use
[5]. In addition, studies have found that ASMs increase
vitamin D destruction in the liver by stimulating the
activity of the liver enzyme cytochrome (CY)P450 [6].
The prevalence rate of vitamin D deficiency in epileptic
patients in the United States is reportedly 11.9% in adults
and 25% in children aged between 3 and 17 years [7, 8].
Comparably, it is 22.5% in children with epilepsy aged
between 3 and 18 years in Malaysia [9]. A similar prevalence
(23.3%) has been found among children with epilepsy
in Thailand [10].
In previous studies, risk factors for vitamin D deficiency
are found to be female sex, adolescents over
12 years of age, high BMI, developmental delay and limited
physical activity, enzyme-inducing ASMs, polytherapy,
using drugs over a long period of time, Indian race,
and exposure to sunshine less than 60 min per day [7–10].
However, there are few reports of the prevalence of
hypovitaminosis D, including vitamin D insufficiency
and deficiency, in pediatric epilepsy patients treated with
different ASMs. We aim to determine the prevalence
and risk factors of hypovitaminosis D in children with
epilepsy.
Methods
This study was designed as both a cross-sectional study to
evaluate the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency and a retrospective
cohort study to investigate the factors affecting
vitamin D levels in children with epilepsy who were
treated with ASMs. Ethical approval was obtained from
the Institutional Review Board of the Royal Thai Army
Medical Department (R227h/60). Informed consent was
obtained from the patients or their parents/guardians.
We enrolled 138 pediatric epilepsy patients aged
1–20 years at the Neurology pediatric clinic at Phramongkutklao
Hospital from April 2018 to January
2019. Patients that had abnormal kidney or liver function,
received vitamin D supplements, or were on a
ketogenic diet containing vitamin D were excluded.
The data collected from the patients included age,
gender, weight, height, BMI, types of seizures, and
cause of epilepsy. Puberty status was assessed using
Tanner staging. Daily activity abilities were divided
into two categories; normal activity and limited activity,
such as walking with aid, using a wheelchair, or bedridden.
Developmental status was initially evaluated
using the Denver II test. If developmental delay was
suspected, patients under 6 years of age were assessed
with Mullen Scales of Early Learning (MSEL), and the
children older than 6 years of age were tested with the
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Third Edition.
The duration of sun exposure between 10 am and
2 pm per day were assessed through an interview and
recorded.
The name, number, and duration of the ASM treatments
were recorded. Participants were divided into the
enzyme-inducing ASM (carbamazepine, phenobarbital,
and phenytoin), valproate, and benzodiazepine (BZD)
and newer ASMs (diazepam, clonazepam, clobazam,
topiramate, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, zonisamide,
vigabatrin, oxcarbamazepine, gabapentin, lacosamide,
perampanel, and rufinamide) groups based on the type of
ASM used.
Serum 25(OH) D levels were used to categorize the
vitamin D status, which was defined as vitamin D sufficiency:
25(OH) D level > 30 ng/ml (75 nmol/L), vitamin
D insufficiency: 25(OH) D level 20–30 ng/ml
(50–75 nmol/L), and vitamin D deficiency. 25(OH) D
level < 20 ng/ml (75 nmol/L) [11]. In this study, we combine
the insufficiency and deficiency groups into the
hypovitaminosis D group for the purpose of our analyses.
Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS
Statistics 25.0 for Mac (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY).
Fisher’s exact and the chi-square test were used to analyze
categorical data. The Mann–Whitney U test was
used to analyze continuous data. Logistic Regression
was used to predict risk factors of hypovitaminosis D. A
p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Vitamin D status
The prevalence of vitamin D deficiency was 23.2%
(n = 32) and that of Vitamin D insufficiency was 47.8%
(n = 66). Thus, 71% (n = 98) of the patients had hypovitaminosis D.
Demographic characteristics
The demographic characteristics of all 138 pediatric
epilepsy patients are shown in Table 1. The mean
age of the participants was 9.65 ± 5.09 years (range:
1.04–19.96 years). The mean serum 25(OH) D level
was 26.56 ± 9.67 ng/ml. The relationship between age
and vitamin D level is shown in Fig. 1. Most patients,
irrespective of age, had a serum 25(OH) D level less than
30 ng/ml, and lower levels were associated with a higher
age.
Table 2 shows the types of ASM used, which includes
enzyme-inducing ASMs (26 patients) such as carbamazepine
(15 patients), phenobarbital (6 patients),
and phenytoin (6 patients). One patient used both
phenobarbital and phenytoin. The enzyme-inhibiting
ASM group, which only included valproate, was comprised
of 53 patients, whereas the BZD and newer ASMs
group comprised 113 patients. The most commonly used
newer ASM was levetiracetam (80 patients), followed
by topiramate (53 patients). Seventeen and 36 patients
received a low (less than 5 mg/kg/day) and high (5 mg/
kg/day or more) dose of topiramate, respectively. Other
ASMs in this group were benzodiazepines such as clonazepam,
diazepam, and clobazam (21 patients); lamotrigine
(5 patients); zonisamide (2 patients); vigabatrin
(3 patients); lacosamide (10 patients); perampanel (11
patients); and rufinamide (1 patient).
3. Factors predicting vitamin D status (Table 3)
Univariate logistic regression analyses revealed that the
potential risk factors of hypovitaminosis D were puberty
and ASM use of more than 2 years, with a 4.9- and 2.7-
times increased risk of hypovitaminosis D, respectively
(p < 0.05).
Multivariate logistic regression analysis adjusted for
other risk factors such as gender, puberty status, duration
of sun exposure, monotherapy drug, enzyme-inducing
ASMs, enzyme-inhibiting ASMs, newer ASMs, and more
than 2 years of ASM use suggested that puberty status and
ASM type were significantly related to hypovitaminosis
D. Specifically, patients who had undergone puberty
had a 5.4-times (95% confidence interval 1.9–15.7) higher
risk of hypovitaminosis D than pre-pubescent patients.
Patients who had received non-enzyme-inhibiting ASMs
had a 3.5-times (95% confidence interval 1.1–11.5) higher
risk of hypovitaminosis D than those who received
enzyme-inhibiting ASMs (valproate).
Discussion
Which role the drugs play for the vitamin D deficiency
is still uncertain [7–9, 11, 12]. VPA seems to exert the
least influence, while the effect of the new generation of
ASMs one cannot say anything certain about, based on
the results from this study.
We found that the prevalence rate of vitamin D
deficiency in pediatric epilepsy patients in Bangkok,
Thailand was 23.2%, which was similar to the rates
reported in previous studies conducted in Thailand
[10] and Malaysia [9]. However, when we considered
both vitamin D deficiency and vitamin D insufficiency
together as hypovitaminosis D, our results indicated
that approximately two-thirds of pediatric epilepsy
patients had hypovitaminosis D, even though Thailand
is located in the tropical zone.
Similar to the previous reports, we also found
puberty status to be a key risk factor of hypovitaminosis
D. This may be because puberty represents a critical
period of skeletal bone mineralization, which results in
a high rate of vitamin D utilization and increased need
for vitamin D, leading to high rates of deficiency [13].
The other factors included in our analyses, namely
BMI, cause of epilepsy, physical activity status, developmental
status, ASMs used for monotherapy or
polytherapy, and duration of sun exposure, were not
significantly associated with hypovitaminosis D.
More than 2 years of ASM use was significantly associated
with hypovitaminosis D in the univariate analysis
but not in the multivariate analysis. This may be
because various drugs were simultaneously studied,
and they may affect vitamin D levels through different
mechanisms.
Interestingly, 53 of the 138 patients (38%) were
receiving an enzyme-inhibiting ASM (valproate). The
multivariate analysis revealed that those treated with
non-enzyme-inhibiting ASMs had a 3.5-times higher
risk of hypovitaminosis D than those treated with
enzyme-inhibiting ASMs. This finding is similar to
those of previous studies that found normal levels of
active vitamin D in patients receiving valproate therapy
[14–16]. One study found that patients receiving
valproate monotherapy had fewer negative effects
on bone markers and better bone density than those
receiving enzyme-inducing ASM (phenytoin, carbamazepine)
monotherapy [17]. However, the findings
from studies of bone metabolism in patients receiving
valproate are controversial, and it is difficult to make
a comparison because of varying study designs [18].
More evidence is needed on the effect of valproate use
on bone health.
Among our participants, the most commonly used
newer ASMs were levetiracetam (57.9%) and topiramate
(38.4%). As seen in previous studies, we found no
statistically significant association between newer ASM
use and vitamin D level. This may be because newer
ASMs, except for topiramate and oxcarbazepine, do not
affect CYP450, the enzyme that regulates the metabolism
of vitamin D in the liver [19, 20]. Additionally,
another study showed no association between the use
of newer ASMs and decreased bone mineral density
[21].
Among newer ASMs, topiramate has unique pharmacokinetics
in that it acts as an enzyme-inhibiting
agent (metabolized via CYP2C19 in the liver) at low
doses (< 200 mg/day in adults) and as an enzyme-inducing
agent (metabolized via CYP3A4) at high doses (≥
200 mg/day) [19, 20, 22]. Hence, we divided participants
receiving topiramate into the low dose (< 5 mg/kg/day)
and high dose (≥ 5 mg/kg/day) groups in our analysis.
We found that more patients in the high dose group
had hypovitaminosis D than in the low dose group
(80.6 and 58.8%, respectively), although this difference
was not statistically significant (p = 0.092, Fig. 2).
We recognize that our study has a limitation of a
small sample size. A multicenter study with a large
number of participants should be conducted in the
future to confirm our results.
Conclusion
Our study shows a relatively high prevalence rate of
vitamin D deficiency and vitamin D insufficiency of
23.2 and 47.8%, respectively, even though Thailand
is located in the tropical zone. The key risk factors of
hypovitaminosis D are puberty status and non-enzymeinhibiting
ASM use. There is currently a lack of guidelines
on the appropriate time to assess the vitamin D
status of epilepsy patients. Our findings suggest that
clinicians who treat pediatric epilepsy patients, especially
those entering puberty and being prescribed
non-enzyme-inhibiting ASMs should consider regular
monitoring of vitamin D adequacy. In cases of hypovitaminosis
D, clinicians should recommend prompt
vitamin D supplementation as it is essential to prevent
pathological fractures and osteoporosis for the patients
in later life.