Background
The public health burden of undernutrition remains
heavy and widespread, especially in low-income countries
like Nepal, where rates are still very high, particularly
in certain subgroups of the population [1]. The
odds of stunting are four times higher in children born
in low-income households compared to those from
higher income households, which highlights inequalities
not just in income, but also in access to, and use of
health and nutrition services [2]. A recent anthropometric
assessment found that 41% of pre-school children in
the Mountains of Nepal were stunted compared with 19%
of preschool children in the lower-elevation Terai (plains
of Nepal), indicating significant geographic differences in
the etiology of malnutrition. The prevalence of wasting in
children under 5 years of age is estimated at 6.1% in the
Mountains, 6.4% in the Hills, but 12.2% in the Terai [3].
A study by Shively et al., showed that “for each 1000 m
gain in elevation, height-for-age Z-scores (HAZ) declined
by between 0.1 and 0.2 points for an average child and by
between 0.35 and 0.42 points for a child with the characteristics
of those living at the highest elevations” [4].
The authors cited several factors beyond economic isolation
as potentially contributing to the high stunting rates
observed in the mountains, including differences in agricultural
production and micronutrient deficiencies (zinc
and iron). Poor sanitation and hygiene, and a low proportion
of children receiving the minimum acceptable diet
[5], are some of the factors associated with high wasting
rates in the Terai relative to the other two regions.
Intermediate and underlying factors associated with
stunting include the duration of breastfeeding, low size
of baby at birth, low socio-economic status, economic
isolation, and low and unpredictable rainfall. Other factors
include seasonality, low maternal body mass index,
lack of access to an improved water source, lower birth
order, poor maternal education, and a high exposure to
enteropathogens as evidenced by the levels measured in
children’s stools [6–9]. Few studies have examined metrics
of political will and quality of policy implementation
relevant to nutrition, and their potential to support
actions targeting factors associated with stunting. Given
the enormous dependence of the public sector on health
and nutrition services in Nepal, it is critical to elucidate
whether the quality and intensity of government-supported
actions aimed at improving nutrition play any
measurable role in outcomes at the household level.
The concept of good governance (defined as “the effective
implementation of national policies”) provides a
platform for questioning the long menu of institutional
changes and capacity building initiatives that are important
and essential for development [10]. Good governance
for nutrition entails four key elements including
efficiency, accountability, transparency, and participation
[11–13]. Most studies on nutrition governance have
focused on evidence at a national or global level and the
role of governance, focused on nutrition improvements,
at the sub-national level has received limited attention. A
critical gap remains in understanding the effectiveness of
nutrition governance with a focus on the role of capacity,
resources, information, coordination, and collaboration
in achieving nutrition gains at the sub-national level [14].
This paper seeks to explore the association between the
effectiveness of nutrition governance at national and subnational
levels and key nutrition indicators such as stunting
and wasting in Nepali children under 5 years of age.
The paper is organized as follows: we start by presenting
the study design for the two surveys used in this analysis.
Then the Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE) model
and multilevel model methods are described, before
presenting results, including findings from regression
analyses for both statistical approaches. We end the paper
with discussion of the findings, articulation of study limitations,
and recommendations for further research.
Measuring the quality of nutrition governance
Measuring the quality of ‘governance’ is challenging.
There is no consensus on a single theoretical definition of
governance, thus it is difficult to determine what to measure.
Yet there is need for governments to know if they are
on track in improving governance systems in order to
assess impact at the grassroots level and/or identfiy areas
for improvement. To address this gap, several metrics
have been proposed, including the World Governance
Index [15] and the Hunger and Nutrition Commitment
Index (HANCI) [16] among others, each with advantages
and disadvantages. One study by Felismino et al. [17],
explored types of national and sub-national governance
(good versus not good) and their relationship with nutritional
status of children in the Philippines. They collected
data from focal point personnel in 30 municipalities and
cities and created a single score out of four domains: 1)
nutrition policies and programs, 2) organizational structure
and resources for nutrition, 3) efficiency, and 4)
accountability, transparency and participation. Cities
and municipalities with a score above the median were
defined as communities with “good governance”, that
is, a governance structure supportive of nutrition. Furthermore,
these good governance communities also had
significantly lower underweight and stunting levels compared
to those communities with lower scores (or poor
governance structures). While these findings are in line
with those of previous authors’ [18], the results obtained
were based on bivariate analyses, thus were not robust
because they did not account for possible confounding
factors.
More recently, Namirembe et al. [19] developed a
Nutrition Governance Index (NGI) that captures the
effectiveness of nutrition governance at a sub-national
level. The authors discussed at length the value of the
NGI for uncovering relationships between the quality of
governance and nutrition outcomes in children under
five. This novel metric is an aggregate of five domains, as
follows: i) understanding of nutrition and responsibilities
by policy implementers, ii) collaboration, iii) financial
resources, iv) capacity, and v) institutional support.
The domains used to create the NGI have been emphasized
as important in facilitating improved nutrition outcomes
[20–22]. For instance, the ‘knowledge’ domain has
been found to be associated with height-for-age Z-scores
(HAZ) in children under 5 years of age in Ghana [23].
Nutrition knowledge may arise from scholarly pursuits
or community and societal engagements, supported by
government and non-governmental initiatives. In Nepal,
several initiatives provide nutrition knowledge as an
intervention to improve nutrition. Examples of these
include the USAID-funded SUAAHARA project and the
Multi-sector Nutrition Plan (MSNP) [24], which sought
to improve mother’s infant and young child feeding
knowledge and behaviors, provide nutritional counseling
and raise awareness regarding better health and nutrition
practices, among other objectives to fight malnutrition
in Nepal. The SUAAHARA project was initiated in
twenty districts of Nepal from 2011 to 2016. The goal of
the project was to improve nutrition, maternal, newborn,
and child health services, reproductive health or family
planning services, water, sanitation and hygiene, and
home-based gardening. The MSNP project spanned from
2013 to 2017 with a similar aim of improving nutrition
outcomes. Some of the objectives included setting action
points for implementing nutrition-sensitive policies and
strategies that encompass agriculture and public health,
and reducing stunting in children and undernutrition in
women [25].
The importance of technical knowledge for nutrition is
clear. However, the scope of such interventions needs to
be widened to include the relevant local leadership that is
tasked with enforcing adherence to, and implementation
of, protocols. Regarding the importance of collaboration,
support and commitment, various authors have studied
the role of inclusiveness of multiple professions on health
outcomes, highlighting their importance in encouraging
workers to speak up and participate in problem-solving
and advancing shared goals [26–28]. These interventions
can contribute to changes in children’s nutrition outcomes
so we found it necessary to adjust for their influence,
especially because there is an overlap between the
time of their implementation and our study duration.
Methods
Study design and data collection
Data used here are derived from two separate but related
studies: the Policy and Science for Health, Agriculture
and Nutrition (PoSHAN) Community study, and the
PoSHAN Policy study. The PoSHAN Community study
was a nationally representative household panel study
that was conducted annually from 2013 to 2016 in Village
Development Communities (VDCs) across the three
agroecological zones of Nepal (Mountains, Hills and
Terai) [29]. At the time of the surveys, VDCs were the
lowest administrative units in Nepal. The PoSHAN Policy
study utilized the same study design and timeframe
but focused on institutional respondents within VDCs.
Thus, the PoSHAN Policy study sampled government
and non-government officials while the PoSHAN Community
study surveyed households, and women and children
within these households. The PoSHAN Policy study
targeted relevant offices and organizations within VDCs
based on their defined responsibilities in implementing
Nepal’s Multisector Nutrition Plan (MSNP). The MSNP
is a collaborative multi-national partnership spearheaded
by the government of Nepal to improve maternal and
child nutrition and reduce chronic malnutrition, largely
through evidence-based nutrition interventions [30].
Additional details regarding the PoSHAN Community
study have been published elsewhere [29]. Briefly,
seven VDCs were sampled from the three agroecological
regions of Nepal (Mountains, Hills and Terai), resulting
in twenty-one VDCs. From each VDC, three wards
(roughly equivalent to neighborhoods) were selected
at random. Households eligible for inclusion in the
PoSHAN Community study were those with a child
younger than 5 years or with a woman who was married
within the past 2 years. The 2016 survey of the PoSHAN
Community study included 5556 households from 64
wards, and 6815 children in total. The 2014 PoSHAN
Policy study collected data at the ward level and included
523 participants. Questionnaires for both the POSHAN
Community study and the POSHAN Policy study are
publicly available [31]. The Tufts University Social
Behavioral and Educational Research Board (SBER) and
the Nepal Health Research Council (NHRC) provided
human subjects research ethical approval.
To construct the dataset for this analysis, we matched
the 2014 Policy data to the 2016 PoSHAN Community
data by VDC. Although the Policy study sampled the
same wards as the Community study, the selection of
participants was not representative of the wards within
the Community study. To correct for this imbalance, we
aggregated NGI scores to the VDC level, which is the
smallest administrative and geographic unit available for
matching the two studies.
Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis focuses on two child anthropometric
measures: height-for-age Z-score (HAZ) and
weight-for-height Z-score (WHZ). These nutrition indicators
were calculated using WHO’s age- and sex-specific
growth standard references [32]. We utilized Generalized
Estimating Equation (GEE) models and Multilevel
(also known as hierarchical) regression models for the
multi-variate analyses. Both approaches provide advantages
over conventional regression models in the context
of our study design, where errors and outcomes for units
are clustered within sample frames. Conventional regression
models may underestimate the standard error of the
mean and easily reject the null hypothesis because they
do not account for this study design effect. In this situation
a GEE model provides robust estimates of the variances
of regression coefficients [33] and provides other
benefits [34]. A multilevel regression approach provides
the advantage of estimating variances at each level (in
this case the child and the VDC), which avoids overweighting
realizations of the NGI that are repeated for all
children within a VDC. All estimates were adjusted for
distance to the market, child’s age, sex, diet diversity [35],
fever in the past 30 days, mother’s education, mother’s
BMI (Body Mass Index), maternal age, Food Insecurity
and Access Scale [36], MSNP and SUAAHARA districts.
All analyses were conducted in SAS v 9.4. Both models
satisfied tests for normality and absence of multicollinearity
among regressors. Unless otherwise specified,
associations are reported as statistically significant based
on p < 0.05.
Generalized estimating equation (GEE) models
The Generalized Estimating Equation model (GEE)
is an extension of generalized linear regression models
(GLM). As estimated, the GEE models included as
explanatory variables those known from past studies to
be associated with stunting and wasting in Nepalese children
under 5 years of age [8, 37]. Child-specific variables
included age, sex, diet diversity, report of any fever in the
past 30 days, breastfeeding status, and whether the child
received healthcare. Age squared was included to account
for any non-linearity in the relationship between age and
outcome. Mother-specific variables included duration of
formal schooling, BMI and age. Household-specific food
insecurity scores were also included as direct measures as
well as indirect controls for household wealth.
Multilevel regression models
The multilevel models were fitted using the maximumlikelihood
estimation method, allowing intercepts to vary
across VDCs. To judge model fit, we relied on the Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC). Lower values imply better
fit [38]. In the multilevel regression, children are nested
within VDCs. Accordingly, child outcomes constitute the
primary level of analysis and the VDC constitutes the second
level. We began analysis with a null model without
predictors to determine whether mean HAZ and WHZ
differed significantly across the 21 VDCs. The multilevel
model further tests the alternative hypothesis that VDClevel
predictors are correlated with HAZ and WHZ. We
tested this hypothesis using the intra cluster correlation
(ICC) value. The ICC indicates the extent to which children
in the same VDC are similar based on their HAZ
and WHZ relative to the total variation in HAZ and
WHZ measured across all VDCs. If the within-cluster
variance is high, then the resulting ICC is expected to
be low. Koo et al. [39] states that an ICC less than 0.5 is
poor. Although a multilevel model approach may not be
ideal if the ICC indicates clustering by VDC is not substantial,
this approach allows us to investigate VDC-level
effects (NGI) on child-level outcomes (HAZ and WHZ).
Figure 1a and b illustrate the variances in mean HAZ and
WHZ across VDCs.
Successive models included child-level predictors and
VDC-level predictors respectively. These models control
for the nested design of the data by permitting VDC
intercepts to vary while estimating fixed effects.
The Null model equation is:
Substituting Eq. 2 into Eq. 1 results in estimating the
Null equation:
Yij = 0j + rij (1)
0j = 00 + μ0j (2)
where
Yij is the HAZ or WHZ outcome for child i within VDC
j
β0j is the average HAZ or WHZ for each VDC
ϒ00 is the grand mean of VDC intercepts
μ0j is the variance of the intercepts
rij is the within-group variance in the outcome for each
VDC
The successive random intercept and fixed slope, and
interaction equations are denoted by:
in WHZ were due to the NGI and its cross-level interaction
respectively.
Discussion
This paper measured the association between the effectiveness
of nutrition governance and nutrition outcomes
using a Nutrition Governance Index. After adjusting
for other known predictors of stunting and wasting, we
found that this relationship was positive for children
over 2 years of age. This may reflect that policy actions
rolled out in Nepal improve nutrition over time via multisectoral
nutrition-sensitive pathways that typically
benefit older children. More targeted nutrition-specific
interventions are largely designed to affect pregnancy
and post-pregnancy outcomes, usually delivered through
health services alone. It may also reflect the lagged effects
of changes in trainings or practice that may enhance the
effectiveness of implementation over time. Since the
NGI captured the effectiveness of nutrition governance
at societal and community levels, it could reflect aggregate
gains at those levels rather than shorter-term gains
accruing specifically to mothers and infants. It has been
shown that agriculture, education and infrastructure
investments most likely support improvements in older
children in Nepal who are already consuming the family
diet as compared to babies and infants [40].
The results presented here underscore the point that
factors associated with the child’s nutritional status are
complex, ranging from individual to the community level.
Individual and community-level variables explained 19%
of the variation in HAZ and 42% in WHZ. Child-level
variables were strong predictors of both outcomes and
their effects persisted throughout the series of models
that adjusted for higher-level variables, highlighting their
importance in addressing malnutrition. This finding echoed
findings in Bangladesh and Nigeria that showed the
predominance of these factors in predicting stunting and
wasting in children [41, 42]. Smith and Shively reported
significant but relatively smaller overall contributions
from community-level factors, although their investigation
focused on district-level factors and did not address
governance directly. They found that approximately 6%
of total variance and 22% of explained variance in heightfor-
age Z-scores occurred between districts [43].
That between-VDC variance was relatively low in our
null model reflects the fact that since Nepal’s VDCs are
larger geographic units than wards, individual variability
within these groups can be expected to be higher compared
to smaller units. That said, Smith and Shively found
that adding additional ward-level variables to a multilevel
model of HAZ did not increase the explained proportion
of second-level variance substantially [43].
We found a negative relationship between HAZ in
older children and the ‘knowledge about nutrition’
domain of the NGI, which is surprising but an indication
that there is need to improve nutrition knowledge acquisition.
Our findings were in line with Saaka [23] who
found a significant association between HAZ and maternal
childcare knowledge. The counterintuitive direction
for the magnitude of effects for the NGI domains on
both nutrition outcomes could be attributed to two possible
explanations: the deficits of using a cross-sectional
approach and a lack of specificity in the nutrition knowledge
domain. Cunningham et al. [44] studied predictors
of changes in nutritional outcomes in Nepal from 1996
to 2011 and found that “health services were the single
largest contributor to LAZ change,” with an estimated
increase of 0.15 in LAZ over a 15-year period. This suggested
that the impacts attributed to good governance,
of which access to health services is a crucial component,
occured after a long period. It is possible that our
analyses, which were limited to a 2-year period, were
not able to capture any measurable effects. The knowledge
domain at its core measured an understanding of
nutrition (nutrition problems and strategies to address
any issues) and personal responsibilities in their roles as
relevant officials that are key to interpreting and implementing
nutrition policies. A negative relationship with
HAZ may imply that this domain is not specific enough
to capture the true effect of nutrition knowledge that may
include knowledge of nutritious diets, agricultural and
WASH practices that have been established as important
factors associated with stunting. The negative relationship
between the Support domain and WHZ was surprising
and should be investigated further.
One limitation of this study was the reliance on one
second-level variable to represent community-level
predictors due to a small sample of VDCs and minor
observed variation in nutrition outcomes between VDCs.
However, when we estimated models using other community-
level variables, such as distance to market, estimates
and interpretations remained similar and model fit
statistics did not improve. In addition, the Policy Process
study recruited various office holders as participants in
the study. Over time, some of these individuals changed
offices or departments. Because the study design focused
on the position, rather than the individual, the NGI may
not have captured long-established governance practices,
rendering its association with nutrition outcomes
inaccurate.
Although our findings are based on two time points,
the design used is multi cross-sectional so we cannot
account for temporal trends that are likely to affect nutrition
outcomes. However, the two statistical approaches
used were appropriate in seeking to understand factors
associated with stunting and wasting in Nepal. These
results may not be generalizable to other contexts, as the
questionnaire was adapted for Nepal although some of
the questions can cut across all nutrition-relevant offices.
Magnusson et al. [45] revealed that assuming independence
of errors associated with baseline indicators
used in the creation of the World Governance Indicator
[15] resulted in an inaccurate indicator. The NGI was
modeled with the same assumption about measurement
errors. We therefore recommend further investigation
into alternative methodologies that relax this assumption
and a reassessment of NGI in relation to nutrition
outcomes.
Conclusions
In Nepal, through an innovative set of analyses, we found
that better nutrition governance was positively associated
with nutrition outcomes (HAZ and WHZ) in children
over 2 years of age. This result was obtained using
two robust statistical approaches. Our findings underscore
the importance not just of targeted interventions,
but also of effective management of those interventions
in the context of translating policies into practice. The
multilevel approach revealed that NGI explained a nonnegligible
amount of variation in HAZ and WHZ, which
underscores the fundamental role that good governance
plays in promoting child nutrition and growth.
where
Yij is the HAZ or WHZ outcome for child i within
VDC j
ϒ00 is the grand mean of the outcomes across VDCs
and children
ϒ10 is the regression coefficient associated with Xij
ϒ01 is the regression coefficient associated with Wj
ϒ11 is the regression coefficient associated with the
interaction term XijWj
Wj is the VDC-level predictor (NGI)
μ0j is the variance of the intercepts
μ1j is the variance of the slopes
rij is the within-group variance in the outcome for each
VDC
Results
Sample characteristics
The sample characteristics for women and infants participating
in this study are presented in Table 1. The average
Nutrition Governance Index (NGI) score was 52.36 (95%
CL: 50.21–54.50) in 2014. The median distance to any
market within VDCs was 0.52 miles. Regarding women’s
characteristics, the average age was 27 years and the
mean amount of time spent in school was 3.61 years (95%
CL: 2.60–4.61) in 2014. Forty-seven percent of children
were female. The average child’s age was 35.60 months
in 2014. Average child’s weight was 11.20 kg (95% CL:
10.97–11.43). The prevalence of stunting and wasting
was estimated at 34.0% (95% CL: 33–35%) and 14.0%
(95% CL: 13–15%) respectively. Seventy-two percent of
the households were food secure in 2014; slightly more
households were food secure in 2016 (79.10%).
NGI was positively associated with HAZ and WHZ in
older children (> 2 years old) compared to younger children
(HAZ; β = 0.02, p < 0.004, WHZ; β = 0.01, p < 0.37)
as seen in Table 2. Mothers’ education, her age and BMI,
Yij = 00 + μ0j +rij (3)
Yij = 00 + 10Xij + 01Wj + μ0j + rij (4)
(5)
Yij = 00 + 01Wj + 10Xij + 11XijWj + μ0j + μ1jXij + rij
and absence of fever in the child during the past 30 days
were all positively associated with HAZ and WHZ. Distance
to the market and child’s diet diversity were negatively
associated with HAZ and WHZ.
The NGI score was aggregated from its five constituent
domains. Estimates for its interaction with child’s age are
presented in Table 3. Collaboration, financial resources
and support domains were significantly and positively
associated with HAZ in older children as was the knowledge
domain for WHZ. We observed an unexpected negative
and significant relationship between the nutrition
knowledge domain with HAZ and support domain with
WHZ in children over 2 years old.
Results from the multilevel models are shown in
Table 4. Because HAZ variation across VDCs was small
(Fig. 1a and b) and the VDC-level analysis must be based
on a small set of observations (21 VDCs), we investigated
VDC-level effects using only one community-level
variable, NGI. Interpretation of results was restricted to
Model 4 for both outcomes as it was the best-fit or most
improved model based on possessing the smallest AIC
estimate. This means that adjusting for NGI together
with its interaction with age, improved model fit for both
outcomes.
From Model 1, we calculated a significant ICC of 0.07
(95% CI, 0.04, 0.12) for HAZ and an ICC of 0.17 (95% CI,
0.10, 0.28) for WHZ. This indicates that 7 and 17% of the
overall variances in HAZ and WHZ were accounted for
by variations across VDCs. When the NGI was zero, the
average estimated HAZ for all VDCs was -1.49 and the
average estimated WHZ was -0.75. The covariance estimates
for both the intercept and residual were significantly
different from zero. This implies that average HAZ
differed considerably across VDCs (intercept = 0.116,
p < 0.001) and there was more variation in HAZ among
children within VDCs (residual = 1.555, p < 0.0001) as
reflected in the low ICC estimate.
The positive and significant relationship between NGI
and HAZ in older children, that was also observed in the
GEE model, was observed across both outcomes (Fig. 2a
and b). That is, a one-point increase in the NGI was significantly
associated with a 12% higher average HAZ and
a 4% higher WHZ in older children (> 24 months old).
No reported fever, maternal education and maternal BMI
were all positively associated with HAZ and WHZ.
The covariance parameters for the intercept in Model 4
were unchanged compared to previous conditional models
for the same outcome. This minimal decrease in variance
meant that NGI and its cross-level interaction with
age, explained only a small portion of the between-VDC
variations in HAZ and WHZ. Specifically, 19% (0.116–
0.094/0.116) of the explainable variation in mean HAZ
and 42% (0.199–0.115/0.199) of the explainable variation