Introduction
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by novel
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-
2) has been globally spreading since the end of
December 2019. Historically when looking at previous
coronavirus pandemics caused by SARS-associated coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) and Middle Eastern respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), there were reported
cases of spontaneous abortions, preterm births, low birth
weight, and neonatal respiratory infections [1]. This was
hypothesized to be a result of increased inflammatory
activity associated with the first and third trimesters and
a period of overall decreased immune activity associated
with the second trimester and in the newborn period [2,
3]. At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, this
prior experience from pandemics caused by the same
family of viruses, raised the concern that pregnant
women and newborns could be at high risk for SARS-CoV-2
related complications.
Early reports of pregnant women infected with SARSCoV-
2 in the third trimester raised concern for increased
risk of premature delivery [4], while large cohorts of pregnant
women in the UK suggested that they are not at increased
risk of spontaneous abortion or preterm birth but
do have higher rates of Cesarean section [5–7]. In a review
of 262 pregnant women who were admitted with confirmed
COVID-19 and delivered, most were admitted due
to symptoms in their 3rd trimester, 75% gave birth at that
time, 59% had a Cesarean section (C-section), and 5% of
neonates tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 but did not have
evidence of severe illness [6]. In a review of literature published
on COVID-19 in pregnant women worldwide (primarily
China and US), it was reported that most women
presented in their second and third trimesters, with 65–
88% developing mild to moderate pneumonia and 64–
78% undergoing C-sections [8, 9]. A more recent report
from the INTERCOVID multinational cohort has shown
and increased overall maternal morbidity in pregnant
women with COVID-19 and increased risk for preterm
birth, severe neonatal and perinatal morbidity indices [10].
In addition to this overall increase in maternal morbidity,
the placenta may be affected as well [11] which raised the
concern for possibility of vertical transmissions [12]. More
recently some variants, particularly the SARS-CoV-2
B.1.617.2 variant (delta variant) have been reported to
have been associated with more severe infection and
worse pregnancy outcomes [13].
Initial review of SARS-CoV-2 positive neonates suggested
that newborns were at risk for SARS-CoV-2 related
complications [8]. De Bernardo et al. reviewed 18
studies from December 2019 to April 2020 and found
that 21 of 25 neonates positive for COVID-19 were
symptomatic, with 32% requiring ICU admission and
20% requiring mechanical ventilation. The most common
symptoms were fever, vomiting, and cough or
shortness of breath. Major complications reported were
pneumonia or respiratory distress, and there were no
reported deaths [14].
With increasing concern for COVID-19 related complications,
the question of whether there was any risk of
vertical transmission from SARS-CoV-2 infected mother
to fetus and newborn came to light. It is well-established
that the main routes of transmission are via respiratory
droplets and contact [15, 16]. Neonates stand additional
risk of infection by possible intrauterine transmission,
intrapartum infection after exposure to maternal infected
secretions or feces around the time of birth and
postpartum infection from infected mother. Although
the majority of reports have not shown any strong evidence
of vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 [17–19],
there have been some anecdotal cases with possible vertical
transmission based on neonatal nasopharyngeal
RT-PCR swab or presence of IgG and IgM antibodies
for SARS-CoV-2 [20–22].
While there is growing literature describing low risk of
vertical transmission of this virus to newborns, there is
still concern for intrapartum transmission through infected
maternal infected secretions or feces at time of
birth or post-natal transmission from respiratory secretions
of infected mother [23]. Timely initiation of appropriate
precautions to decrease risk of transmission
became imperative. Recommendations for the most appropriate
management regarding isolation, breastfeeding,
and discharge practices have evolved through the
pandemic. It is not well-established what the best practices
will minimize risk of post-natal infection [23]. Additionally,
given the incubation period, there is the
consideration of whether neonates will develop lateonset
infections or sequelae after hospital discharge in
those born to mothers with active infection. We sought
to review the outcomes of infants born to mothers with
active perinatal COVID-19 infection during initial hospital
stay and up to 2 months of age.
Methods
Study design and participants
We established a database to prospectively enroll all neonates
born to mothers with active perinatal COVID-19
infections presenting to our network of two neonatal intensive
care units (NICUs) starting in April 2020. The
network includes a referral level 4 center in a freestanding
children’s hospital and a level 3 unit located in a regional
perinatal center in Memphis, TN. Active perinatal
SARS-CoV-2 infection was defined as maternal infection
diagnosed between 14 days prior to and up to 72 h after
delivery. In keeping with national practice, active infection
was defined by detection of SARS-CoV-2 by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on
nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs. Initially, testing for mothers
was symptoms-based between April and May 2020;
thereafter, all mothers were uniformly screened with NP
swabs on admission for delivery with the option to optout
unless symptomatic. If the mother was confirmed
positive for SARS-CoV-2 or was a person under investigation
(PUI) at time of delivery, the neonate would
undergo testing at 24 and 48 h of life. Only infants of
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 positive mothers were included
in the database.
All data were collected by chart review and stored in a
secure HIPPA compliant database. Institutional review
board (IRB) approval was obtained from the UTHSC
IRB and the hospital research boards.
Statistical analysis
Chi squared test of independence was used to compare
outcomes of prematurity and c-section were compared
between woman with and without active perinatal
SARS-CoV-2 infection. All analyses were conducted
using R, version 4.0.5 (R Foundation). Two-sided P < .05
indicated significance.
Data collection & follow-up
We collected several maternal and neonatal variables,
which included demographics, maternal symptoms,
treatment, mode of delivery, neonatal symptoms, treatment,
mode of feeding, and lab data when available. We
also collected limited data on the control cohort i.e. deliveries
during study time period with no evidence of
active maternal perinatal infection. Follow-up of infants
was performed by telephone calls at 1-, 2-, 4-weeks and
2 months of age if discharged to assess for any late onset
symptoms (Fig. 1).
Delivery room practices
In order to minimize exposure and conserve personal
protective equipment (PPE), we re-classified delivery
room attendance criteria to allow the pediatric members
of delivery team to remain on “stand-by.” When
attendance was required, if feasible, a single team
member would perform an initial assessment of the
neonate before remaining team members would enter
if indicated. For all deliveries of PUIs or confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 positive mothers, PPE based on Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations
was used (i.e., N95 mask, eye shield, gown, and
gloves). Given lack of data regarding transplacental
transmission, routine delayed cord clamping was continued;
however, skin-to-skin contact immediately
after birth was avoided. Mothers and any family
members present were required to wear surgical face
masks during deliveries.
Isolation practices & neonatal care
As national data and recommendations evolved, so
did our separation practices. From April to September
2020, any neonate born to a PUI or confirmed SARSCoV-
2 positive mother was routinely separated and
isolated in the NICU until negative maternal testing
in the case of PUIs or until discharge in the case of
confirmed positive mothers. After September 2020,
mothers were considered eligible and given the option
for rooming-in if they were asymptomatic, with no
need for respiratory support, afebrile with stable vital
signs, and able to care for their baby. Neonates were
eligible for rooming-in if they were well-appearing,
with no need for respiratory support, able to feed
without additional support, and had normal vital
signs. Practice for symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 positive
mothers remained unchanged.
When separated in the NICU, neonates were placed
in closed incubators (isolettes) and cohorted in a single
large isolation room with isolettes placed 6 ft
apart. When rooming-in with mother, the neonate
was kept in an isolette at least 6 ft away from
mother’s bed, and mothers were instructed to wear
masks and to perform hand hygiene prior to and after
taking care of the infant (including breastfeeding).
Breastmilk feeding (directly or expressed) was always
encouraged after counseling mother of unknown but
likely exceptionally low risk of transmission by breastmilk.
In both settings, medical providers interacting
the neonates used Airborne, Droplet, and Contact
Precautions-level PPE. Neonates were bathed soon
after birth and underwent testing with NP RT-PCR
swabs at 24 and 48 h of life while those in the newborn
nursery or rooming-in generally only received
testing at 24 h of life prior to discharge. Newborns in
the NICU were removed from isolation after two
negative tests.
Given the possible increased risk of aerosol generation,
if neonatal SARS-CoV-2 status was unknown or positive
and they required non-invasive respiratory support
greater than 2 l per minute of high flow nasal cannula,
they were intubated with HEPA filter placed in expiratory
limb of ventilator circuit. These infants were placed
in negative pressure room when available.
Regarding discharge practices, when possible, infants
were discharged to a family member with a proven
negative SARS-CoV-2 test and families were educated
to isolate from mother for 10 days from her positive
test. If no family member was available and mother
was symptomatic, infant was kept in NICU for 7 days
then discharged home with mother with education on
handwashing/breast hygiene and continuation of
droplet precautions.
Results
Between April 2020 to April 2021, there were 2367 deliveries,
of which 67 mothers tested positive for SARSCoV-
2 via NP RT-PCR in the perinatal period. Of these
women, 70 neonates were identified, with 65 single, 1
twin, and 1 triplet gestation live-born deliveries.
Demographic and clinical characteristics of the mothers
are provided in Table 1. Forty-four (66%) mothers identified
as African American, 6 (9%) as Caucasian, and 15
(22%) Hispanic. Mean maternal age was 26.7 ± 6.4 years
old. Of the 67 mothers, 54 (81%) were asymptomatic before
admission, while 9 (13%) reported being sick at home
and 4 (6%) required hospitalization for SARS-CoV-2
within 14 days prior to delivery. Forty-two (63%) mothers
were confirmed COVID-19 positive at the time of delivery,
the remainder were persons under investigation
(PUIs) at time of delivery and later confirmed to be positive.
Overall, median time from diagnosis to delivery was
1 day (IQR, 0 to 1.75 days), with a positive number indicating
that the test was obtained before birth. Maternal indications
for testing are reported in Table 1–55 (89%) of
women underwent asymptomatic screening and 4 (6%)
had previous positive tests. The remaining were tested
due to symptoms that included fever, upper or lower respiratory
symptoms, anosmia or ageusia, or recent known
SARS-CoV-2 contact.
Of the 13 symptomatic mothers, 6 received specific
treatment for COVID-19. Three received Remdesivir,
two of them also received dexamethasone, and of those,
one received convalescent plasma therapy as well due to
severe disease. Two mothers received a combination of
dexamethasone, zinc, and vitamin D; and one mother
was treated with zinc and vitamin D. There were no maternal
deaths related or non-related to COVID-19.
In the cohort, 15 (21%) had preterm births and 42%
underwent C-section, however we did not see any statistically
significant difference in preterm birth (15 of 67
[21%] vs 534 of 2300 [23.2%]; p-value = 0.87) or Csection
(28 of 67 [42%] vs 805 of 2300 [35%]; p-value =
0.25) between mothers with and without perinatal
SARS-CoV-2 infection during the study period.
Of the 70 neonates enrolled in the study, 37 (53%)
were female, 55 (79%) were born at term (≥37 weeks gestational
age), and mean gestational age was 37.3 ± 2.9
weeks (median 38 weeks, range 28–41 weeks). There
were 28 (42%) cesarian deliveries. The most common
maternal indications for C-sections were repeat Csection
(n = 10) and 3 underwent C-section for worsening
maternal condition due to COVID-19. Fetal indications
for C-section included fetal distress (n = 10),
malpresentation (n = 3), and severe intrauterine growth
restriction (n = 2). Mean birth weight was 2988 ± 733 g.
Median APGAR score at 5 min was 9 (range, 4–10). Median
(IQR) lengths of maternal and neonatal hospitalization were 2 (2–3) days and 3 (2–6) days, respectively.
Characteristics of the neonates are summarized
in Table 2.
In addition to the standard drying and stimulation
during resuscitation at delivery, 21 (32%) neonates
needed supplemental oxygen delivered, 20 (31%) received
positive pressure ventilation, and 6 (9%) were
intubated. Maximum respiratory support during neonatal
hospitalization was tracked, and while the majority
did not require any respiratory support (n = 53, 76%),
two (3%) required supplemental oxygen, four (6%) were
on continuous positive airway pressure, 10 (14%) were
mechanically ventilated, and one (1%) was placed on
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). The
neonate that was placed on ECMO required it for
management of meconium aspiration syndrome. We
reviewed every case requiring mechanical ventilation and
respiratory support, all cases had independent risk factors
predicting need for respiratory support, most commonly
prematurity (7 of 10 neonates mechanically
ventilated were preterm). All neonates requiring supplemental
oxygen or additional respiratory support were
negative for SARS-CoV-2.
Of the 70 mother and infant pairs, 46 (66%) were separated
at birth due to positive maternal SARS-CoV-2 status
(given our initial protocol requiring separation for all
positive mothers), complications with delivery or pending
maternal convalescence, or if neonate required increased
resuscitation efforts or support. A total of 30
(46%) neonates roomed-in with mothers during their
hospitalization, and of these, 18 (60%) were also admitted
to the NICU during their hospital stay. Of the 18
newborns, 5 (29%) were initially roomed-in but were
transferred to the NICU due to development of maternal
complications.
A total of 123 NP swabs were obtained. Sixty-nine of
70 (99%) neonates were tested during the first 14 days of
life. Two (3%) were tested on day of life 0 (day of birth),
65 (93%) were tested on day of life (DOL) 1, 49 (70%) on
DOL 2, 5 (7%) on DOL 3, 1 (2%) on DOL 4, and 1 (2%)
on DOL 9. Of these, 67 (97%) neonates tested negative.
Of the two who tested positive, one (neonate A) was
positive on DOL 1 with repeat testing on DOL 2 being
negative, and the other (neonate B) was positive on DOL
2 after a negative test on DOL 1. Neonate A was born to
an asymptomatic 16-year-old G1 at 36 weeks gestational
age via spontaneous vaginal delivery, length of stay was
2 days, and was found to be asymptomatic at till 2
months of age. Neonate B was born to an asymptomatic
20-year-old G2 at 37 weeks gestational age via spontaneous
vaginal delivery, length of stay was 3 days, and was
found to be asymptomatic till 2 months of age as well.
Follow-up response rates were 90, 90, 89, and 83% at
1-, 2-, 4-week, and 2-month time periods, respectively.
Of the respondents, all neonates were asymptomatic at
the 1-week follow-up. At the 2-week follow-up, one neonate
was reported to have be febrile secondary to a
urinary tract infection with no other COVID-19 related
symptoms. At 4-week follow-up, one infant was admitted
for 2 days after presenting with increased work of
breathing and vomiting but remained afebrile and
SARS-CoV-2 test was negative at that time. At 2-month
follow-up, there was one neonate that family reported
had a self-limiting febrile illness for 3 to 4 days, no
COVID-19 test was obtained. A summary of follow-up
data is found in Table 3.
Discussion
While case reports of SARS-CoV-2 positive newborns
demonstrated significant symptoms or complications,
rate of transmission has been reported to be low (0–5%),
especially with appropriate precautions in place. Our
2.8% rate of positive SARS-CoV-2 infection in neonates
is similar to earlier reports in literature [6]. Breslin et al.
performed a retrospective review of a 15-day period describing
neonatal outcomes of 18 infants who were born
to mothers with confirmed COVID-19, where all neonates
tested negative though timing of the testing was
not reported [24]. Dumitriu et al. reported negative results
of 101 neonates, with testing ranging from DOL 0
to 25 based on symptoms [18]. De Sousa et al. performed
a systematic review on risks of infections among
pregnant women and subsequent fetal transmission,
where 75–99% of mothers were reported to have mild to
moderate pneumonia, rates of C-section ranged from 64
to 78%, and there were 2 newborns who tested positive for
SARS-CoV-2 out of a total of 145 newborns tested [9].
Of the two neonates who tested positive in our study,
both had one negative and one positive test result in the
first 48 h. It should be noted that the RT-PCR testing for
SARS-CoV-2 is highly specific but not as sensitive, so
the neonates were treated as positive regardless of the
negative result. Both mothers of the positive neonates
were asymptomatic at presentation. Neither neonates required
additional resuscitation efforts other than drying
and stimulation and did not have any oxygen requirements
during hospital stay (length of stays were 2 and 3
days). De Bernardo et al. reviewed studies describing
clinical presentations of 25 SARS-CoV-2 positive neonates,
the majority of which presented with symptoms,
but were found to have a good outcome with low rate of
severe complications and no deaths reported. Our study
also supports these findings. Additionally, in our study,
the neonates who tested positive were found to be
asymptomatic at all follow-up periods up to 2 months.
Of the 70 neonates, 30 (46%) roomed-in with their
mothers, none of whom tested positive. During the time
when all newborns were admitted to the NICU for isolation,
patients were primarily formula-fed due to isolation
efforts even when mothers were encouraged to pump
breastmilk. However, as guidelines evolved, and direct
breastfeeding was encouraged with enforcement of good
hand hygiene and wearing a mask during breastfeeding.
Overall, there were relatively small numbers of patients
who received breast milk (17%) or were directly
breastfed (11%). Of the patients who received breast
milk, none tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 during
hospitalization and remained asymptomatic during
follow-up. There have been sporadic reports of detection
of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in breastmilk, however, the presence
of viral particles does not imply the possibility of
transmitting infection [23].
Recent multinational cohort of 706 pregnant women
with COVID-19 diagnosis showed that there was
significantly higher risk for preeclampsia/eclampsia, Csections,
maternal mortality, preterm birth, severe neonatal
morbidity index and neonatal complications when
compared to women without COVID-19 [10]. In our cohort,
we did not see a statistically significant difference
in the rates of preterm birth and C-sections. There were
no neonatal or maternal mortalities and when individual
cases of neonates requiring mechanical ventilation were
analyzed, there was an identifiable etiology for need for
mechanical ventilation in all cases.
Lavizzari et al. compared international guidelines for
managing neonates and found that most countries suggested
viral testing on all neonates born to SARS-CoV-2
positive mothers regardless of symptoms. All countries
reported limited family access to the NICU and prohibited
entrance of symptomatic visitors [25]. Ronchi et al.
evaluated safety of rooming-in and risk of postnatal
transmission and concluded that risk of mother-toinfant
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 during rooming-in
was unlikely if the infected mothers were not severely affected
and were educated to observe droplet and contact
precautions when caring for or breastfeeding infants
[26]. We believe that our guidelines which were consistent
with international recommendations promoted a low
rate of viral transmission.
Most studies present results of infection rate and
SARS-CoV-2 positivity of neonates, however very few
have described that protocols followed for the data
reviewed [26]. Additionally, the furthest follow-up reported
was 14 to 20 days post-discharge [26, 27]. We believe
ours is the first study that reports infectivity and
follow-up as far as 2 months after discharge. In our cohort,
there were 3 infants reported to have a febrile illness
up to 2 months of age, none directly attributable to
a SARS-CoV-2 infection. Overall, our results showed an
extremely low percentage of symptomatic infants at each
follow-up period, which demonstrates a low-risk of lateonset
infection or late presentation of vertically acquired
infection after hospital discharge.
Limitations of this study included the fact that while
the neonates were followed up to 2 months after discharge,
they did not undergo repeat testing. With the latency
of SARS-CoV-2 infection and prolonged
incubation period, it is possible that the RT-PCR could
still result in a positive test within 14 days of birth if
there was vertical transmission. However, it would be
difficult to differentiate if the transmission were vertical
or horizontal if the neonates tested positive after the immediate
post-natal period. Other limitations include the
relatively small number of study participants and our laboratories
did not perform typing of the SARS-CoV-2
virus, hence, we were unable to collect data regarding
the dominant variant.
Conclusion
Our data supports the previous findings that describe a
probable very low-risk of vertical transmission of SARSCoV-
2. Additionally, with follow-up data suggests there
is likely low-risk of post-natal transmission of SARSCoV-
2 or late-onset symptomatic infection or its sequelae.
While there are still many unknowns with respect to
controlling this pandemic, we believe that the hospital
guidelines we described regarding rooming-in, isolation,
breastfeeding, and discharge practices are effective for
minimizing risk of transmission while still promoting
family centered care.