Background
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP), also called IgA vasculitis,
is a type of vasculitis in which small blood vessels
accumulate deposits of immunoglobulin A1. HSP is
more common in children [1] and is characterized by
non-thrombocytopenic purpura, abdominal pain, joint
swelling and pain, and hematuria or proteinuria [2].
Renal involvement is an important determinant of longterm
prognosis [3–5]. About 30 to 90 % of HSP patients
have mild and self-limiting proteinuria and hematuria,
and these patients generally have a good prognoses [4–
6]. However, an increase in the urine protein level or the
development of nephrotic syndrome or rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis is indicative of poor prognosis
[7, 8]. Aggressive measures are usually required to improve
the long-term outcomes of these patients.
Currently, clinicians often treat these patients with a
combination of corticosteroids and immunosuppressants
[9], including cyclophosphamide (CTX) [10], mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) [11], cyclosporine A (CysA) [12],
and azathioprine [13]. In our clinical experience, we
found that many patients and families do not accept
CTX therapy, mainly due to its gonadal toxicity. Although
MMF is effective and safe, its high cost may impact
treatment decisions. Leflunomide (LEF) is a
relatively new oral immunosuppressant that is approved
for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis,
but has also been used for treatment of juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis, lupus nephritis [14], IgA nephropathy
[15], and other conditions. A previous study reported
that LEF in combination with a corticosteroid led to
good outcomes in adult patients with HSP who had
nephrotic-range proteinuria [16]. In addition, LEF is less
expensive than many other drugs used to treat HSPN
and has a favorable safety profile. However, little is
known about the effect of LEF in pediatric patients with
HSPN. The present case series describes our experience
in the use of LEF for 5 pediatric patients who had IgA
vasculitis with nephritis.
Methods
Five children (3 girls and 2 boys) who had diagnoses
of IgA vasculitis with nephritis were first admitted to
our department between February 2014 and April
2016 and received LEF treatment (Table 1; Fig. 1).
The study was approved by the research ethics board
of Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University
(2016PS41J), and all methods were performed in accordance
with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
Informed consent was obtained from the parents or
legal guardians. Diagnosis was based on EULAR/
PRINTO/PRES criteria [17]. Urinary protein was
defined as normal (≤ 5 mg/kg/day), pathological (5–
50 mg/kg/day), or nephrotic (≥ 50 mg/kg/day). Children
weighing 20 to 40 kg received 20 mg of LEF for
3 days followed by a maintenance dose of 10 mg per
day; children weighing more than 40 kg received
40 mg of LEF for 3 days followed by a maintenance
dose of 20 mg per day. These dosing schedules are
based on the drug instruction for treatment of adult
rheumatoid arthritis (50 mg for 3 days followed by a
maintenance dose of 10–20 mg per day) and our
experience of using leflunomide for juvenile idiopathic
arthritis.
Results
Patient 1
In February 2014, a 12-year-old girl was admitted to our
hospital for leg purpura, abdominal pain, microscopic
hematuria, and proteinuria (25 mg/kg/day). The blood
urea nitrogen (BUN) was 4.07 μmol/L, serum creatinine
(SCr) was 51 mmol/L, serum albumin was 40.5 g/L, and
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 116 mL/
min/1.73 m2. A renal biopsy showed 21 glomeruli with
diffuse moderate and focal mesangial cell proliferation
and an increased mesangial matrix. Immunofluorescence
(IF) analysis of the mesangial lesions indicated they were
positive for IgA (predominant), IgM, and C3, leading to a
diagnosis of HSPN ISKDC class II and M1 E0 S0 T0 C0
(revised Oxford classification ) (Fig. 1). We administered
intravenous methylprednisolone (1.45 mg/kg/day for 12
days, followed by 2.18 mg/kg/day for 7 days), and this led
to reduced abdominal pain and cutaneous vasculitis, but
the proteinuria increased to 41 mg/kg/day. Because of the
elevated proteinuria despite 19 days of intravenous steroid
therapy, we administered LEF (40 mg/day for 3 days and
followed by 20 mg/day for 8 months) and tapered the
steroid to oral prednisone. We also administered an
angiotension-converting enzyme inhibitor (captopril,
0.5 mg/kg, 2–3 times daily) for 3 months to reduce the
proteinuria. The patient received follow-ups every 2 to 3
months. At the 12-month-follow-up, the patient had no
recurrence of the skin rash or abdominal pain, normal
clinical status and renal function, no hypertension, a
urinary protein level of 8 mg/kg/day, 45 red blood cells
(RBCs) per high power field (HPF), and no relevant
adverse events (Table 1). This girl received oral prednisone
for 12 months. Because her clinical status was stable,
we scheduled follow-ups every 6 months.
Patient 2
In July 2014, a 12-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital
for microscopic hematuria and proteinuria (43 mg/
kg/day). He had a history of leg purpura for 1 month.
The BUN was 4.08 μmol/L, serum creatinine was 53.6
mmol/L, serum albumin was 40.7 g/L, and eGFR was
124 mL/min/1.73 m2. A renal biopsy isolated 51 glomeruli.
Light microscopy indicated moderate-to-severe
mesangial hypercellularity, expanded matrix, and three
glomeruli with epithelial crescents. IF analysis indicated
the mesangial lesions were positive for IgA (predominant),
IgM, and C3, leading to a diagnosis of HSPN ISKD
C class IIIb and M1 E0 S0 T0 C1 (revised Oxford classification
) (Fig. 1). We administered intravenous methylprednisolone
(1.78 mg/kg/day for 3 days followed by
3.56 mg/kg/day for 8 days), but the proteinuria remained
(52 mg/kg/day). We subsequently administered a pulse
of intravenous methylprednisolone (11.11 mg/kg/day for
3 days) with subsequent oral prednisone, and this partially
resolved the proteinuria (20 mg/kg/day), but also
led to increased intraocular pressure (45 mmHg, measured
with a noncontact tonometer for a weekly in hospitalized
patients) with no symptoms. An intravenous
steroid was used for 14 days, and we rapidly tapered the
oral prednisone and administered LEF (40 mg/day for 3
days followed by 20 mg/day for 7 months). We also administered
captopril (0.5 mg/kg, 2–3 times daily) for 3
months to reduce the proteinuria. The patient received
follow-ups every 2 to 3 months. At the 8-month-followup,
the patient had no recurrence of the skin rash, no
detectable urinary protein, no relevant adverse events,
normal clinical status and renal function, no hypertension
(Table 1). He used oral prednisone for 6 months.
Because his clinical status was stable, we scheduled
follow-ups every 6 months.
Patient 3
In April 2016, an 11-year-old girl was admitted to our
hospital for leg purpura, bilateral swelling of the wrists,
microscopic hematuria, and proteinuria (40 mg/kg/day).
The BUN was 1.37 μmol/L, serum creatinine was 29.8
mmol/L, serum albumin was 39.2 g/L, and eGFR was 119
mL/min/1.73 m2. A renal biopsy provided 25 glomeruli.
Light microscopy indicated diffuse moderate and focal severe
mesangial cell proliferation and increased mesangial
matrix, segmental endothelial cell proliferation, visceral
and parietal epithelial swelling, two glomeruli with cellular
crescents and two other glomeruli with small cellular crescents.
There was also focal interstitial edema. IF analysis
indicated the mesangial region was positive for IgA, and
weakly positive for IgM and C3, leading to a diagnosis of
HSPN ISKDC class IIIb and M1 E1 S0 T0 C1 (revised Oxford
classification ) (Fig. 1). We administered intravenous
methylprednisolone (2.29 mg/kg/day for 5 days followed
by 4.57 mg/kg/day for 6 days), and this reduced the proteinuria
to 20 mg/kg/day. We then progressively tapered
the oral prednisone and administered LEF (20 mg/day for
3 days followed by 10 mg/day for 12 months) and captopril
(0.5 mg/kg 2–3 times daily for 3 months) to reduce
the proteinuria. The patient received follow-ups every 2 to
3 months. At the 18-month-follow-up, she had no recurrence
of skin rash, no detectable urinary protein, no relevant
adverse events, normal clinical status and renal
function, no hypertension (Table 1). She used oral prednisone
for 12 months. Because her clinical status was is
stable, we scheduled follow-ups every 6 months.
Patient 4
In November 2015, an 11-year-old girl was admitted to
our hospital for leg purpura, bilateral swelling of the
wrists and knees, microscopic hematuria, and proteinuria
(25 mg/kg/day). The BUN was 4.26 μmol/L, and
serum creatinine was 30.2 mmol/L, serum albumin was
37.9 g/L, and eGFR was 121 mL/min/1.73 m2. A renal
biopsy was performed and 18 glomeruli were isolated.
Light microscopy indicated focal moderate-to-severe
mesangial hypercellularity with expanded matrix and
segmental endothelial cell proliferation, visceral and parietal
epithelial swelling, and two glomeruli with epithelial
crescents and focal segmental necrosis. IF analysis indicated
the presence of IgA (predominant), IgM, and C3
in the mesangial lesions, thus leading to a diagnosis of
HSPN ISKDC class IIIa and M1 E1 S1 T0 C1 (revised
Oxford classification ) (Fig. 1). We administered intravenous
methylprednisolone (2.67 mg/kg/day for 6 days
followed by 5.33 mg/kg/day for 5 days), and then a
methylprednisolone pulse (16.67 mg/kg/day for 3 days)
because of continuing proteinuria. However, the proteinuria
increased to 42 mg/kg/day. We then administered
LEF (20 mg/day for 3 days followed by 10 mg/day for 6
months) and tapered the steroid to oral prednisone. We
also administered captopril (0.5 mg/kg, 2–3 times daily
for 3 months) to reduce the proteinuria. The patient received
follow-ups every 2 to 3 months. At the 32-
month-follow-up, she patient had no recurrence of skin
rash, no detectable urinary protein, no relevant adverse
events, normal clinical status and renal function, and no
hypertension (Table 1). She used oral prednisone for 9
months. Because of her stable clinical status, we scheduled
follow-ups every 6 to 12 months.
Patient 5
In September 2015, a 12-year-old boy was admitted to
our hospital for leg purpura, microscopic hematuria, and
proteinuria (34 mg/kg/day). The BUN was 3.82 μmol/L,
serum creatinine was 39.4 mmol/L, serum albumin was
33.9 g/L, and eGFR was 120 mL/min/1.73 m2. A renal
biopsy isolated 28 glomeruli and light microscopy indicated
diffuse moderate to focal severe mesangial hypercellularity
with expanded matrix and segmental
endothelial cell proliferation, and visceral and parietal
epithelial swelling. IF analysis indicated the presence of
IgA (predominant) and C3 in the mesangial lesions,
leading to a diagnosis of HSP ISKDC class II and M1 E1
S0 T0 C0 (revised Oxford classification ) (Fig. 1). We administered
intravenous methylprednisolone (1.78 mg/kg/
day for 4 days followed by 3.56 mg/kg/day for 8 days),
and this reduced the proteinuria to 10 mg/kg/day. We
then progressively tapered the patient to oral prednisone,
and administered LEF (20 mg/day for 3 days
followed by 10 mg/day for 6 months) and captopril
(0.5 mg/kg, 2–3 times daily for 3 months) to reduce the
proteinuria. Although this patient weighed 45 kg, his
parents requested use of a lower dose of LEF, and this
lower dose subsequently appeared to be effective. The
patient received follow-ups every 2 to 3 months. At the
7-month-follow-up, he had no recurrence of the skin
rash, undetectable urinary protein, no relevant adverse
events, normal clinical status and renal function, and no
hypertension (Table 1). He used oral prednisone for 6
months. Because of his stable clinical status, we scheduled
follow-ups every 6 months.
Discussion
We described 5 children who presented with IgA vasculitis
with proteinuria that was nearly 50 mg/kg (nephrotic
range) and remained high despite administration of
intravenous steroid. All children had biopsy-proven
nephritis, and we described their successful treatment
with LEF combined with a corticosteroid. None of these
patients received diuretics because of their relatively
disease-free status (no nephrotic syndrome or oliguria).
Two patients previously received intravenous steroid
without resolution of proteinuria. Steroid therapy was
quickly discontinued in 1 patient who experienced increased
intraocular pressure. Four patients achieved
complete renal remission, and the other patient had significantly
reduced proteinuria. In all cases, remission
persisted for the entire follow-up period of 8 to 32
months and there were no severe adverse events.
The optimal therapeutic strategy for IgA vasculitis in
children remains controversial. Some patients only receive
supportive therapy in an effort to control the acute symptoms.
However, more intensive and specific treatment for
IgA vasculitis with nephritis should be considered in
pediatric patients with severe proteinuria and/or impaired
renal function [18]. Although nephritis is the most serious
long-term complication of IgA vasculitis, limited data are
available regarding the best therapy. Corticosteroids are
currently a first-line treatment for HSPN, and this approach
leads to remission in most patients. However,
some patients exhibit steroid dependence or steroid resistance,
and require immunosuppressant therapy in combination
with a corticosteroid.
The SHARE recommended treatments for children
with moderate IgA vasculitis with nephritis include oral
prednisolone and/or pulsed methylprednisolone as a
first-line treatment, and AZA, MMF or intravenous
CTX as a first- or second-line treatment [9]. Due to the
lack of evidence-based data for treatment of IgA vasculitis
with nephritis and the similarities of this condition
with primary IgA nephropathy, the KDIGO guidelines
proposed the same treatment for both diseases. Thus,
they recommend oral or intravenous corticosteroids plus
oral or intravenous CTX for initial therapy, but provided
no recommendations for maintain therapy [10], and did
not recommend MMF or AZA. Clinicians who strictly
follow the KDIGO guidelines for the treatment of HSPN
may face the risk of delayed initiation of effective treatment
and an increased risk of chronic kidney disease
over the long term.
The adverse effects of CTX, especially on the gonads,
often reduce patient compliance. MMF (which selectively
suppresses the proliferation of T and B cells) is another
commonly used immunosuppressant. The adverse
events from MMF therapy are less severe than those
from CTX, but the high-cost of MMF restricts its use in
low-medium income countries. CysA (which decreases
lymphocyte function) is another commonly used immunosuppressant.
CysA can be very effective in pediatric
patients with severe HSPN; however, administration can
be difficult because it has poor water solubility and close
monitoring of the blood concentration is necessary. Cys
A may also cause severe adverse events [19]. Azathioprine,
a prodrug of 6-mercaptopurine, has antileukemic,
anti-inflammatory, and immunosuppressive properties,
and is also often used in the treatment of IgA vasculitis
with nephritis [9, 13]. Previous studies reported administration
of tacrolimus and rituximab for treatment of
HSPN [20, 21], but there is limited evidence of their efficacy
and further research is required for confirmation.
LEF is an affordable medication that is associated with
few adverse events. Research in adults with HSPN reported
that LEF in combination with a corticosteroid
may lead to a slower deterioration of GFR than corticosteroid
monotherapy [16].
We administered LEF treatment to these patients
because their parents refused CTX due to possible
side effects and they could not afford MMF treatment.
AZA was not availble in our hospital, and we
had limited experience with AZA and CysA. LEF is
commonly used for juvenile idiopathic arthritis and
lupus nephritis in our center, and we found no obvious
adverse effects, suggesting suitability for our patients.
LEF is an immunosuppressive agent that
disrupts T and B cell function via inhibition of dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase (the rate-limiting enzyme of
de novo pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis) and also
inhibits several tyrosine kinase signaling molecules involved
in immune function [22]. LEF is currently a
common treatment for autoimmune diseases. There is
evidence that LEF is effective in treating IgA nephropathy,
and nephropathy caused by systemic vasculitis
and systemic lupus erythematosus [14, 15]. In
this study, we prescribed LEF in combination with a
corticosteroid to successfully treat 5 children who had
IgA vasculitis with nephritis. The duration of LEF
therapy ranged from 6 to 12 months, and there were
no severe adverse events.
This study is an observational case series. Data from
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) supporting the use
of LEF as a treatment for IgA vasculitis with nephritis
are currently lacking. Thus, we need to study more patients
using a well-designed RCT to compare LEF with
conventional agents (i.e., a corticosteroid and a standard
immunosuppressive agent) to confirm the effectiveness
and safety of LEF therapy. Nonetheless, our examination
of 5 children who had IgA vasculitis with nephritis indicated
that LEF in combination with a corticosteroid
achieved complete or nearly complete renal remission,
and that none of the patients experienced severe adverse
events.