Introduction
Household food insecurity (FI) — a household’s experience
of inadequate or insecure access to sufficient, safe
and nutritious food because of income or finances — is
a major public health problem [1, 2]. Household food insecurity
is associated with poor child health outcomes,
even at marginal levels [3–5]. Previous research also
shows that families with marginal food security are more
like food-insecure households than food-secure households
[6].
Families affirming one or both of the first 2 items of
the 18-item U.S. Household Food Security Screening
Module (HFSSM), are considered marginally food secure
[6, 7]. The first item measures uncertainty about having
enough food and the second item measures uncertainty
about exhausting their food supply. Developed in the
U.S., these items comprise the 2-item Hunger Vital
Sign™ (HVS) [8], now advocated for use as a screening
tool for marginal food security in clinical practice and
embedded into the electronic medical record system
along with clinical and billing codes in some areas. However,
the 2 items on the HVS™ are from the adult module
in the 18-item HFSSM, which may not apply to
children [9]. Furthermore, a 1-item child-specific screen
for use in paediatric primary care practice may have
greater utility in identifying marginal food security in
families with young children.
The Nutrition Screening Tool for Every Preschooler
(NutriSTEP®) is a valid and reliable 17-item parentcompleted
questionnaire developed in Canadian children
addressing multiple domains of nutrition risk [10, 11]. A
single item addressing FI may be a useful child-specific
screening tool. The 17-item NutriSTEP® has an area
under the curve of 84.6% compared with a dietitiancompleted
assessment [10, 11]. However, the accuracy of
the FI question is unknown. We aimed to examine the
diagnostic test properties of the single NutriSTEP® FI
question.
Methods
This cross-sectional study enrolled healthy children 18
months to 5 years of age during scheduled health supervision
visits at primary care practices in Toronto,
Canada participating in a research network called TARGet
Kids! (www.targetkids.ca). TARGet Kids! is an ongoing,
open, longitudinal cohort enrolling healthy
children from birth to age 5 years. The profile of this cohort
has been previously described [12]. Study participants
were recruited by trained research personnel
embedded in participating practices. Informed consent
was obtained from parents of participants, who completed
standardized questionnaires including the FI
screens. For the purpose of this study, children were included
if they had complete data on both the HVS™ and
NutriSTEP® questionnaires. All methods were performed
in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations
and approved by Research Ethics Boards at the
Hospital for Sick Children and St. Michael’s Hospital,
Toronto.
Parents completed the HVS™, the first 2 items of the
18-item HFSSM; this brief 2-item measure has 97% sensitivity
and 83% specificity for identifying marginal food
security, using the HFSSM as the criterion measure [8].
The HVS™ questions are: “Within the past 12 months,
we worried whether our food would run out before we
got money to buy more” and “Within the past 12
months, the food we bought just didn’t last and we
didn’t have money to buy more” with response options
“Was that often true, sometimes true or never true for
your household in the past twelve months?” According
to convention, both items were coded as an affirmative
response if either “often true” or “sometimes true” was
selected [7, 8]. By definition, families affirming one or
both items were classified as having marginal food
security.
Parents also completed the 17-item NutriSTEP® which
included the FI question: “I have difficulty buying food I
want to feed my child because food is expensive” with
response options: “most of the time”; “sometimes”;
“rarely”; “never”. Using the same convention as for the
HVS™ questions, this single item was coded as an
affirmative response if “most of the time”, “sometimes”,
or “rarely” was selected. We included “rarely” as an affirmative
response as we reasoned that families struggling
to meet their needs, may either choose not to
disclose or select “rarely” due to stigma or shame [13].
Families affirming this single item were classified as having
marginal food security.
We examined the diagnostic test properties (including
sensitivity and specificity) of the 1-item Nutri-
STEP® FI question using the 2-item HVS™ as the
criterion measure. We then examined convergent
construct validity (the correspondence between the 1-
item NutriSTEP® screen and theoretically related variables,
e.g. self-report family income) using multiple
logistic regression. Convergent construct validity was
tested by comparing the multiple logistic regression
models for the 1-item NutriSTEP® with those of the
2-item HVS™ evaluating the associations of these FI
measures with variables considered predictors of marginal
food security (family income, maternal education
and parent employment status) adjusting for covariates.
Missing covariate data (< 15% missing) were handled
using multiple imputation. Statistical significance
was defined as p < 0.05, and all statistical tests were
2-sided. Statistical analysis was conducted using SAS
version 9.4 (SAS Institute).
Results
Participants
Of 1753 children recruited to the TARGet Kids! cohort,
1174 children had complete data on the HVS™ and
NutriSTEP® questionnaires. Of these, 53 (4.5%) children
were living in families with marginal food security as determined
by the 2-item HVS™. Compared with families
not at risk for food insecurity, a higher proportion of
children in families at risk for food insecurity had a
lower family income, a mother with high school education
or less, 1 or both parents were unemployed, and
were from a single-parent family (Table 1).
Diagnostic test properties of the 1-item NutriSTEP®
The diagnostic test properties of the single FI Nutri-
STEP® question, compared with the 2-item HVS™ as the
criterion measure were: sensitivity 84.9% (95% CI: 72.4,
93.3), specificity 91.2% (95% CI: 89.4, 92.8), false positive
rate 8.8% (95% CI: 7.2, 10.8), positive predictive value
31.3% (95% CI: 26.7, 36.2), negative predictive value
99.2% (95% CI: 98.5, 99.6). An affirmative response indicating
marginal food security on the 1-item screen was
9.6 times more likely (LR+ = 9.6; 95% CI: 7.7, 12.0) for
those with marginal food security as determined by the
2-item HVS™ (Table 2).
An affirmative response to the single NutriSTEP® FI
question was associated with higher odds of family income
less than CAD $40,000 (adjusted odds ratio
[aOR]: 7.4; 95% CI: 3.4, 16.1; p < 0.001), lower maternal
education (high school or less, aOR: 1.8; 95% CI:
0.9, 3.7; p = 0.09; college/trades certificate, aOR: 1.7;
95% CI: 1.0, 2.8; p = 0.049), and both parents being
unemployed (aOR: 3.3; 95% CI: 1.1, 10.4; p = 0.04).
These associations were similar to (perhaps somewhat
weaker than) the corresponding associations for the
HVS™ (Table 3).
Discussion
In this large healthy child cohort recruited in urban
Canadian primary care practice, the 1-item NutriSTEP®
FI question demonstrated strong diagnostic test properties
and good construct validity. This single question
may be an effective screening tool for identifying young
children living in families with marginal food security in
primary care settings. Furthermore, increasingly recognized
is the importance of nutrition security, defined as
‘having consistent access, availability, and affordability of
foods and beverages that promote well-being and prevent
disease’ [14]. When using the 17-item NutriSTEP
in healthy toddlers and preschoolers in community settings,
this single question provides clinicians with a valid
measure of marginal food security, as well as nutrition
risk.
Marginal household food security is associated with
poor educational outcomes and emotional and behavioural
problems in children, as well as maternal major
depression and anxiety [3–5]. Sociodemographic characteristics
of households reporting marginal food security
(affirming 1 or 2 items) are more similar to those experiencing
more severe food insecurity (affirming > 2 items)
than food secure households (affirming 0 items) [3–5].
Such evidence of associations of marginal food security
and both immediate and long-term adverse health outcomes
in young children highlights the importance of
screening for social needs in paediatric primary care
practice in an empathic and efficient manner.
There are study limitations. First, we did not use the
18-item HFSSM as our criterion measure, so we could
not examine associations between the single question
and more severe household FI. However, because we
were evaluating a brief measure of marginal food security
suitable for screening in healthcare settings, the
HVS™ is considered the gold standard and therefore is
the more appropriate criterion measure. In addition, detection
of marginal food security is an appropriate target
for a clinical screening tool. Second, our sample had a
relatively high family income, which may not be representative
of other families. However, because FI screening
tools are likely to perform better in low income
populations, it is important to evaluate them in an economically
diverse population [9].
The 1-item NutriSTEP® FI question is an alternative
brief measure of marginal food security and one that is
child-specific, which is suitable for screening for marginal
food security in families with children in clinical
settings. While no previous study has examined this single
item on the NutriSTEP® as a food security screen,
others have examined the validity of a single item measure
of food security. Nolan et al. [15] validated the single
question “In the past 12 months, were there any times
that you ran out of food and couldn’t afford to buy
more?” using the HFSSM as the criterion measure in a
random sample of households in three low income regions
in Australia, including 56% with children under
age 18 years. The question had high specificity (96%) but
low sensitivity (56.9%). Urke et al. examined each question
in the 18-item HFSSM with the purpose of developing
a rapid assessment of food security among Inuit
adults and children. They identified one child item (“In
the last 12 months, were there times when it was not
possible to feed the children a healthy meal because
there was not enough money?”) with strong diagnostic
test properties using an affirmative response to any 2
HFSSM questions as their criterion measure [9]. Our
study differs from Urke et al. in several ways. Our study
was conducted in an urban primary care setting, with an
anticipated lower prevalence of FI than seen in the remote
Arctic setting. In addition, we used the HVS™ as
the criterion measure, a measure of marginal food security,
rather than the more severe problem of food insecurity.
It is possible that the 1-item NutriSTEP® FI
question (“I have difficulty buying food I want to feed
my child because food is expensive”) may more effectively
target marginal food security, which is a more appropriate
target for primary care screening efforts.
Future research should empirically examine this
hypothesis.
While healthcare providers recognize the importance
of identifying poverty in clinical settings, they
identify time constraints and multiple competing demands
as barriers to integrating social needs screening
into healthcare [16]. Using a single question to
measure marginal food security may be more feasible
than using a 2-item tool in a busy practice and would
allow clinicians to intervene on unmet social needs by
linking families to community-based services or financial
assistance programs including tax benefits to
which they may be entitled. Despite the clear importance
of social determinants to child health, limited
research has addressed clinical implementation of social
needs screening. However, the importance of
identification of caregiver needs and priorities, and referral
to appropriate community supports have been
highlighted [17, 18]. Furthermore, caregivers experiencing
food insecurity report feeling ashamed or embarrassed
in reporting FI and that health care provider
empathy, concern and empowerment can mitigate
these challenges [13]. This single question may be
useful for opening a dialogue in the context of a
trusting relationship with a health care provider, thus
facilitating linkage of families with needed resources.
Conclusion
The single NutriSTEP® question may be an effective
screening tool in clinical practice to identify marginal
food security in families with young children and to link
families with community-based services or financial assistance
programs including tax benefits.