Background
It has been suggested that cigarette craving is the most
sensitive and consistent predictor of smoking behavior
and smoking relapse [1, 2]. Cigarette craving has been
shown to contribute to and sustain nicotine addiction
[3] and is seen by many smokers as a key barrier to successful
cessation of smoking [4]. Three studies have investigated
the hypothesis that craving is indeed the
mechanism through which pharmacological treatment
has an effect on smoking cessation and found evidence
of partial mediation [5–7]. Therefore, management of
cravings is fundamental to maximizing the chances of
success in a quit attempt.
Relief of cravings and withdrawal symptoms represents
the primary intended use of nicotine replacement therapy
(NRT) and relief of these symptoms is also the principal
mechanism of action of NRT in the support of smoking
cessation [8]. NRT increases the success rate of attempts to
quit smoking by approximately 50% versus placebo [9, 10],
however, long-term success rates are low [11].
The dose of nicotine appears to be an important factor
for the efficacy of NRT in the treatment of tobacco dependence.
A study in almost 3600 subjects demonstrated
that a 25 mg nicotine patch was superior to both placebo
and a 15 mg patch with regards to 12-month smoking
cessation rates [12]. In real life, patients may not use
enough doses of oral NRT per day to get the maximum
benefit [9], and under-dosing has long been discussed as
a problem that results in suboptimal treatment effect
[13, 14]. A new gum that contains 6 mg nicotine was
therefore developed, with the aim of providing an additional
dosing option for smokers who are highly
dependent (> 20 cigarettes per day), and/or requiring enhanced
craving relief. The new gum contains nicotine
resinate as the active ingredient, with addition of sodium
hydrogen carbonate to facilitate absorption of nicotine
through the oral mucosa. A previous study has shown
that the 6 mg gum releases approximately 50% more
nicotine than the 4 mg gum [15].
The current study was performed to compare 6 mg
gum and 4 mg gum in terms of the urges to smoke over
time following single-dose administration to abstinent
smokers.
Our hypothesis was that the 6 mg nicotine gum would
give rise to a greater reduction in VAS urges-to-smoke
measurements in the given timeframe compared to the
4 mg reference gum (the underlying null hypothesis was
no treatment difference with an alternative hypothesis of
a treatment difference in either direction). The primary
objective was to compare single-dose administration of
6 mg gum versus 4 mg gum with respect to urges to
smoke during the first 1 and 3 h, respectively, after starting
to chew gum. Secondary objectives were betweentreatment
comparisons of urges to smoke scores during
3, 5, and 10 mins, and 2, 4, and 5 h, and to evaluate the
tolerability of the study medications.
Methods
Study design
This randomized, 2-way crossover study compared
urges-to-smoke in abstinent smokers following singledose
administration of either nicotine 6mg or 4 mg
gum (Fig. 1). Following 12 h of carbon-monoxide verified
abstinence, including ≥1.75 h of witnessed abstinence,
study treatment was administered and urges to
smoke were measured for 5 h. The primary study objective
was to compare urges to smoke during the
first 1 and 3 h, respectively, after starting to chew the
gum. The study protocol was approved by the local
Independent Ethics Committee, in Lund, Sweden, and
by the Swedish Medical Products Agency. The study
was performed in accordance with current International
Conference on Harmonization Guidelines on
Good Clinical Practice. The study was performed at
the Department of Clinical Pharmacology, McNeil
AB, Lund, Sweden, and at Karolinska Trial Alliance,
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden, between April and July 2011. The study
planned to enrol 250 subjects, and all randomized
subjects with at least one valid efficacy endpoint were
included in the statistical evaluation.
Study population
The study recruited, via newspaper and posters, healthy
adult volunteer male and female smokers, aged 19–55
years, who had smoked at least 20 cigarettes per day for
at least one year directly preceding the study start, but
who were willing to abstain from smoking 12 h prior to
and during the treatment visits. Eligible subjects had to
weigh at least 55 kg and have a body mass index (BMI)
of 17.5–32.0 kg/m2. Female subjects of childbearing age
had to be using an effective form of contraception. Concomitant
medication was only allowed if considered necessary
for the subject’s welfare and allowed at the
discretion of the investigator. A full list of inclusion and
exclusion criteria for this study can be found in Additional
file 1. All subjects provided written, informed
consent before entering the study. Subjects were financially
compensated for their participation.
Study execution
The subjects were randomly allocated in equal proportions
to one of two treatment sequences by means of a
random number generator. The two study medications
comprised nicotine 6 mg gum and nicotine 4 mg gum
(Nicorette® Freshfruit 4 mg; McNeil AB, Helsingborg,
Sweden) which were administered on two separate visits
(Fig. 1). The gums differed in appearance, but gums
were concealed from subjects, both prior to and after
chewing, and they were not told which gum they received
during a specific visit.
In order to conceal the gums from the subjects, gums
were transferred from blisters to
labelled, opaque aluminium bags in a separate room.
The subjects were to pour the gums straight into their
mouths without looking at the contents of the bag. Subjects
were then instructed to chew the gums slowly for 30
min, with breaks as they considered most convenient.
After chewing, without looking at the gum, each subject
was to place the used gum on a piece of foil, which was
immediately wrapped around the gum by study personnel.
The gums were then placed in the labelled aluminium bag
a labelled plastic bag and stored at − 20 °C until transport
to the analysis laboratory.
Periods of at least 36 h without NRT separated the two
visits. Subjects abstained from smoking or using nicotinecontaining
products from 12 h before, and throughout,
each treatment visit. They were instructed not to smoke
after 8 pm on the evening prior to each visit; on arrival at
the study site around 7.45 am the following morning, a
carbon monoxide monitor was used to verify abstinence
from smoking (subjects were rescheduled if CO > 20
ppm). Since it is known that acidic beverages may interfere
with buccal absorption of nicotine [16], the study subjects
were not allowed to eat or drink at 15 min prior until
60 min after study treatment administration. Administration
of study treatment commenced at around 9.30 am.
Subjects chewed one piece of gum slowly for 30 min, with
breaks in chewing as needed. After chewing, used gums
were collected for analysis of residual nicotine. Nicotine
was extracted from each gum matrix using a two-phase
system. The aqueous phase was analyzed using a High
Performance Liquid Chromatography system and nicotine
was quantified using a calibration curve. All observed and
spontaneously reported adverse events during the study
were recorded.
Measurement and analyses of urges-to-smoke
Subjects were provided with electronic diaries in order
to record the time that treatment commenced, and to
collect urges-to-smoke data by letting the study subjects
answering the question “How strong is your urge to
smoke now?”. Urges to smoke were scored on a 100mm
visual analogue scale (VAS) 10 and 3 min before, and at
3, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 min and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 h after treatment
administration. On the VAS, zero represented ‘no
urge to smoke’ and 100 represented ‘extreme urge to
smoke’ (Additional file 2). This type of scale is reliable
[17, 18] and can be administered quickly and repeatedly,
measures the momentary intensity of urges-to-smoke,
and are used regularly in smoking research [19–24].
Other cigarette craving scales consist of several individual
items. However, a recent study compared the widely
used ten-item Questionnaire on Smoking Urges (QSUbrief)
with six shorter measures of craving in terms of
sensitivity to abstinence and reliability and concluded
that the ten-item QSU-brief is not more sensitive to abstinence
or reliable than the two-item or a single rating
of craving [25]. The reliability and ease of use of 1-item
VAS for assessing cravings makes this an appropriate
method to have used during this study.
Study endpoints and statistical analysis
Primary study endpoints were change from baseline in
urges-to-smoke. The average score change in urges-tosmoke
score in the interval from time zero (baseline) to
time t was calculated as the difference between the area
under the urges-to-smoke- vs.-time curve from time zero
to t divided by t, and the baseline score. Comparisons of
the average score change in urges-to-smoke score were
based on a mixed linear model that included treatment sequence,
treatment, site and period as fixed effects, and
subject, nested within sequence, as a random effect. In
addition, the baseline urge-to-smoke score was included
as a co-varying fixed effect. Pair-wise treatment comparisons
of the average score changes from time zero until 3,
5 and 10 min post-administration were performed in the
same manner. The sample size calculation was based on a
requirement to have at least 90% statistical power for a
true mean difference in average score change at 1 h and 3
h of 12.9mm and 4.3mm, respectively. The corresponding
within subject standard deviations was assumed not to
exceed 37.5mm and 12.5mm, respectively, based on previous
data from a similar crossover study of 6 mg gum vs.
4 mg gum. To adjust for multiplicity a Bonferroni adjustment
was made. Consequently, the sample size calculation
used a significance level of 2.5%.
In addition to the planned analyses, two post-hoc analyses
were performed to investigate speed and duration of
relief of urges to smoke. The endpoints for speed of relief
were the time points at which the reduction in the VAS
urges-to-smoke score first equalled 25, 50 and 75%, respectively,
of the baseline value; as estimated using linear
interpolation. The quartiles of the distributions of the estimated
time to a reduction from baseline by 25, 50 and
75%, with 95% confidence intervals (CI), were estimated
separately for each treatment using Kaplan-Meier estimation
techniques. Pair-wise treatment comparisons of speed
of relief were based on the proportions of subjects with a
shorter estimated time-to-event on 6 mg nicotine gum
compared to 4 mg gum. To compare treatments with respect
to duration of effect, the length of the first periods
post-administration during which the VAS score was continuously
≤75%, ≤50% or ≤ 25% of the baseline value were
used as endpoints. These were based on follow-up to 5 h
post-administration and were calculated using linear
interpolation. Treatments were compared using a nonparametric
test that involved adjustments for period effects
(Mann-Whitney test for period differences between
sequence groups, i.e. Koch’s test). For statistical analysis,
SAS v 9.2 was used.
Results
Descriptive analysis
Two-hundred and forty healthy smokers (120 male, 120
female) were enrolled. The initial plan of enrolling 250
subjects was not met, due to difficulties in recruiting the
planned number of subjects in time for study start. Table 1
shows the subject characteristics of the 240 enrolled subjects
in the study. A total of 228 subjects completed the
study as planned; 12 subjects withdrew prematurely (nine
no longer wanted to participate, two because of adverse
events, one for other reasons).
Mean amounts of 4.0 (±1.28) mg and 2.64 (±0.90) mg
nicotine i.e. 67 and 66% of the nicotine content of the gums
were released from 6mg and 4mg gums, respectively.
Figure 2 displays the mean urges-to-smoke versus time
curves for 6 mg and 4 mg gum over 5 h post-administration.
From a mean baseline level of 73mm (on a 100mm VAS),
6mg gum reduced urges to smoke over the first 40 min
after treatment start to an average minimum score of 22
mm, i.e. a mean decrease of 51mm. One hundred and
eleven (111) subjects out of 231 (48%) experienced complete
or close to complete relief (≤5mm) during the sampling
period. For the 4 mg gum, the average baseline score was
73 mm, the average minimum mean urges-to-smoke score
was 26 mm, and 75 subjects out of 234 (32%) had a score of
≤5mm.
Primary analysis
Table 2 shows estimated means of subjects’ average
changes in urges-to-smoke scores from baseline following
administration of 6 mg or 4 mg gum, and the corresponding
comparisons between treatments. The 6 mg
gum reduced urges to smoke by a mean of 44mm over
the first 60 min and 39mm over the first 3 h after
administration.
Secondary analysis
The mean reductions in urges to smoke were statistically
significantly (p < 0.05) greater with 6 mg than 4 mg gum
for all examined time intervals, including 3, 5 and 10
min.
Post-hoc analysis
Post-hoc comparisons of the estimated times to 25, 50,
and 75% reductions of the baseline urges to smoke
scores showed that at all levels of reduction, the times to
endpoint were statistically significantly shorter with 6
mg than 4 mg gum.
A 50% reduction in perceived urges to smoke was estimated
to be reached in 9.4 min (median with 95% CI,
7.92, 13.4) with 6 mg gum compared to 16.3 min (95%
CI 12.07, 19.02) with 4 mg gum (p-value for the null hypothesis
of equal time-to-event distributions 0.001).
Similarly, the duration of treatment effect (reduction
in urges to smoke) was longer with 6 mg than 4 mg
gum; the median duration of a ≥ 50% reduction in urges
to smoke was estimated to be 111 min with 6 mg gum
versus 74 min with 4 mg gum.
Safety analysis
All subjects were included in the safety analysis. No serious
adverse events were reported. A total of 173
treatment-emergent adverse events were recorded, of
which 153 were rated as mild, 18 as moderate and 2 as
severe (1 face injury for the 6 mg gum treatment, and 1
cough for the 4 mg treatment). Treatment-emergent adverse
events were reported by 68 subjects with 6 mg
gum, and 54 subjects with 4 mg gum. The most frequent
adverse events were nausea, dyspepsia, throat irritation
and hiccups (Table 3). Two subjects withdrew because
of adverse events not related to study treatment (one
case of cough, and one face injury) but there were no
withdrawals due to treatment-related adverse events.
Discussion
Extensive review of present NRT studies and their data
establishes that it is clear that NRT increases the
chances of stopping smoking by approximately 50% regardless
of NRT type [10]. A previous systemic review of
NRT studies also found that there was a benefit to
highly dependent smokers when using a 4 mg nicotine
gum compared to a 2 mg nicotine gum [11]. At present
the strongest forms of oral NRT contain 4 mg of nicotine.
A new gum that contains 6 mg nicotine has been
developed with the aim of providing enhanced craving
relief for highly dependent smokers (> 20 cigarettes per
day) who might benefit from a gum with a higher dose
of nicotine. A pharmacokinetic study had previously
shown that nicotine 6 mg gum attained higher plasma
nicotine concentrations at early and late time points
post-dose compared to 4 mg gum.
As done in previous pharmacokinetic studies [15], the
residual amount of nicotine in used gums was measured.
In accordance with the previous results, we found that approximately
50% more nicotine was released from 6 mg
gum than 4 mg gum (mean of 4.0mg vs 2.6 mg nicotine).
Conclusions regarding higher plasma levels attained with
6 mg gum in comparison with lower strength gums and 4
mg lozenge drawn in the pharmacokinetic studies are
therefore likely to apply also in this study.
Our study enrolled healthy adults who were smoking
at least 20 cigarettes per day for at least one year directly
preceding the study start, as this is the target population
for 6 mg gum in clinical practice. Even though the
planned number of study subjects was not fully met, the
240 subjects included, and the 232/236 subjects evaluated
was still considered as high enough to be able to
reliably evaluate the results of this study, given the 234
evaluable subjects suggested by the sample size calculation.
The cross-over design of the study is beneficial
since each study subject serve as its own control and it
limits the number of needed participants. It does however
bring a potential carry-over effect which might influence
the results. Urges to smoke was assessed
following 12 h of abstinence from smoking, which has
been demonstrated to be a reliable method to provoke
cravings in a controlled setting [26]. Following singledose
treatment with either 6 mg gum or 4 mg gum,
urges to smoke was measured repeatedly over five hours
using a 1-item scale. Single rating scales have proven to
be as reliable as multi-item scales [25]. Also, VAS has
the advantage of using a small scale, which makes it easier
to capture small changes between the treatments.
However, it also brings the disadvantage of being more
difficult to compare between subjects. The withinsubject
changes in this study do however indicate that
this is not a major issue in this study. The crossover design
employed in our study permitted within-subject
comparisons of the two study treatments. Since the test
and reference product differed in appearance, complete
blinding of this study was not possible. Hence per strict
definition this was an open label trial, with the potential
of bias following that type of setting. However, the study
subjects were not aware of which treatment they received
since the chewing gum was concealed for them
both at administration and at removal of the gum. These
precautions were taken to eliminate the risk if potential
bias from the study subjects.
We found that the 6 mg gum provided statistically
significantly greater relief of urges to smoke than 4
mg gum within intervals up to 3, 5, 10 min, 1, 2, 3,
4 and 5 h after start of administration, i.e. 6 mg
gums provide a greater craving relief than 4 mg
gums in a population of smokers who were highly
dependent. The maximum reduction of the average
score from baseline was seen in the interval up to 1
h and measured on average 44 mm with 6 mg gum
and 39 mm with 4 mg gum and a between treatment
difference of 4.8 mm was seen. A difference in urges
to smoke score of similar size (3.1 mm) was seen
comparing 4 mg nicotine lozenge and 2 mg nicotine
lozenge in a previous trial using the same type of
scale [19].
As a means to facilitate interpretation of the urges to
smoke data and put them into a clinical context, posthoc
analyses were performed. The post-hoc analyses revealed
that the higher dose was more effective than the
lower dose in terms of speed of onset and duration of
treatment effect. The treatment effect within the first 10
min post-administration was greater with 6 mg than 4
mg, and a 50% reduction in perceived urges to smoke
was reached in 9.4 min with 6 mg gum compared to
16.2 min with 4 mg gum (median values). Thus, results
indicate that 6 mg gum gives a faster craving relief than
4 mg gum. Similarly, the duration of treatment effect appeared
to be longer with 6 mg gum; the median duration
of a continuous 50% or more reduction in urges to
smoke was 111 min with 6 mg gum versus 74 min with
4 mg gum. However, further studies are needed to evaluate
potential difference in the long-term smoking cessation
success between the 6 mg gum compared to the 4
mg gum.
The adverse events observed with 6 mg gum reflect
the events previously reported with lower-strength nicotine
gum and included nausea, dyspepsia, throat irritation
and hiccups [9, 27–29]. As expected, some adverse
events, e.g. dyspepsia, nausea, hiccups and throat irritation
were more frequent with 6 mg than 4 mg gum, but
none was rated as severe.
Conclusion
In summary, the 6 mg gum was well tolerated and resulted
in a greater reduction in VAS urges to smoke
score than 4 mg gum. Greater reductions within the first
few minutes post-administration demonstrated faster relief
of craving with 6 mg gum, and the duration of effect
of 6 mg gum was longer than that of 4 mg gum, indicating
that the higher plasma nicotine exposure observed
with the 6 mg dose is paralleled by a more pronounced
relief of urges to smoke. The efficacy of 4 mg gum in
smoking cessation has previously been demonstrated in
large, well-designed clinical trials [11, 28–30]. Given the
importance of craving management for a successful
smoking cessation and the fact that 6 mg gum has
proven superior to 4 mg gum in this respect, these properties
may prove useful to smokers in a quit attempt.