Background
Peripheral and optic neuropathies associated with
chronic ethanol consumption are clearly known [1]. Although
the etiology of ethanol induced optic neuropathy
is multifactorial; malnutrition and direct toxic effects of
ethanol are the main factors [2, 3]. Oxidative stresses, increased
levels of free radical formation and elevated
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines has been shown in
ethanol induced neuropathy [4–6].
Thiamine pyrophosphate is produced by phosphatisation
of thiamine with thiamine pyrophosphokinase [7, 8].
It is the active metabolite of thiamine. Chronic alcohol
consumption is known to decrease the expression of
thiamine pyrophosphokinase enzyme; causing a decrease
in thiamine pyrophosphate formation [9]. Previously,
thiamine and thiamine pyrophosphate, both were studied
in prevention of ethanol induced tissue damage on liver
and only thiamine pyrophosphate was reported to be effective
[10]. Moreover, recently, ethambutol induced oxidative
stress has been shown histopathologically on the
retinal tissue with thiamine pyrophosphate being effective
in preventing this [11].
In this study, we aimed to determine the effects of
thiamine pyrophosphate in prevention of etanol induced
optic nerve damage in an experimental model. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first study in literature
evaluating the biochemical and histopathological effects
of thiamine pyrophosphate on ethanol induced optic
nerve damage.
Methods
The study was approved by the local ethics committee
of Ataturk University, Erzurum, Turkey (Ethics Committee
Number: 137, Date: 10.26.2017). All animal experiments
were performed in accordance with the ARVO
Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Vision
Research.
Study animals
Totally 24 albino Wistar male rats (265–278 g) were
housed at room temperature (22 °C), fed twice a day and
had access to water ad libitum for 1 week before the study.
The rats were obtained from the Ataturk University Medical
Experiments Application and Research center.
The rats were divided into 4 groups, with 6 rats in
each group as follows: healthy controls (HC group), only
ethanol administered group (EtOH group), ethanol +
thiamine pyrophosphate (20 mg/kg) administered group
(TEt-20 group), and only thiamine pyrophosphate (20
mg/kg) administered group (TPG group).
Experimental procedure
In this experiment, to the rats in TEt-20 and TPG groups,
20 mg/kg thiamine pyrophosphate was administered via
intraperitoneal route. To the rats in HC and EtOH groups,
the same volume (0.5 ml) of distilled water as solvent was
applied in the same manner. To the rats in TEt-20 and
EtOH groups, one hour after application of thiamine pyrophosphate
or distilled water, 32% ethanol with a dose of 5
g/kg was administered via oral gavage. Different doses of
ethanol were used to produce oxidative stress in organs
and tissues of animals. In our study this dose was preferred
because 32% ethanol was more effective at a dose of 5 g /kg
[12]. In literature, it was reported that alcohol results in oxidative
damage in 6 weeks on optic nerve [13]. For that reason,
this procedure was repeated once a day for 6 weeks
with the same dose and volume in the same manner. At
the end of this period, the animals were sacrificed with high
dose (50mg/kg) i.p. thiopental sodium (IE Ulagay-Türkiye)
anesthesia and their eyes were enucleated.
Biochemical evaluations
Blood samples were obtained from the tail veins of the rats
and collected into separation gel vacutainer serum tubes.
Blood samples were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 15min
and stored at − 80 °C until biochemical analysis [14]. From
these samples serum Malondialdehyde (MDA), reduced
glutathione (GSH), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β) and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) levels were investigated.
Eye tissues of the rats were obtained after sacrification
and the tissues were homogenized in ice-cold phosphate
buffers and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C.
Then IL-1β, TNFα, GSH and MDA levels were investigated
from those supernatants. The protein concentration
of the supernatant was also measured using the
method described by Bradford MM and all tissue results
were expressed by dividing to g protein [15].
IL-1β and TNF-α analysis in serum and tissue
Serum and tissue-homogenate IL-1β and TNF-α concentrations
were measured using rat-specific sandwich
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay Rat Interleukin 1β
ELISA Kit (Cat no: YHB0616Ra, Shanghai LZ) and Rat
Tumor Necrosis Factor α ELISA kits (Cat no:
YHB1098Ra, Shanghai LZ). The manufacturers’ instructions
were followed for the analyses.
GSH analysis in serum and tissue
GSH levels in serum and tissue were analyzed regarding
the method defined by Sedlak J and Lindsay RH [16].
For this purpose, the yellow color obtained through the
reduction of DTNB (5, 5′-dithiobis [2-nitrobenzoic
acid]) was analyzed by spectrophotometry at 412 nm.
MDA levels in serum and tissue
Based on the method used by Ohkawa et al. [17], MDA
levels were measured by analyzing the spectrophotometrical
absorbance of the pink-colored complex formed by thiobarbituric
acid (TBA) and MDA at 532 nm.
Histopathologic analyses
For histological examinations, eye tissues were fixed in
10% formalin for 24 h, and embedded in paraffin blocks.
Four-micrometer-thick sections of specimens were deparaffinized
in xylene and dehydrated in graded alcohol
[14]. The total retinal thickness, outer nuclear layer
(ONL), inner nuclear layer (INL) and ganglion cell layer
(GCL) were evaluated in H&E stained retina sections by
the same pathologist.
Statistical analysis
The statistical analyses were performed with the Software
SPSS version 21.0 (SPSS for Windows software;
SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Numerical variables were
expressed as mean ± standard deviation. For the analysis
of continuous variables one way variance analysis was
performed. Subsequently, in determination of different
groups Turkey multiple comparison tests were performed.
Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.
Results
The results of biochemical analyses are summarized in
Tables 1 and 2. Regarding these results, serum IL-1β,
TNF-α and MDA levels were the highest in EtOH group
which were significantly lower in thiamine pyrophosphate
administered group. Similarly, tissue IL-1β, TNF-α
and MDA levels, studied on optic nerve tissue, were also
the highest in EtOH group which were significantly
lower in thiamine pyrophosphate administered group. In
TEt-20 group all those parameters were statistically significantly
higher than both HC and TPG groups but significantly
lower than EtOH group. On the other hand,
serum and tissue reduced GSH levels were the lowest in
EtOH group which were significantly higher in thiamine
pyrophosphate administered group. In TEt-20 group
those parameters were statistically significantly lower
than both HC and TPG groups but significantly higher
than EtOH group. There was not any statistically significant
difference between HC and TPG groups regarding
any of the study parameters.
The histopathological findings are shown in
Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4. Regarding these findings, in EtOH
group there was obvious destruction and edema with
hemorrhage and dilated blood vessels in optic nerve. On
the other hand, the histopathological findings in TEt-20
group were near normal except a mild edema.
Discussion
In this study we investigated the effects of thiamine
pyrophosphate on protection from the destructive effects
of chronic ethanol administration on eye tissue in an experimental
model and we have determined that: 1) Six
weeks of ethanol administration was associated with an
increased systemic oxidative damage and augmented destruction
on eye tissue; 2) concomitant administration of
thiamine pyrophosphate was significantly effective on
protection from this damage at both systemic and ocular
planes.
Chronic alcohol consumption is clearly known to enhance
the production of reactive oxygen species and
augment the oxidative stress and oxidative stress is one
of the main mechanisms of ethanol induced tissue damage
[18, 19]. Expression of Cytochrome p450 2E1
(CYP2E1) mRNA, CYP2E1 protein activity, and production
of reactive oxygen species were determined to be
induced by ethanol in a concentration-dependent manner
in retinal pigment epithelium [20]. Moreover,
chronic alcohol consumption was also associated with
the ultra-structural alterations on cornea [21].
Reactive oxygen species produced as a result of ethanol
consumption reacts with biological macromolecules
such as DNA and results in the lipid peroxidation. MDA
is the end product of lipid peroxidation and regarded as
an indicator of measure of oxidative stress [22]. Decreased
serum and tissue MDA levels determined in our
study was also showing the success of thiamine pyrophosphate
in preventing oxidative stress development.
Glutathione is an important non-enzymatic antioxidant
decreasing lipid peroxidation in tissues [23]. We have
determined significantly higher reduced glutathione
levels in serum and tissues in thiamine pyrophosphate
group compared with the ethanol group showing the
anti-oxidant effects of thiamine pyrophosphate. We also
investigated the IL-1β and TNF-α level which are the cytokines
that stimulate cells to intensify the inflammatory
response [24] and we have determined that those inflammatory
markers were significantly increased with ethanol
consumption and this increase was also prevented by concomitant
thiamine pyrophosphate administration.
In previous literature there are only a few studies investigating
the role of antioxidant agents in prevention of
ethanol-induced ocular abnormalities. Johnsen-Soriano et
al. [25] reported that chronic alcohol consumption was
causing an alteration on the retinal redox status which was
returned with a biologically active selenium-organic compound
treatment. Parnell et al. [26] reported that Nacetylcysteine
was effective to reduce the ocular teratogenic
effects of ethanol in an experimental model. For the first
time in literature we have determined that; thiamine
pyrophosphate was effective in prevention of oxidative
stress development and optic neuropathy induced by
ethanol.
Thiamine is a water-soluble vitamin having a critical
role in glucose metabolism. Classically, thiamine deficiency
results in an acute confusional state and ataxia,
while ophthalmoparesis and optic disc swelling may also
take place rarely [27, 28]. The role of thiamine pyrophosphate
treatment has been studied in some ocular
diseases before. Cinici et al. [29] reported that thiamine
pyrophosphate significantly reduced the degree of
hyperglycemia-induced retinopathy by preventing the
oxidative damage. In another recent study, thiamine
pyrophosphate but not the thiamine was determined as
having protective effects on retinal tissues from
ethambutol-induced oxidative damage [11]. The latter
one was an important study since it was comparing
thiamine and the thiamine pyrophosphate; and its results
can be interpreted as ‘administration of thiamine pyrophosphate
might lead to a slower, but longer lasting
thiamine accumulation in the blood than thiamine administration’.
However, this hypothesis should be checked by
measuring serum thiamine levels at different time intervals.
These recent studies were also supporting our findings
that thiamine pyrophosphate was having protective
effects on oxidative stress induced ocular damage.
Of course this study has some limitations. First is that;
this is an experimental study and direct dosage and
pharmacokinetic comparisons between rats and humans
may be difficult due to the inter-species differences in
metabolism and administration paradigms. Second is the
low number of rats that is especially kept low regarding
the animal rights. We also did not measure the serum or
tissue thiamine concentrations at different time periods,
which is another limitation of this study. Determination
of serum or tissue thiamine concentrations would elucidate
the effectiveness of administered thiamine
pyrophosphate.
Conclusions
In conclusion in this study we have determined that,
thiamine pyrophosphate administration was effective in
prevention of oxidative stress and inflammation induced by
chronic ethanol consumption and for the first time in literature
we have determined that at histopathological level,
thiamine pyrophosphate was protective for the ethanol induced
optic neuropathy. There was an apparent destruction
in ethanol administered group in histopathological analyses
with an augmented oxidative stress and all those alterations
were prevented with concomitant thiamine pyrophosphate
administration. In future studies, investigating the effects at
different time intervals after starting ethanol administration
and/or sacrificing the rats at different time points to see the
time-bound beneficial effects of thiamine pyrophosphate
and reversibility of the optic nerve damage on histopathology
would be highly beneficial. Moreover, gene based
analysis may also show the pathophysiological aspect of
these effects of thiamine pyrophosphate. Clinical studies are
also warranted to define the role of thiamine pyrophosphate
in prevention of other ocular diseases induced by oxidative
stress and inflammation.