Introduction
Growing evidence indicates that women affected by pregnancy
complications, including preeclampsia, gestational
diabetes, and preterm deliveries have an increased risk
for the development of cardiovascular disease later in life
[1–3]. Thus, targeted monitoring and management for
women with pregnancy complications are recommended
to decrease the rates of cardiovascular diseases (CVD)
after delivery [4, 5].
Recent decades have seen a major increase in multiple
gestations rates globally [6, 7]. In the US, twin births continue
to rise from 1.9% in 1980 to 3.3% of all live births
in 2009 [6]. Multiple gestations are associated with a
significant increase in the risk of perinatal and neonatal
morbidity and mortality, especially the ones associated
with prematurity [8]. Moreover, this condition is usually
considered as a risk for the mother as well. Women
with multiple gestations have an increased risk of pregnancy
complications including preeclampsia and gestational
diabetes during pregnancy [9]. Several studies also
reported the increased risk of CVD such as cardiomyopathy,
heart failure, and myocardial infarction, but these
studies investigated the effects of multiple gestations on
the development of CVD only during peripartum period
[10–12]. However, there exist limited data regarding the
long-term effect of multiple gestations on the development
of CVD, especially, the development of hypertension
(HTN) later in. Accordingly, this study aimed to
determine whether multiple gestations are associated
with HTN beyond the peripartum period.
Methods
Characteristics of the data
This study was conducted by merging the databases of
the Korea National Health Insurance (KNHI) claims and
National Health Screening Examination (NHSE).
In Korea, 97% of the population participates in the
KNHI program, and the KNHI claims that the database
includes all medical information for each person except
medical information not covered by insurance such as
cosmetics. Using the KNHI claims database, all women
who delivered between January 1, 2007, and December
31, 2008 were enrolled. A flowchart of patient enrollment
is shown in Fig. 1. To facilitate the evaluation of the
pre-pregnancy characteristics, women were included in
the analysis if they underwent an NHSE within one year
prior to their pregnancy. Among them, women with prepregnancy
HTN were excluded.
Subsequent development of HTN was tracked until
December 31, 2015.
Enrollees in the KNHI system were invited to undergo
a standardized NHSE. The pre-pregnancy characteristics
of our study population were reviewed from the NHSE
data. The NHSE contains two parts: a health interview
and examination. This study was approved by the Institutional
Review Boards of the Korea University Medical
Center (2018GR0401) and this committee granted an
exemption from requiring informed consent.
Study outcomes
Using the KNHI claims dataset, women with preeclampsia
during their pregnancy were identified by a principal
or secondary diagnosis based on the International Classification
of Diseases-10th Revision (ICD-10). Women
were classified as having HTN if they were newly diagnosed
with HTN (ICD-10 code, I10-I15) from the date of
delivery to December 31, 2015. The timing of the initial
diagnosis was confirmed by the lack of a medical claim
for HTN as a primary or secondary diagnosis before
pregnancy.
Measurements and definition
Based on the KNHI claims dataset, pregnancy factors
including multiple pregnancies, the delivery mode and
preeclampsia were confirmed.
Pre-pregnancy factors were evaluated using the KNHI
claims dataset and the NHSE data. Pre-pregnancy diagnosis
of atrial fibrillation was identified using ICD-10
code (I48) on the KNHI claims dataset. Smoking status
and exercise were identified using health questionnaires
on the NHSE data. Regular exercise was defined as moderate-
intensity exercise performed at least 3 d/wk.
The health examination included the calculation
of body mass index ([BMI] in kg/m2) using height
and weight measurements. Obesity was defined as
BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2. Blood pressure (BP) was measured
using a standard mercury sphygmomanometer.
Women with systolic BP (SBP) ≥ 140 and/or diastolic BP
(DBP) ≥ 90 mmHg were excluded from the study. Blood
samples were obtained after a fast of at least 8 h. The
levels of fasting glucose, total cholesterol (TC), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), and alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) were measured. Fasting glucose ≥ 126 mg/
dL at the NHSE or a medical claim for DM as a primary
or secondary diagnosis before pregnancy based on ICD-
10 codes (E10-E14) defined diabetes mellitus (DM). High
TC was defined as TC ≥ 200 mg/dL and abnormal liver
function test was defined as AST ≥ 31 or ALT ≥ 31 mg/
dL.
Statistical analysis
Clinical and biochemical characteristics were compared
among groups using the t-test for continuous variables
and the χ2 test for categorical variables, expressed as
mean ± SD and percentages, respectively. The cumulative
incidence of HTN was estimated using the Kaplan–Meier
method and compared using the log-rank test. We also
determined the incidence rate of HTN (person-years).
Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate
the adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for the development of HTN. Participants
were censored if they developed HTN or on December
31, 2015, in those without HTN. All tests were two-sided,
and p-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Statistical analyses were performed using SAS for
Windows, version 9.4 (SAS Inc., Cary, NC, USA).
Results
Among 362,821 women who gave birth during the study
period and underwent an NHSE within one year prior
to their pregnancy, 4,944 (1.36%) women had multiple
gestations.
Characteristics of participants with respect to the number
of pregnancies
The pre-pregnancy and pregnancy characteristics of participants
are presented in Table 1. Women with multiple
gestations were older and had a higher prevalence of
advanced age, primiparity and preeclampsia compared
with women with singleton pregnancy.
Women with multiple gestations had a higher level
of fasting glucose, TC, AST, the prevalence of obesity,
and DM and a lower prevalence of smoking but higher
prevalence of regular exercise compared with women
with singleton pregnancy. However, there were no differences
in BMI, BP, ALT levels, and the prevalence of atrial
fibrillation, high TC and abnormal LFT between the two
groups.
Risk of HTN with respect to the number of pregnancies
Figure 2 shows the Kaplan–Meier curves for the cumulative
incidence of HTN between singleton and multiple
gestations groups. During follow-up, the cumulative incidence
of HTN was higher in multiple gestations group
compared with singleton group (5.95% vs. 3.78%, p < 0.01,
respectively).
Cox proportional hazards models were employed to
estimate the adjusted HRs and 95% CIs for the development
of HTN with respect to the number of pregnancies
(Table 2). Increased risk of HTN was observed in women
with multiple gestations (HR 1.35, 95% CI 1.19, 1.54)
compared with those with a singleton after adjustment
for age, primiparity, preeclampsia, atrial fibrillation, BMI,
BP, DM, high TC, abnormal LFT, regular exercise, and
smoking status.
Cox proportional hazards models were created to estimate
the adjusted HRs for the development of HTN with
respect to the number of pregnancies and the presence
of preeclampsia (Table 3). According to the proportional
hazards models, the risks of HTN were significantly
increased in women with singleton and preeclampsia
(HR 6.87, 95% CI 6.42, 7.35), women with multiple gestations
but no preeclampsia (HR 1.49, 95% CI 1.28, 1.74)
and women with multiple gestations and preeclampsia
(HR 7.37, 95% CI 5.75, 9.45) compared with women with
singleton but no preeclampsia after adjustment for age,
primiparity, preeclampsia, atrial fibrillation, BMI, BP,
DM, high TC, abnormal LFT, regular exercise, and smoking
status.
Discussion
Main finding
In this study, we evaluated the association between multiple
gestations and the development of HTN after delivery
and found that women with multiple gestations had
an increased risk of HTN during 7 years follow-up period
compared with those with singleton. In addition, as risk
ratios for HTN seem to be additive, it was noted that a
woman with multiple gestations combined with preeclampsia
was at seven-fold increased risk of HTN. It is
well-established that the risk of preeclampsia is greater in
multiple gestations rather than in singleton pregnancies
[9]. Preeclampsia is thought in part to explain the physiological
mechanism by which the association between
multiple gestations and the development of HTN is
mediated, since women who have had preeclampsia have
a high risk of ultimately developing HTN, later in life
[13]. However, in this study, multiple gestations remained
significantly associated with the development of HTN
later in life when preeclampsia was adjusted in multivariable
analysis or participants were divided based on
the presence of preeclampsia, suggesting the existence of
another mechanism.
Strength and limitation
Our findings should be interpreted with caution due
to several limitations. First, we were unable to access
information regarding the characteristics of multiple
gestations. It has been reported that the rate of severe
preeclampsia was significantly increased in triplet
pregnancy as compared to twin pregnancy although
there was no change in the overall rate of preeclampsia
[14]. In addition, several studies reported that the association
of preeclampsia was different by chorionicity [15,
16] although others were inconclusive [17]. Thus, it is
hypothesized that the association of multiple gestations
with the development of HTN may be affected by the
number and chorionicity of multiple gestations. Based on
the results of the present study, further studies are necessitated
to confirm these associations considering these
factors. Second, in this study, the subjects were limited to
women who had undergone the NHSE before pregnancy
to adjust the pre-pregnancy factors for HTN. However,
when we analyzed data of all pregnant women who delivered
during the study period regardless of pre-pregnancy
characteristics (869,822 of singleton and 12,201 of multiple
gestations), similar association of multiple gestations
with the development of HTN in later life after adjustment
for age, primiparity and preeclampsia (HR 1.21,
95% CI 1.19, 1.30) was observed. Third, there were several
other confounding factors not adjusted such as fertility
treatment which is closely related to maternal old age,
multiple gestations, HTN and other obstetric complications.
In addition, women who had multiple gestations
before 2007 and had subsequent singleton pregnancy
were not considered as history of multiple gestation.
The KNHI databases does not contain detailed previous
obstetric histories and chorionicity in each patient. Last,
the results of our study are not generalizable because
the enrolled population enrolled was East Asian and our
health system might be different from other countries.
Nevertheless, the strength of the present study is that
this is the first study to evaluate the association between
multiple gestations and the development of HTN later
in life after adjustment for the pre-pregnancy factors for
HTN with a large population-based long-term follow-up.
Interpretation
Several potential explanations for these associations are
possible. First, physiological changes related to multiple
gestations during pregnancy may be directly attributed
to the development of HTN. In multiple gestations,
pronounced hemodynamic changes including greater
cardiac output, development of left ventricular mass,
fractional shortening and ejection fraction, and lower
total vascular resistance develop compared to singleton
pregnancy possibly due to the unique physiological
changes required to meet the demands of a growing
fetus [18, 19]. Consequently, in uncomplicated twin gestations,
significant changes in systolic and diastolic function
occur from the first to the third trimester mimicking
a diastolic dysfunction as observed in the early stages of
chronic cardiac insufficiency [20]. Moreover, although
diastolic parameters normalize after pregnancy, a relative
systolic dysfunction seems to persist after delivery [20].
These findings are similar with those shown at postpartum
echocardiography in women who developed a preterm
or severe preeclampsia in a singleton pregnancy
[21, 22]. Thus, it is possible that the workload to the heart
by the increased circulating volumes in multiple gestations
may still affect cardiovascular systems leading to
the development of HTN in later life. Moreover, in a twin
pregnancy, circulating levels of antiangiogenic substances
such as sFlt-1 and sEng [18], which have a pivotal role
in the pathogenesis of the maternal syndrome in preeclampsia
[19], were increased owing to large placental volume.
Consequently, it is hypothesized that endothelial
dysfunction caused by increased levels of antiangiogenic
factors may cause HTN later in life even if preeclampsia
did not occur during pregnancy.
Second, this association may be due to the particular
characteristics of women with multiple gestations. An
accumulating body of research has shown that numerous
pregnancy complications appear to be preceded by
subclinical vascular and metabolic dysfunction [23–26],
suggesting that the complications during pregnancy
may be useful markers of latent high-risk CVD [27]. In
the present study, women with multiple gestations had a
high incidence of cardiovascular risk such as obesity and
DM, which are well-known risk factors for HTN. Thus,
the increased risk of HTN later in life may be attributed
to common predisposing factors for both multiple gestations
and risk of HTN while it remains uncertain whether
multiple gestations exacerbates previously unrecognized
risk factors of HTN, or if the risk for HTN is the
direct result of the manifestation of the disorder itself.
Moreover, it has been known that maternal weight gain
increases with increasing number of fetuses [28]. Given
that excessive gestational weight gain may increase of the
risk for the development of cardiovascular and metabolic
disease through long-term maternal abdominal adiposity
[29], women with multiple gestations may have an
increased risk for the development of HTN later in life.
Lastly, it is well known that the rate of multiple gestations
has increased owing to the expanded use of
assisted reproduction [30, 31]. Previously studies
reported the link between fertility treatments with pregnancy
complications including preeclampsia [32–35].
Therefore, it is hypothesized that fertility treatments
may attribute to the development of HTN in cases of
multiple gestations. However, multiple gestations are
suggested to be responsible for a large proportion of
pregnancy complications associated with fertility [36].
However, as the data on fertility treatments were not
available during the course of the present study, studies
with these factors are warranted in the future to confirm
our findings.
Guidelines for the management of multiple gestations
have previously been published with information
about pre-pregnancy and pregnancy management for
multiple gestations to minimize the pregnancy complication
related to multiple gestations [36, 37], but there
is a lack of established guidelines or consensus regarding
long-term follow-up. Based on our results, women
with multiple gestations are considered as the highrisk
group for the development of HTN later in life.
Conclusions
Women with multiple gestations have an increased risk
of HTN later in life. Therefore, guidelines for the management
of these high-risk patients should be established.
Women with existing cardiovascular disease
such as HTN should be warned about consequences of
multiple gestations in short and longterm. The results
should be provided to physicians managing multiple
gestations to aid in the process of patient counseling
regarding the associated risks. However there have
been no definitive preventive strategies for HTN so far,
all women especially who had previous multiple gestations
should be given lifestyle and dietary advice and
monitored for the development of HTN.
