Background
Cardiac ventricular aneurysms affect 1 in 200,000 live
births [1]. The first reported case diagnosed prenatally
was published in 1990, however, to the best of our
knowledge, no reported cases of a left ventricular pseudoaneurym
and in utero rupture exist to guide optimal
management [2].
Case presentation
A 25-year-old primiparous woman was referred for tertiary
specialist fetal assessment at 23 weeks’ gestation following
a mid-trimester ultrasound indicating right
outflow tract obstruction with pericardial effusion. Her
pregnancy was previously uncomplicated. She had no significant
past history. On review, a complex epicardial mass
associated predominately with the left ventricle and a
massive pericardial effusion was seen (Fig. 1), suggestive of
an epicardial bleed. Remaining fetal anatomy was normal
with no evidence of fetal hydrops or anaemia. An uncomplicated
amniocentesis was performed and returned a normal
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) and
karyotype result; maternal infection screening was
negative.
At 24 + 1 weeks’ gestation, the fetal pericardial effusion
appeared stable but with an increasing epicardial
thrombus. There was bidirectional flow between a pseudoaneurysmal
defect and the left ventricle. An abnormal
ductus venosus Doppler waveform, indicating poor ventricular
function secondary to cardiac tamponade, and
new onset ascites was evident.
Drainage of the massive pericardial effusion was deferred
at 25 weeks’ gestation, despite worsening hydropic
features, due to bleeding into the pericardial space raising
concerns for pseudoaneurysmal rupture (Fig. 2). At
26 + 1 weeks’ a pericardial drainage of 40 ml of haemolysed
blood-stained fluid was performed. Weekly follow
up showed a small, gradually reducing, pericardial effusion,
with resolution of the ascites and normalisation of
the ductus venosus Doppler waveform.
A multidisciplinary team meeting with input from maternal
fetal medicine, neonatology, paediatric cardiology,
paediatric cardiac intensive care and perinatal physiology
was conducted at 31 weeks’ gestation to plan birth and
postpartum care. Concerns existed of pseudoaneurysmal
rupture and a potential catastrophic bleed during transition,
as afterload pressures on the pseudoaneurysm increase
due to increased systemic vascular resistance
upon cord clamping and the loss of the low resistance
placental circulation.
A caesarean birth was advised due to concerns of fetal
stress and transient increases in placental resistance during
labour increasing left ventricular afterload and the
risk of pseudoaneurysmal rupture. Birth at term to minimise
risks of prematurity and optimise birthweight prior
to definitive surgical repair on cardiac bypass soon after
birth was planned [3].
A fetal MRI showed normal neuroanatomy at 33
weeks’ gestation. At 35 + 1 weeks’, a large left ventricular
pseudoaneurysm persisted, but the pericardial effusion
had completely resolved (Fig. 3).
An elective caesarean birth occurred at 37 + 5 weeks’
gestation following steroids to minimise the need for respiratory
support. Cord clamping was deferred until
after respiration was established to reduce pulmonary
vascular resistance and allow left-to-right shunting
through the ductus arteriosus to minimise the increase
in left ventricular afterload associated with cord clamping.
A female infant was born weighing 3209 g with
Apgars of 9 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min. In the immediate
post-partum period, a prostaglandin E1 infusion was
commenced to maintain ductal patency and reduce systemic
and pulmonary vascular resistance. She remained
stable and was transferred on day 1 of age to a quaternary
paediatric cardiac centre for surgical management,
undergoing aneurysmal resection with patch closure and
ligation of a patent ductus arteriosus at 10 days of age.
She made a good post-operative recovery and was discharged
home at 19 days of age. On follow-up at 4
months of age she is thriving with a repeat echocardiogram
showing good biventricular function.
Discussion and conclusions
Here we describe a case of fetal cardiac left ventricular
pseudoaneurysm with in utero rupture that resulted in a
successful outcome. Due to the small isolated defect, it
is thought to have occurred secondary to a single coronary
artery occlusion causing a localised myocardial infarction.
Counselling the parents on the likelihood of
having a live born infant and the subsequent prognosis
following birth was challenging due to the rarity of the
condition.
In view of the maternal primigravity and age, vaginal
birth was considered to minimise maternal surgical morbidity
in light of uncertain neonatal outcome. As labour
and vaginal birth are known to cause transient episodes
of fetal and placental hypoxia, leading to increased fetal
acidosis and systemic arterial pressures, this mode of
birth was thought to increase the possibility of pseudoaneurysmal
rupture [4]. Utilising joint decision making
with the parents, a caesarean birth was chosen as the optimal
mode of delivery to minimise fetal risk.
Many key cardiovascular changes occur during transition
from a fetal to neonatal circulation, including a significant
reduction in the pulmonary vascular resistance,
an increase in systemic vascular resistance, and closure
of the ductus arteriosus [5]. Prior to birth, left ventricular
preload is predominately derived from umbilical venous
return, while after birth it is from the pulmonary
circulation [6]. Clamping of the umbilical cord removes
the low resistance placental bed which significantly increases
systemic vascular resistance and arterial blood
pressure, such that in the first hour following birth the
left ventricular cardiac output doubles [5, 6]. As the left
ventricle transitions from pumping against the low resistance
placental circulation to the high resistance neonatal
systemic circulation, there is a significant increase
in afterload, and in this case, an increased risk of pseudoaneurysmal
rupture and catastrophic bleed [6]. To
minimise this risk, umbilical cord clamping was delayed
until neonatal respiration was well established, so that
the pulmonary circulation could act as an alternate
lower resistance pathway for left ventricular output, due
to left-to-right ductal shunting. This prevents the rapid
and large increase in left ventricular afterload associated
with cord clamping [7]. The neonate was commenced
on a prostaglandin E1 infusion to maintain a patent
ductus arteriosus, minimizing systemic vascular resistance
and decreasing left ventricular pressures [8].
We would recommend that in similar cases caesarean
birth, deferred cord clamping and immediate commencement
of a prostaglandin E1 infusion be considered
until definitive surgical repair. Importantly, the possibility
of an excellent outcome is also valuable in counselling
and guiding families that may be impacted by this
rare complication in the future.