Introduction
Every year approximately 15 million babies are born preterm
[1]. Several complications are associated with preterm
delivery making it the leading cause of perinatal
mortality and a major cause of child death in many middle
and high income countries [2]. Preterm birth (PTB)
puts a serious burden on the healthcare system as babies
who are born prematurely present both short and long
term complications and are at a higher risk of morbidity
[3]. Other adverse perinatal outcomes such as low birth
weight (LBW), small for gestational age (SGA), and large
for gestational age (LGA) have also a direct or indirect
impact on the health of the newborn and may result in
long-term sequelae [4–7].
These adverse events are complex and are associated
with a number of factors, including biological, obstetrical,
behavioral, psychological, and socio-economic.
Over the past two decades, there has been an increasing
interest in the association of antenatal depression with
adverse perinatal outcomes [8–10]. Several studies examined
the effect of depression in pregnancy on preterm
birth (PTB) and found a positive association [11–14].
Furthermore, antenatal depression has been identified as
a risk factor for low birth weight (LBW) [13]. These associations
have also been presented in the meta-analyses
of Grote et al. who computed a pooled RR of 1.39 (95%
CI: 1.19, 1.61) and 1.49 (95% CI: 1.25, 1.77) for the association
of PTB and LBW, respectively [8]. In addition,
women with depression in pregnancy, especially in midpregnancy,
have been shown to experience greater odds
of delivering a baby with small for gestational age (SGA)
[9, 15]. At the same time, the evidence about the association
of antenatal depression and macrosomia (> 4000 g)
or large for gestational age babies (LGA) is very limited
[9]. Despite the fact that there is some scientific evidence
which supports that antenatal depression is associated
with these adverse outcomes, these associations are not
consistent, even when comparing results from studies
conducted in the same country [10, 16–19].
The mechanism underlying the association of depression
and psychosocial stress with birth weight is also not
clear [20]. Cortisol levels in pregnancy are shown to be
inversely proportional to birth weight but these levels
cannot be explained by prenatal stress [21]. Different
mechanisms have been suggested to explain the possible
association of depression and PTB. Depressed mood is
linked to a decrease in the activity of natural killer cells
and a rise in the plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines,
suggesting that the effect of depression on PTB is
mediated through inflammation [22]. Moreover, the
depression-PTB association could be mediated by behavioral
factors related to depression. Depressive symptoms
in pregnancy have been associated with adverse health
habits, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, which
are known risk factors for PTB [2, 23].
Other psychosocial problems that may exist before or
during pregnancy have been also described as potential
risk factors of perinatal adverse outcomes. A study conducted
among a group of African-American women in
the USA suggested that a poor psychosocial profile was
significantly associated with preterm delivery as well as
low birth weight infants [20]. Women with posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) were also shown to be
at a greater risk of preterm birth [24]. Shapiro et al.
summarized the results from different studies and concluded
that psychosocial stress is associated with preterm
birth, with perceived stress and pregnancy-related
anxiety being the two indicators most consistently reported
to increase the risk of PTB [25].
AlSeaidan et al. (2016) looked at birth outcomes in a
prospective pregnancy-birth cohort study in Kuwait and
found that the prevalence of PTB and SGA was similar
to other developed countries, while macrosomia and
LGA were in fact greater than what it was expected [26].
The authors also reported that SGA and LGA were associated
with pre-pregnancy maternal overweight or obesity.
In a secondary analysis of data collected in this birth
cohort, we estimated that as high as one in five women
in Kuwait experiences depressive symptoms during pregnancy
and these symptoms are usually comorbid with
other indicators of a poor psychosocial profile [27].
Examining whether antenatal depression is associated
with poor perinatal outcomes is important, as it will add
important information in this limited or contradictory
literature. Thus, the aim of this study is to investigate
whether antenatal depressive symptoms predict preterm
birth, small for gestational age or large for gestational
age babies using data collected from a prospective cohort
study in a population where antenatal depressive
symptoms were found to be relatively common [26, 27].
Methods
Study design
This analysis is based on data from the Transgenerational
Risk Assessment of Children’s Risk (TRACER)
study that was conducted in Kuwait. Details of this study
have been published elsewhere [26]. Briefly, the TRAC
ER study is a longitudinal prospective birth cohort study
that was set up by the Harvard T.H. Chan School of
Public Health in the USA and the Dasman Diabetes Institute
in Kuwait. The main aim of this study was to
examine prenatal risk factors for early childhood obesity.
The review boards of both institutions provided ethical
approval for the study and permission for recruitment of
participants was obtained from the participating health
centres.
Participants
A convenience sampling method was used, approaching
pregnant women attending antenatal visits at primary
public health clinics in each of the six governorates of
Kuwait and three private clinics. The clinic staff provided
a brochure and referred interested women to the
onsite research assistant. The TRACER study was open
to both Kuwaiti and non-Kuwaiti women attending public
and private clinics, thus making the sample representative
of the population in Kuwait. Women were eligible
to participate if they were between 18 and 45 years old,
had a singleton pregnancy, and were fluent in Arabic or
English. Most of the women were enrolled in the second
trimester of their pregnancy but they were also eligible
to participate if they were in their first or third trimester.
A written consent from the woman and her partner was
required for participation in this study.
Data collection
Data were collected from May 2012 until August 2015.
The collection process included several intervieweradministered
questionnaires. For the purpose of the
main research question of this analysis we used data collected
using the Baseline questionnaire, which assessed
the socio-demographic background and the medical history
of women, including their last menstrual period;
and the Stress questionnaire, which assessed several
mental and physical health indicators before and during
pregnancy, including antenatal depressive symptoms
(Edinburgh Depression Scale). The Baseline questionnaire
was administered at enrolment during a prenatal
visit to the clinic or hospital while the Stress questionnaire
was administered at a visit subsequent to enrolment
or by a phone interview. In the event that the
woman was recruited during the third trimester of her
pregnancy, the Baseline and Stress questionnaires were
both administered at enrolment. The enrolled participants
were also contacted via phone at a median time of
6 weeks (IQR: 3–9) after delivery to obtain information
about the birth date and birth weight and, at the same
contact, the majority of the women also answered a
postnatal questionnaire which included questions about
the health and the diet of the baby, including breastfeeding.
During the same call, the mother was asked to report
any diagnosis and treatment for gestational diabetes
and gestational hypertension in her last pregnancy.
Measures
Preterm birth
The date of the last menstrual period and the birth date
were used to calculate the gestational age at birth. PTB
was defined as a gestational age at birth that was less
than 37 weeks [28].
Small and large for gestational age babies
SGA was estimated based on the World Health
Organization birth weight percentiles for gestational
week [29]. If the birth weight was lower than the 10th
percentile for the gestational age then the neonate was
characterized as SGA. Similarly, LGA was defined by a
birth weight greater than the 90th percentile [30].
Antenatal depressive symptoms
The main exposure of interest was the experience of
antenatal depressive symptoms which were assessed during
pregnancy using the Edinburgh Depression Scale
(EDS). This is the same tool as the Edinburgh Postnatal
Depression Scale (EPDS) which was originally developed
to assess postnatal depression. However, some studies
showed that subscales of the EPDS could also screen for
anxiety and anhedonia [31]. The tool has 10 items,
which take a score of 0–3 each with 3 corresponding to
higher depression or anxiety. Different cut-off points for
defining the presence of depressive symptoms have been
recommended in the literature. The questionnaire was
not validated in this study population, therefore the cutoff
point of EDS ≥ 10 was used to define depressive
symptoms, similar to other multi-ethnic studies [32, 33].
Other variables
Apart from the aforementioned variables, we also included
socio-demographic characteristics, such as age,
nationality (Kuwaiti vs. non-Kuwaiti), employment status,
educational level, and monthly household income in
Kuwaiti Dinars [1 Kuwaiti Dinar (KWD) ≈ 3.5 United
States Dollars (USD)]. We further examined the role of
pre-pregnancy BMI and self-reported factors describing
maternal reproductive health, such as parity, preterm delivery
in a previous pregnancy, conception by in-vitro
fertilization (IVF), as well as gestational diabetes and
gestational hypertension in the current pregnancy.
Statistical analysis
The strength of the linear association between gestational
length and birth weight with the EDS scores was
described using Spearman correlation coefficients. We
also examined the association of depressive symptoms in
pregnancy with each of the three outcomes of interest
(PTB, SGA and LGA) using the chi-square test of independence
and univariate logistic regression models and
reported crude odds ratios (ORs) and the corresponding
95% confidence intervals (95% CI). The same analysis
was repeated for socio-demographic characteristics, behavioural,
reproductive health, obstetric, and psychosocial
variables in order to identify potential risk factors
for each of the outcomes of interest. We considered variables
based on previous knowledge and biological
plausibility. This was followed by a multivariable logistic
regression model for each outcome to examine the
adjusted effects of the variables considered. Each
model included antenatal depressive symptoms, as
this was the primary exposure of interest, along with
variables that had a univariate association with a pvalue<
0.25. Nationality and pre-pregnancy BMI were
considered as potential effect-modifiers of the antenatal
depressive symptoms associations with the outcomes.
We checked for statistical significance of the
possible effect-modifiers by adding interaction terms
in the multivariable logistic regression models. The fit
of the model was assessed using the Hosmer-
Lemeshow goodness of fit test. All statistical analyses
were conducted using SAS 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary,
NC, USA) and statistical significance was defined as a
p-value< 0.05 using two-sided tests.
Results
A total of 2038 women were enrolled in the TRACER
study and completed the Baseline and Stress questionnaires
with usable data. We excluded women without a
score for the antenatal depressive symptoms (n = 92) and
women who reported taking anxiety or depression medication
during the current pregnancy (n = 6) or who completed
the stress questionnaire in the first trimester (n =
24). We further restricted the sample to women who
had provided information about their babies (n = 1798).
Of these, a total of n = 1694 women had available data to
calculate all PTB, SGA, and LGA and were included in
the current analysis.
Among the 1129 multiparous women there were 469
(41.5%) with parity 2; 518 (45.9%) with parity 3–4; and
142 (12.6%) with parity > 4. The majority of the women
in our sample were non-Kuwaitis (75.1%) and were
younger than 30 years old (63.3%), similar in the group
of women with depressive symptoms and the group
without (Table 1). The two groups also had similar income,
in vitro fertilization, as well as gestational hypertension
and gestational diabetes rates. More than half
(54.2%) had pre-pregnancy BMI in the overweight/obese
group. The mean gestational age at delivery was 39.2 ±
1.7 weeks and the mean birth weight was 3216 ± 495 g.
The group of women with depressive symptoms had
somewhat smaller percentage unemployed than the
group with no depressive symptoms, had lower education
level and were more multiparous (all p < 0.05).
Overall, the prevalence of PTB, SGA, and LGA in our
sample was 7.3, 7.1, and 22.6%, respectively (Table 1)
while the prevalence of depressive symptoms was 19.5%.
The unadjusted associations of baseline characteristics
with the outcomes of interest are shown in Table 2.
The ORs obtained from the logistic regression models
indicated that women with antenatal depressive symptoms
had higher odds of PTB, SGA, and LGA though
none of these associations reached statistical significance.
When we controlled for possible confounders,
these associations became slightly stronger for PTB and
LGA but they remained non-significant (Table 3). None
of the factors examined (nationality and pre-pregnancy
BMI) was found to be a modifier of the effect of antenatal
depressive symptoms on the outcomes of interest.
In the adjusted analysis, the risk of PTB was associated
with conception by IVF (OR = 3.32, 95% CI: 1.18, 9.39)
and preterm delivery in previous pregnancies (OR =
3.92, 95% CI: 1.99, 7.73) whereas the risk of SGA was
associated with the sex of the baby, with males having
lower odds of being small for gestation age than females
(OR = 0.57, 95% CI: 0.39, 0.84). On the other
hand, a male baby was a significant predictor of LGA
(OR = 2.07, 95% CI: 1.56, 2.74). Non-Kuwaiti women
had increased odds of delivering a LGA baby (OR =
1.92, 95% CI: 1.19, 3.08).
Furthermore, we examined the strength of the linear
association of antenatal depressive symptoms with birth
weight and gestational length as continuous variables.
The correlation between the EDS score and gestational
length was rs = − 0.02 (p = 0.39) and that of EDS and
birth weight was rs = − 0.04 (p = 0.07).
Discussion
This study examined the association of depressive symptoms
during pregnancy and adverse birth outcomes in a
sample of pregnant women in Kuwait who were enrolled
in the TRACER cohort. Overall, higher rates of preterm
birth, as well as for small and large for gestational age
babies, were found among women with an EDS score ≥
10. However, none of these associations reached statistical
significance either in univariate models or in multivariable
models after controlling for socio-demographic
and pregnancy related variables. These results are in line
with studies conducted elsewhere, which showed that
depression is not predictive of PTB, especially in women
who are at a lower obstetric risk [34, 35]. On the other
hand, in a recently published meta-analysis the pooled
estimate from 14 studies with a total sample of 21,048
women showed that there is a much stronger association
between clinical depression that requires treatment and
adverse outcomes [9]. However, as Bindt et al. suggested,
it seems that studies that had taken into consideration
pregnancy complications did not find a strong association
between depression and PTB, while many published
studies which had shown a significant association
failed to include these complications as risk factors of
PTB [35]. In our analysis, we tried to include complications
in current or previous pregnancies that may have
increased the risk of adverse birth outcomes, to the extent
that data were available.
A larger body of evidence exists on the effect of depression
on low birth weight; in contrast, not many
studies have examined the effect of depression on birth
weight in relation to gestational age at delivery. We
demonstrated that the levels of SGA were not different
among women with and without depressive symptoms,
which was consistent with some studies but inconsistent
with others [15, 36]. Molyneaux et al. reported a weak
impact of depression on SGA in obese and overweight
women, though not in normal weight women. However,
in our study, BMI was not shown to be an effectmodifier
of this association [37].
The evidence regarding the effect of depression on delivering
a large for gestational age baby is scarce. This
lack is also noted in Jarde et al. [9]. Despite the fact that
LGA was relatively common in our study, with more
than a fifth of women delivering a LGA baby, we did not
find any significant association between this outcome
and depressive symptoms in pregnancy, in-line with the
limited studies identified in the literature [38, 39]. Two
other studies, which investigated the combined effect of
a BMI 25.0 kg/m2 or higher and depression, reported a
higher frequency of LGA babies or babies with greater
standardized birthweight among women with both comorbidities
[40, 41]. Similar to SGA, our results did not
suggest that BMI modifies the association between depressive
symptoms and LGA. Delivering a baby that has
a weight that is greater for its gestational age is usually
not considered as an adverse birth outcome but evidence
suggests that it can be as unhealthy as SGA. Several
studies have suggested that LGA, or macrosomia, can
have a sequelae of adverse events at birth, childhood or
adolescence [4, 7, 42]. Therefore, more research is
needed to further examine the association of antenatal
depression and large for gestational age.
We recognize some limitations in the analyses. The
EDS was not validated in Kuwait, as this was not the
main exposure of interest when setting up the cohort.
An Arabic version has been validated in other Arab
countries, however, the cultural setting of these countries
could be different than Kuwait, which ranks among
the richest countries in the world. Gestational age at
birth was computed as the number of weeks since the
last reported menstrual period and was not ascertained
using ultrasound measurements. However, this is the
most common method in practice to calculate gestational
age in the absence of early pregnancy ultrasound
data. Birth weight and birth dates were self-reported,
which could potentially be subject to recall bias, though
it is unlikely that any recall bias exists given the fact that
mothers recall birth dates and weight very accurately. In
addition, information was collected by a phone interview,
therefore women had probably access to the health
card of their baby. Finally, as there was limited information
about the mode of delivery we could not adjust for
it in the multivariable models.
Despite these limitations, the study has several
strengths. First, the analysis is based on a prospective cohort
study with a large sample size and a wide range of
covariates considered. Furthermore, the data have been
obtained from a population that has not been studied in
the past, as regards to the role of mental health and adverse
perinatal outcomes. Finally, the women recruited
in the study included both Kuwaitis and non-Kuwaitis,
who attended public and private clinics in all six governorates
of Kuwait, in a way that represented the heterogeneous
composition of the population of Kuwait.
Therefore, the findings could be generalizable to the
population of Kuwait and possibly to other countries
that share similar biological and cultural characteristics.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our study suggests that depressive symptoms
in pregnancy did not predict adverse birth outcomes,
such as PTB and SGA, which adds to the
currently non-conclusive literature. Similarly, our findings
showed that antenatal depressive symptoms are not
associated with LGA though further research is needed
to examine this association, given that the available evidence
is quite limited.
