Background
As a result of war, conflict, persecution and human
rights violations, the numbers of forcibly displaced
people have escalated in recent years. Almost 80 million
people are currently being forced to flee their homes,
whereof 26 million are refugees and 4.2 million are asylum
seekers, i.e., seeking international protection but
whose claim for refugee status has not yet been determined
[1]. Sweden is one of the largest European recipients
of refugees and asylum seekers, and has received
more than 500,000 applications for asylum over the past
decade [2].
Forced migrant populations are subjected to extreme
stress related to both ongoing living difficulties [3–7]
and high rates of pre-migratory exposure to trauma [7–
9], e.g., war at close quarters, witnessing the death of
others, generalized violence, and torture. Experiences of
interpersonal trauma, and especially torture, are powerful
predictors of mental ill health in general and symptoms
of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in
particular [9–11]. Torture is by definition a grave violation
of human rights. It is prohibited in international human
rights law, but still practiced in over 140 countries,
including Syria, Afghanistan, Somalia, and other countries
where many refugees originate [12]. Furthermore,
exposure to trauma and extreme stress often continue
both during and after the migration. Experiences such as
separation from family, dangerous travel methods, continued
conflicts in home country, prolonged and uncertain
asylum processes, socioeconomic difficulties, and
perceived racism may add to previous traumatic experiences
and contribute to the development or maintenance
of both mental and physical health problems,
including symptoms of PTSD [3–6, 10, 13, 14]. Consequently,
refugees and asylum seekers are at high risk for
complex health conditions. Previous research has demonstrated
high rates of both PTSD and associated comorbidity
such as depression and anxiety [4, 7, 9, 13],
sleep disturbances, chronic pain, fatigue, and functional
impairments [14–18]. In all, these complex health issues
constitute substantial health care challenges [10, 19, 20]
and a significant public health problem in receiving
countries [19, 21].
PTSD and other stress-related disorders are also associated
with poor health behaviors, including low levels of
physical activity (PA) [22–25], which may additionally
complicate the already burdened health situation among
forced migrant populations. The health benefits of PA
are well established [26] and regular PA is known as an
effective stress reliever and associated with improved
psychological wellbeing [27]. Both international [28] and
national PA guidelines [29] suggest that at least 150 min
of moderate-intensity PA per week is needed to obtain
important health benefits. Conversely, insufficient PA
(i.e. < 150 min per week) is strongly connected to adverse
effects on both mental and physical health, including
increased risks of chronic medical conditions such as
diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease [30],
which forced migrant populations are already at heightened
risk for [18, 31]. Previous research on PA and
PTSD has shown a potentially complex interrelationship,
including different suggestions of directionality, and indications
that low levels of PA may act as a reciprocal
maintaining factor of both PTSD and comorbidity [23–
25, 32, 33]. For example, insufficient PA is generally proposed
to be bi-directionally associated with depression,
sleeping problems, and chronic pain, while these symptoms
or conditions are also associated with symptoms of
PTSD [14, 16, 34, 35]. Interventions including PA and
exercise have been shown to alleviate the severity of
PTSD symptoms and to have beneficial effects on prevalent
psychological comorbidity such as depression and
anxiety [36–38]. Further, regular PA is also associated
with a range of favorable health aspects that may be of
particular importance concerning forced migrants’
health, including increased energy and daily life functioning,
resilience and self-management of stress, sleep
quality, physical health status, self-esteem and selfconfidence,
cognitive performance, and improved social
relations [26, 27, 39, 40]. However, the potential impact
of PA has received scarce research attention in the field
of PTSD and forced migrants’ health, and particularly
among the vulnerable group of asylum seekers. Despite
the complex mental health needs related to stress and
trauma exposure; neither the prevalence of PA, nor its
association to PTSD and exposure to grave trauma,
especially torture, has to our knowledge previously been
examined.
Thereby, the aim of this study was to (i) assess the
prevalence of PA among a cohort of asylum seekers in
Sweden, in total and stratified by sex and age group, (ii)
examine the differences in PTSD symptom severity between
asylum seekers with different levels of PA, and
(iii) examine the associations between PA and PTSD,
controlled for exposure to torture.
Methods
Study design
A cross-sectional survey design was used for the study.
The reporting adheres to the STROBE guidelines for
reporting observational studies [41].
Participants and setting
The study setting was three large housing facilities for
asylum seekers located in Sweden. Inclusion criteria for
participation in the study were: having an asylum seeker
status, belonging to one of the largest refugee groups at
present in Sweden (Afghanistan, Eritrea, Iraq, Somalia,
or Syria), and being at least 18 years old. The total number
of eligible participants was 1698. Data on PTSD and
exposure to torture among the sample has been published
previously [6].
Data collection and procedure
Data collection for this study was part of a comprehensive
survey to asylum seekers in Sweden and was conducted
from May 2016 to March 2018 [6]. A
questionnaire including sociodemographic data, trauma
history, measures of mental health, and level of PA, was
used. Translations of the questionnaire were carried out
by certified translators and reviewed by other certified
translators or by bilingual staff members of the Swedish
Red Cross University College. The Swedish Migration
Board provided a list of eligible participants, including
sociodemographic data, based on the ethical approval
from the Regional Ethical Review Board. Written and
oral information about the study was provided to eligible
participants in their native language (Arabic, Dari, or
Tigrinya), including that completing and returning the
questionnaire would be considered informed consent.
Each participant was then assigned a unique ID number
and all further data handling was performed on anonymized
dataset. At each housing facility, volunteers and
Red Cross staff members distributed the questionnaires
and the written information to eligible participants. At
each site, professional interpreters were also available
during data collection. All completed questionnaires
were scanned and compiled for analysis.
Measures
Sociodemographic characteristics
Data on sex, age, country of origin, and year of immigration
was provided by the Swedish Migration Board. Age
of participants was categorized into two groups: 18–30
years and 31–64 years. Additional sociodemographic
data, including highest educational level and family situation,
were collected by self-report from the participants.
Physical activity
Level of PA was assessed by the Exercise Vital Sign
(EVS) [42]. The EVS is a brief PA questionnaire that was
designed to identify individuals who are not meeting PA
recommendations. It was selected by application of the
“decision matrix” in the Guide to the Assessment of Physical
Activity: Clinical and Research Applications [43].
According to these guidelines, the EVS is a commonly
used global PA questionnaire that may be used to identify
PA guidelines and/or to provide a classification. It
assesses the average time spent in moderate to strenuous
activity, displayed in minutes per week, by multiplying
the responses on two self-report questions: 1) “On average,
how many days per week do you engage in moderate
to strenuous exercise (like a brisk walk)?” (response options:
1–7 days) and 2) “On average, how many minutes
per day do you engage in exercise at this level?” (response
options for minutes per day: 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 90,
120, and ‘150 or more’). In this study, the EVS score was
divided into three PA categories according to established
cut-offs in PA guidelines [28]: Inactive (0 min·wk.−1), Insufficient
PA (1–149 min·wk.−1), and Sufficient PA (≥
150 min·wk.−1). The questionnaire has shown good discriminant
validity being administrated to more than 1.5
million individuals in a US healthcare setting and by
using the same classification as in this study [42]. The
EVS has also been recently evaluated against accelerometry
in an ethnically/racially diverse sample, providing
preliminary evidence of acceptable validity and high testretest
reliability [44].
Post-traumatic stress disorder
To assess symptoms of PTSD, the trauma symptom
scale (part IV) of the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire
(HTQ) [45] was used. The HTQ symptom scale is crossculturally
validated and frequently used among refugee
populations for both evaluation of treatment outcome
[46] and in screening for PTSD [10, 13]. The scale consists
of 16 PTSD symptom items, corresponding to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
4th edition, (DSM-IV) criteria for PTSD. The PTSD
symptoms is assessed by asking respondents to rate how
much they have been bothered by each of the 16 symptoms
during the past week on a 4-point scale: not at all
(1), a little bit (2), quite a bit (3), or extremely (4). PTSD
symptom severity is computed by averaging the responses
on the list of symptoms, giving a score between
1 and 4. Higher score indicates more symptom severity.
In this study, a mean item score of ≥2.06 was used to define
positive PTSD cases, based on previously established
value of PTSD among primary care patients in Bosnia
Herzegovina [47], and previously used among refugees
in Sweden [7, 11]. According to a recent study by Vindbjerg
et al. [48], the HTQ may also be divided into two
subscales: a 9-item arousal/intrusion subscale (AIS) and
a 7-item avoidance/numbing subscale (ANS). In the
present study, these subscales were used to examine differences
between clusters of PTSD symptoms in relation
to different levels of PA.
Exposure to torture
Two questions from the Refugee Trauma History
Checklist (RTHC) [49] was used to assess whether participants
had experienced torture before and/or during
their flight. In addition to the questions regarding torture
exposure, the checklist includes questions targeting
other potentially traumatic events, e.g., war at close
quarters, violence, and forced separation from family
and close friends. All questions are answered on a binary
outcome scale (Yes/No). The two questions regarding
exposure to torture prior to flight and during the flight
were combined to establish exposure, i.e., participants
who endorsed either or both of the questions were considered
exposed. The checklist has been used in previous
studies among refugee populations in Sweden [7, 11].
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics was used to describe participant
characteristics. Prevalence estimates and their corresponding
95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated
to outline the proportions for each EVS category both
within the total sample and stratified by sex and age
group. Although no significant testing of the differences
between strata were performed, non-overlapping CI’s
were viewed as indicating significant differences in
prevalence estimates.
The differences between participants designated to different
EVS categories (levels of PA) in regard to HTQ
score (PTSD symptom severity) and its subscales, AIS
and ANS, were assessed by univariate and multivariate
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA and MANOVA). Oneway
ANOVA for independent group was used to assess
the difference in regard to total HTQ score, while MANOVA
was used for assessing the overall differences in
AIS and ANS due to high intercorrelation between these
symptom clusters (r = 0.83). Upon establishing an overall
significance indicated by Wald and F statistics, follow-up
univariate ANOVAs were then used to explore the differences
in AIS and ANS separately. Pairwise
comparisons between each pair of EVS categories were
done by Hochberg’s GT2 test in order to account for different
samples sizes in each category, and Dunnett’s T3
test in order to account for possible heterogeneity of
variance. In all analyses, the significance level was set to
p ≤ .05.
Assumption about homogeneity of variance for
ANOVA for total HTQ score, and MANOVA for ANS
and AIS, were tested by Levene’s Test and Box’s Test of
Equality of Covariance Matrices. Neither of the tests
were significant. Furthermore, normal distribution of residual
for both HTQ total score and AIS and ANS were
examined and showed neither substantive departure of
normality nor presence of outliers. Although the assumptions
for ANOVA and MANOVA were confirmed,
the analyses were also performed by bootstrapping the
CIs as a further mean of guarding against violations of
assumptions.
Multiple regression analysis with HTQ score as the
dependent variable was performed to assess the overall
associations between sex, age, exposure to torture, and
level of PA, indicated by EVS categories. Stepwise hierarchical
regression in three steps were applied in order
to assess the contribution of the EVS categories to PTSD
symptom severity, indicated by HTQ score, by controlling
for sex, age, and exposure to torture. Subsequently,
the variables sex and age group were entered in the first
step of the model, exposure to torture was added in the
second step, and lastly, the variable EVS categories were
added in the final step of the model. Analyses were performed
by bootstrapping in order to provide robust
bootstrap adjusted standard errors of the estimates and
to guard against the violation of assumptions of normality.
All statistical analysis were conducted using the IBM
SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 24.0.
Results
Characteristics of participants
In total, 455 asylum seekers were included in the study
by responding to the questionnaire (26.8% of the eligible
residents). Characteristics of the participants are presented
in Table 1. In brief, the majority of participants
were men, between 18 and 30 years of age, not living
with a partner, and had 9 years or less of education.
About one third originated from Afghanistan, one third
were from Syria, and the remaining from Somalia,
Eritrea, and Iraq. Among the participants, 56% had been
exposed to torture (57% among women and 55% among
men). Among the participants who responded to the
HTQ (n = 319), 61% reported PTSD symptom severity
above or equivalent to the recommended cut-off (≥ 2.06)
to define a checklist-positive diagnosis. The mean PTSD
symptom severity score was 2.28 (SD = 0.771)
exposure to torture respectively. Being exposed to torture
was associated with significantly higher PTSD symptom
severity compared to not being exposed to torture (B =
0.526, SE= 0.085, p < .001). The addition of exposure to
torture in this model accounted for an additional 11% of
the total variance in PTSD symptom severity and the
change in R2 was significant (F(1, 309) = 40.51, p < .001).
In the final model, all the above-mentioned variables
were included with the addition of level of PA. All the
above associations persisted, and Sufficient PA was
found to be negatively associated with PTSD symptom
severity. Both Insufficient PA (B = 0.297, SE = 0.086,
p < .001) and Inactive (B = 0.789, SE = 0.104, p < .001)
was significantly associated with more symptom severity.
This model accounted for 25% of the total variance in
PTSD symptom severity, i.e., the addition of the variable
PA uniquely explained an additional 12% of the total
variance in PTSD symptom severity. This change in R2
was also significant (F(2, 307) = 23.39, p < .001).
Discussion
Despite the well-known impact of PA on mental health
and wellbeing [26–28], little is currently known about
PA among asylum seekers, a population which is known
to display high prevalence of trauma exposure and mental
ill health including PTSD [3, 4, 8, 9]. The results of
this study revealed several noteworthy findings. First, almost
50% of the study population did not meet the
international recommendations for a sufficient level of
health-promoting PA, and were classified as either inactive
or insufficiently engaged in PA. Second, both inactive
and insufficient PA were found to be significantly
associated with more PTSD symptom severity compared
to those who met the recommendations for a sufficient
level of PA. Finally, this association persisted and additionally
accounted for a marked proportion of the variance
in PTSD symptom severity even when analyses
were controlled for sex, age, and exposure to torture.
A proportion corresponding to almost half of the cohort
of this study not meeting the recommendations of
sufficient PA appears as noticeably high compared to
both international and national estimates of insufficient
PA (also including those being completely inactive). According
to the WHO Global Health Observatory data of
2016 [50], the worldwide estimates of insufficient PA
were in average 27.5% (31.7% among women and 23.4%
among men), whereas the same estimate for the general
population in Sweden was 23.1% (24.7% among women
and 21.5% among men). Our findings of possible differences
between women and men are in line with these
data as well as previous research reporting female gender
to be associated with higher levels of insufficient PA
across most countries and populations [51, 52]. However,
the disparities between sexes varies considerably
within and between countries. Differences in both level
and types of PA has been suggested to be highly influenced
by social and cultural norms and practices [52,
53], whereby some cultural norms have been recognized
as particularly discouraging of women’s participation in
PA, such as conservative dress codes, lack of social and
community support, and lack of gender segregated facilities
[54]. There is also a wide variation of overall country
specific estimates of insufficient PA across both
cultural and geographical regions [51], which is believed
to be explained by numerous factors at multiple levels,
including demographical, psychosocial, sociocultural,
and environmental variables [52]. However, potential differences
on basis of country by origin could not be reliable
provided in this study, and neither could our overall
estimates be further examined against relevant national
estimates since such data are not available for either
Afghanistan, Syria, or Somalia (i.e., representing almost
80% of our study population).
In general, the estimates of insufficient PA are higher
in high-income countries than in low-income countries,
with in average 36.8% of the populations in high-income
countries being insufficiently active compared to 16.2%
in low-income countries [51]. Most asylum seekers originate
from low- or middle-income countries [1], indicating
that the high prevalence of insufficient PA in our
study may possibly be viewed as attributed to overall
conditions associated with the process of forced migration,
trauma exposure, and being an asylum seeker.
More specifically, previous research has established that
people with severe mental ill health are less likely to engage
in PA and are more sedentary in comparison to the
general population [55–57], and, the process of cultural
change and acculturation has been suggested to additionally
influence almost all other correlates of PA, including
key variables such as social inequalities, social
support, and motivation [53, 58]. Given the high rates of
trauma-related ill health [3, 4], disrupted daily life and
work routines from home country [4, 6], as well as other
barriers to engage in PA that are likely to be faced by
forced migrant populations, such as economic strain, access
to facilities, language difficulties, unfamiliarity with
the environment, loss of social network, and lack of motivation
when living under extreme stress and uncertainty
about the future [53, 57–59], it may be concluded
that asylum seekers are more readily susceptible to insufficient
PA. An increased focus on assessment and
promotion of PA is thereby justified. This may be seen
as particularly pertinent considering the currently much
extended time of the asylum-seeking processes in many
host countries [1]. In order for such actions to be efficient,
particular attention to contextual and cultural factors
may be necessary.
The issue of further assessment and promotion of PA
among asylum seekers may also be seen in light of the
WHO Global Action Plan on Physical Activity 2018–
2030 [60], including an accentuated need to identify high
risk groups of insufficient PA, to increase the knowledge
and delivery of context and culturally sensitive actions to
promote PA, and subsequently, to facilitate both mental
and physical health. According to the few recent reports
on PA and sport among forced migrant populations,
such actions may not only be attributed to physical and
psychological outcomes but also as a facilitator of social
health, such as greater acculturation, integration, social
inclusion, and feelings of belonging [38, 58, 61–63]. In
regard to promotion of PA, and partially related to our
findings of more than one in eight asylum seekers being
completely inactive, it may also be noted that recent research
has demonstrated important health benefits even
at much lower doses than advocated by generic PA
guidelines, and especially when moving from completely
inactive to some activity [64, 65]. Further, as it has
been recognized that the current threshold of 150 min
per week may seem unattainable or even discoursing
for some people, it has also been argued that the promotion
of any engagement in PA may, in some cases,
be advisable and which has been particularly pronounced
as a potentially important message among
people currently inactive and/or suffering from severe
mental ill health [65, 66].
Our findings of a clear pattern of differences in PTSD
symptom severity relating to level of PA, support that
there is an association between mental ill health and insufficient
PA. Previous research has found substantial reductions
in PA and active leisure time habits after the
onset of PTSD [25], which may indicate a direction of
mental illness as a contributing factor or an antecedent
to insufficient PA. However, research has also shown
that low levels of PA can act as a major risk factor for
the development and maintenance of mental ill health,
including PTSD and comorbidity [33, 35, 56, 67]. It is
thus possible that a similar pattern is reflected in the
findings of the present study. In that case, low levels of
PA may adversely influence mental health and PTSD
symptom severity among asylum seekers who have been
exposed to severe traumatic experiences. Taken together,
the associations indicated by the differences in
regard to insufficient PA and PTSD symptom severity
may as well be bi-directional in the same line as delineated
by the Mutual Maintenance Model [68]. This
model proposes that PTSD symptoms and chronic pain
are mutually maintaining conditions, and that there may
be several pathways by which both conditions can lead
to an escalation of symptoms and distress following
trauma. Concerning PA, presuming an equivalent analogy,
this would imply that PTSD symptom severity may
partially influence level of PA while also simultaneously
be adversely influenced by insufficient PA. Promotion of
PA may, in this case, be seen as both a preventative
measure (i.e., to reduce the risks of maintenance or escalation
of PTSD symptoms and PA-related comorbidity)
and an attempt to alleviate current symptom
severity. Based on this hypothetical analogy with the
Mutual Maintenance Model, it should, however, also be
noted that the mediating mechanisms between PTSD
and chronic pain may be very different, and that chronic
pain may in itself have an essential role in the links between
PA and PTSD. For example, there are several proposed
symptom overlaps between pain and PTSD, such
as anxiety, avoidance behavior, and elevated somatic
focus, which may also influence level of PA. Further, our
findings of differences in PTSD symptom severity also
between those being completely inactive compared to
those with insufficient PA, might yield some support to
previous suggestions that even a low dose of PA may be
associated with important aspects of health [64, 65].
However, on basis of our results, the direction between
respective associations remains unclear.
The possibility that levels of PA may, to some extent,
influence PTSD symptom severity, was furthermore supported
by the results of the analyses in which exposure
to torture, as an established main predictor of PTSD [9,
10], was controlled for. While exposure to torture displayed
an expected high explanatory function for PTSD
symptom severity, insufficient PA provided additional
high explanation for the variation in PTSD symptom severity
beyond exposure to torture. Although those not
exposed to torture may still have experienced other severe
trauma, the overall pattern indicates that insufficient
PA may act as a risk factor, mediator, or
aggravator of PTSD symptom severity for those inflicted
by severe trauma. On the other hand, and in line with
the analogy with the Mutual Maintenance Model, higher
symptom severity may also act as a risk factor for or
mediator of lower PA. Nevertheless, as the crosssectional
nature of our data precludes causal inferences,
the results need to be replicated by means of
longitudinal studies in order to clarify causality and
to assess each factor’s contribution to symptom severity.
In addition, there may be other symptoms or conditions
that may influence both PTSD symptoms and
level of PA, such as poor social support [69], low
self-efficacy [70], and as previously highlighted,
chronic pain and sleeping problems [15–17], which
are common in the context of displacement and exposure
to severe trauma, and thus, warranted further
investigation in future studies.
Our results regarding different clusters of PTSD symptoms,
i.e., arousal/intrusion and avoidance/numbing,
showed similar patterns of differences and associations
with insufficient PA as that of the overall PTSD symptom
severity. These results deviate to some extent from
the inferences of a systematic review by Vancampfort
et al. [32], suggesting that the only correlate consistently
associated with low PA in people with PTSD is symptoms
of hyperarousal. Our findings, however, could also
be viewed in light of other studies that have suggested
that physical and social inactivity may also comprise a
part of avoidance symptoms and negative cognitions and
mood, e.g., avoidance of trauma-related stimuli, feeling
isolated, and decreased interest in activities [25, 35, 37,
71]. Moreover, these symptom clusters may as well be
closely interrelated in regard to their influence on PA,
such as avoiding activities or exercise due to lack of energy
or motivation, fear of bodily arousal (e.g., muscle
tension, increased heart rate, shortness of breath), or fear
of intrusive memories that may be triggered by physical
strain. In addition, despite a recently increased attention
[38, 40], the role of social, cultural, environmental, and
policy factors on PA participation among people with
PTSD in general [32], and forced migrant populations in
particular [53, 58, 59], is still understudied and need to
be further addressed by future research.
Strengths and limitations
To our knowledge, this is the first assessment of prevalence
of PA and its association to PTSD in a cohort of
asylum seekers in a high-income country setting. The
use of a cross-culturally validated measure for PTSD and
well-established measures of PA, availability of information
on the sample population, and an adequate sample
size that provided necessary statistical power for assessment
of associations and the possibility to establish the
actual response rates compared to the total eligible study
population, are the strengths of the study. It is, however,
a limitation to the study that the proportion of those
choosing to participate was just slightly more than one
fourth of the total population. Still, such response rate is
common in surveys conducted among hard-to-reach
populations in general, and in forced migrant populations
in particular. Thus, obtaining data on PA and severity
of PTSD symptoms among 26.8% of all eligible
individuals could be considered acceptable in this context.
However, the generalizability of the estimates of
prevalence of PA to other settings and other forced migrant
groups may be limited.
Further, it has been reported that mental health problems
may be more common among non-respondents
[72, 73], which may also bias the results concerning the
PA prevalence estimates. However, since the estimates
of associations, compared to that of population
characteristics, are less prone to bias caused by nonresponse
[73, 74], the results concerning associations
of PA with PTSD symptom severity may be viewed as
less influenced by this condition. Our findings regarding
PA prevalence should also be interpreted with
caution due to the subjective nature of assessment by
the EVS. Specifically, it has previously been reported
that many self-report PA questionnaires, including the
EVS, generally overestimate the minutes of PA per
week compared to objective measures such as accelerometry
or direct observations [44, 75]. It is thus
possible that the true proportion of insufficiently active
asylum seekers may be even higher than suggested
by our results.
The selection of torture as a single worst trauma may
be another limitation, as it has been suggested that a cumulative
trauma score may provide more explanatory
power. However, since the RTHC only includes eight
broad categories of potentially traumatic events which
differ in terms of both specificity and severity of trauma,
a valid a cumulative score for this study could not be estimated
on basis of the available data.
Moreover, given the cross-sectional design and the observational
data in the study, causal directions in links
between PTSD symptomology and PA cannot be established
by means of the obtained empirical data. Bearing
this in mind, our ambition has not been to assess the
causality of these associations and we have opted to discuss
the possible directions of these associations against
the background of the existing literature. Nevertheless,
the results provide some evidence for the potential importance
of PA in regard to PTSD symptomatology and
mental health of asylum seekers. Our results also encourage
more in-depth examination of PA and mental
health among forced migrants and provide an interesting
starting point for future studies using prospective and
longitudinal designs.
Conclusions
Insufficient PA appeared to be more prevalent among
the cohort of asylum seekers in this study compared to
the reported prevalence in general populations and our
findings suggest that more PA is highly associated with
lower PTSD symptom severity. An increased focus on
assessment and promotion of PA among the traumaprone
populations of asylum seekers is thereby justified,
and further discussed as particularly pertinent considering
the currently much extended time of asylum-seeking
processes. The results of this study support previous evidence
of PA as a potentially important factor in the context
of PTSD and forced migrants’ health, however,
further research is warranted to clarify causality and to
examine the potential efficacy of PA promotion in this
regard.
