Background
There has been an increase in interventions for the management
of child and adolescent mental health problems,
with reviews showing positive results for
psychosocial interventions with children and adolescents
[1–5]. One way of assessing the outcome of an intervention
is by measuring it during the treatment process.
Outcome measures have been identified as essential to
demonstrate patient improvement [6] and determine
whether these interventions are effective [7]. They also
improve clinical practice when it is part of a feedback
monitoring system for clinicians by informing clinical
decision making and enable the clinician to adjust treatment
planning accordingly [8].
The need to evaluate routine health services has led
to the development of various outcome measures [8,
9], with the purpose and use of outcome measures
depending on the end user [10]. The Health of the
Nations Outcome Scales for Children and Adolescents
(HoNOSCA) is one of these outcome measures. The
HoNOSCA is part of a larger body of work - the
Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS) developed
by Wing et al., [11, 12] in the United Kingdom
as a brief mental health measure with the aim of
tracking progress towards improving the health and
social functioning of mentally ill people. The HoNOS
were intended to cover the range of symptoms, behaviours
and social difficulties associated with mental
illness and can be used in any health setting to measure
behaviour, impairment, symptoms, and social
functioning in patients [13]. It was noted that the
HoNOS scales were not appropriate for use with a
younger population, leading to the development of
the HoNOSCA by Gowers et al. [14, 15]. The HoNOSCA
was first developed as a clinician rated measure
to track child and adolescent outcomes in routine
care. The self-report version (HoNOSCA - SR) was
developed from a criticism that it failed to consider
the patient’s perspective [16]. A caregiver version is also
available. Although few studies have reported on the selfreport
version of the HoNOSCA [16, 17], the clinician
rated version has been used extensively to regularly monitor
the patient’s progress [13]. The HoNOSCA has four
subscales relating to: (i) a behaviour (disruptive behaviour,
overactivity, self-injury, inattention and substance misuse);
(ii) an impairment (physical illness and disability
- problems with scholastic or language skills, physical
illness or disability problems); (iii) symptoms (psychotic
and emotional symptoms - problems associated
with hallucinations, delusions or abnormal perceptions,
problems with non-organic somatic symptoms
or emotional and related symptoms); and (iv) a social
((problems with peer, family relationships, problems
with self-care and independence, poor school attendance)
[17, 18]. Several studies have examined the psychometric
properties of the HoNOSCA [13, 14, 16]
and because of its good psychometric properties and
ease of use in routine clinical services, it has been
translated into different languages [18].
In Kenya, there are few translated and/or culturally validated
scales to assess and detect psychopathology especially
in children and adolescents. The Child and
Behaviour Checklist [19] and Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire [20] have been commonly used in several
studies for the assessment of child and adolescent problems
[21–25], but they have not been used to measure
outcome during and post treatment. They have also not
previously been validated in Kenya.
Evidence on the effectiveness of interventions conducted
in mental health services for children and adolescents
in Kenya remains limited, in part due to a lack of
validated scales. Our study aims to address this issue by
evaluating the psychometric properties of the self-report
and clinician rated versions of the HoNOSCA for outcome
assessment with adolescents seeking mental health
services in Kenya.
Methods
The study was conducted at the Youth Centre, at the
Kenyatta National Hospital (KNH), Kenya’s largest
teaching and referral hospital. The clinic caters to young
people between the ages of 12–24 years. Services offered
include mental health, sexual and reproductive health
services including Voluntary Testing and Counselling
services. The study targeted adolescents between the
ages of 12–17 years seeking services for emotional and
behavioural problems. Many of these adolescents are referred
from academic institutions or by a caregiver.
From time-to-time they may self-refer. Adolescents attending
the clinics during the months of May 2019 to
March 2020 were invited to participate. To be included
in the study, patients had to be between 12 and 17 years,
both caregiver consent and assent from the adolescents
was given. We also invited clinicians working with these
adolescents to participate in the study. All participants
provided written consent to participate. Patients with
moderate to severe intellectual disability, experiencing
acute psychotic symptoms and having any unstable medical
condition were not included in the study. Our study
protocol is described in more detail in Wambua et al.
[26].
Measures
Demographic questionnaire
A researcher designed questionnaire that captured relevant
demographic variables like age, sex, level of education,
reasons for referral, past and present psychiatric
history, family (who did they live with, family structure),
and social history (substance use, previous trauma history)
was used. Psychiatric diagnosis using the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSMIV-
TR/V) were retrieved from patient files at the clinic.
Health of the nations scale for children and adolescents
(clinician-rated HoNOSCA) [14]
The HoNOSCA focuses on clinically significant problems
and symptoms the child/adolescent may face, and
consists of 15 items, each rated from 0 (no problem) to
4 (for severe problem). It is divided into two sections,
where section A relates to the child/adolescent’s condition
and covering four subscales: behaviour, impairment,
symptoms (psychotic and emotional) and social aspects.
Section B relates to the clinician’s assessment of the patients
and caregivers’ understanding of the services and
management options available to them. The HoNOSCA
total score is the sum of the first 13 scales and indicates
the severity of the mental health problems. The effectiveness
of the HoNOSCA is independent of the type of
mental disorder involved, and its psychometric properties
has been found to have moderate to good inter-rater
reliability, with intraclass correlation coefficients above
0.7 [14, 15] and has validity demonstrated in number of
studies [27–30].
Health of the nations scale for children and adolescents
(self-rated HoNOSCA) [16]
The self-rated HoNOSCA was developed using the 13
items from Section A of the clinician rated HoNOSCA
[14]. These items relate to different types of problems
the child/adolescent may face within the last 2 weeks,
with the adolescent responding, ‘not at all’, ‘insignificantly’,
‘mild but definitely’, ‘moderately’, or ‘severely’.
Questions include: ‘Have you been troubled by your disruptive
behaviour, physical or verbal aggression’, ‘have
you done anything to injure or harm yourself on purpose’,
‘Have you experienced difficulties keeping up with your
usual educational attainments and abilities’, ‘Have you
found it difficult to look after yourself or take responsibility
for your independence’, ‘Have you been troubled by relationships
in your family or substitute home’? Internal
consistency was found to be .73 in the initial study by
[16], while a Spanish version found alpha of .74 [17].
Paediatric symptom checklist - youth version (PSC-youth)
[31]
The PSC is often used as a screening measure to assess
child and adolescent psychosocial well-being. It is
used to identify individuals who may need further
evaluation, or as an indicator of psychosocial wellbeing
prior to and following intervention/treatment.
This 35-item scale assesses internalizing, externalizing,
and attention problems, with the young person rating
each item as either never, sometimes, or often. Some
of the items include (marking the best that fits the
child or adolescent) complains of aches or pains, are
afraid of new situations, act younger than children
your age, teases others, blames others for your troubles,
less interested in friends, are irritable or angry,
absent from school. A positive score suggests the need
for further evaluation. Studies have also indicated
strong internal consistency (0.91–0.93) of the scale
when inter-item analysis was carried out on the items
[32]. In Botswana, Lowenthal et al. [33] found that it
had an internal consistency was 0.86 for the PSCYouth.
Data collection procedures
The first author trained a research assistant to administer
the questionnaires [34]. The research assistant
approached potential participants during their first visit
at the clinic. The purpose of the study was explained to
the adolescents, their caregivers, and clinicians. Those
who were interested to participate in the study gave consent
(caregivers and clinicians) and assent (adolescents).
As English is one of the national languages spoken in
Kenya, each participant was then given a set of questionnaires
in English. The set of questionnaires consisted of
the above-mentioned measures. The clinicians received
the original training guide for HoNOSCA in English.
The first author was available to help when doubts or
questions arose from the participants. Caregivers were
not allowed to access the adolescent’s information and
clinicians were blinded to the adolescents’ responses.
Data analysis
Item means, standard deviations, frequencies and percentages
were calculated for the socio-demographic
variables.
Internal consistency
To investigate the reproducibility and consistency of the
self and clinician rated versions of the HoNOSCA, reliability
coefficients as measured by Cronbach’s alpha
were calculated. We used Shrout’s [35] standards for the
reliability results: virtually none: 0.00–0.10; slight: 0.11–
0.40; fair: 0.41–0.60; moderate: 0.61–0.80; and substantial
0.81–1.0. We also carried out inter-rater reliability
between self-report and clinician rated versions using
intraclass correlation (ICC, absolute-agreement, 2-way
mixed-effects model).
Validity
Concurrent validity was examined by comparing the
Pearson’s correlation coefficients between totals of the
self- and clinician rated HoNOSCA and total PSC
scores, as well as the scores on first and second followup.
Sensitivity to change
Sensitivity to change (test-retest reliability) was assessed
in the second/third session (first and second follow-up).
A subsample of participants (N = 98) was available to be
evaluated again with HoNOSCA by both adolescents
and clinicians. The ability of the two HoNOSCA versions
to reflect changes over time was assessed by observing
mean differences between the scores across time
points using both Pearson’s correlation coefficient, and
t-tests.
Dimensionality
Before performing factor analysis, the correlation matrix
was inspected to check for the strength of correlation
and then factorability was tested using exploratory factor
analysis using Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of
sampling adequacy and Bartlett’s test of sphericity. To
assess dimensionality underlying the self-rated HoNOSCA
items and extract the proper factor structure, we
conducted exploratory factor analysis (EFA) based on
Maximum Likelihood. Varimax (orthogonal factors with
simple structure) and Promax (an oblique rotated factor
solution with correlated factors also preserving simple
structure) rotation were performed.
Results
The majority of the participants in our study were female
at 54.2% and the mean age of our participants was
15.88 years. The most referrals to the clinic were made
by academic institutions (84.2%). Only 11.9% of the participants
had previously received prior treatment. Most
of the participants (61.2%) experienced psychosocial
problems. See Table 1.
The self-rated version of the HoNOSCA and the PSC
were completed by all adolescents at intake, and each
time they came for follow-up at the clinic. The mean
scores at intake were (N = 201); M= 10.16 (SD = 7.4) and
M= 51.1 (SD = 9.5) respectively. Scores of the PSC suggest
that there was significant psychological impairment
among all the participants. Clinicians attending to these
adolescents also filled in the corresponding HoNOSCA;
the mean of these ratings was 7.02 (SD = 5.07).
Internal consistency
The self-rated HoNOSCA demonstrated acceptable internal
reliability with a Cronbach’s alpha of .77. The
clinician rated HoNOSCA demonstrated an alpha of .59.
The PSC was found to have an alpha of .87. ICC estimates
and their 95% confident intervals were calculated
based on a mean-rating (k = 3) of the self-report and
clinician scores on the HoNOSCA, using absoluteagreement,
2-way mixed-effects model. Good reliability
was found between self-report version, with the average
ICC measure .827 with agreement definition and 95%
confidence interval as .745–.883. The clinician version
reported good reliability as well with the average ICC
measure .801, (.700–.868). Further, poor reliability was
found between the self- and clinician rated versions,
with the average ICC measure .305 with agreement definition
and 95% confidence interval as −.006–.525.
Validity of the HoNOSCA
The validity of the self-report HONOSCA was explored
by correlating it with the clinician rated version, and
PSC. The self-rated HoNOSCA gave a strong correlation
of .74 (p < .001) with the PSC and weak correlation with
the clinician rated HoNOSCA at r = .30 (p < .001). The
clinician rated HoNOSCA gave weak correlations with
the PSC at .34 (p < .001). The item scores between the
two versions were found to be not highly correlated with
each other with range of correlations between self-rated
(− 0.01–0.49) and clinician rated (− 0.01–0.48)
respectively.
Sensitivity to change
To assess sensitivity to change, we assessed change in
scores in the follow up sessions from the intake in a
sub-sample (n = 98). During intake, the adolescent participants
reported higher levels of difficulty compared to
the clinician ratings. The correlation of self-report at the
first and second follow-up was r = .59 (p < 0.001) and r =
.54 (p < 0.001) respectively; with an average of 5 days between
intake and first follow-up, and 10 between first
and second follow-up. The clinician rated version correlated
at first follow-up (r = .68, p < 0.001) and at second
follow-up (r = .48, p < 0.001) respectively. Independent ttests
were carried out to determine whether the means
between sex were different, findings are presented in
Table 2. A paired t-test was carried out between the initial
scores and the first (t = 4.297, df = 158, p < 0.001).
and second follow-up (t = 4.705, df = 97, p < 0.001) showing
significant differences. Similarly, differences were
found in the clinician rated scores at first follow up (t =
5.55, df = 157, p < 0.001) and second follow-up (t = 5.125,
df = 97, p < 0.001). Thus, the HoNOSCA seems to be
sensitive to change.
Exploratory factor analysis
The suitability of factor analysis was assessed prior to
analysis. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin KMO = 0.800 and Bartlett’s
test of sphericity (476.222, df = 78, p < 0.001) justified
a dimension reducing procedure such as the factor
analysis. The measure of sampling adequacy was > 0.80,
so the items could be considered suitable for factor analyses.
We carried out a maximum likelihood factor analysis.
Our goodness-of-fit test X2 (df = 32) = 35.544, p =
.305 suggesting a good fitting model. EFA revealed four
components that had eigenvalues greater than one and
which explained 54.74% of the variance. As a final EFA
model, we retained these four factors. The four factors
were related to relationship problems (1,3,10,11,12,13),
severe psychiatric symptoms (3,7,9), school problems
(2,5,11) and physical problems (6). Table 3 reproduces
the factor pattern of EFA structure with Promax-rotated
factors.
Discussion
While the HoNOSCA is widely implemented and continues
to garner significant recognition, these studies
have all been carried out in the developed world. It has
not been used or validated in any LMIC context. Our
study found both versions of the HoNOSCA easy to use
and reliable to assess global severity of mental health
problems experienced by children and adolescents seeking
services in the youth clinic at KNH.
Internal consistency of the self-rated HoNOSCA was
at .77, which suggests that the different items carried independent
weight, similar to Ballesteros-Urpi et al. [17]
who found alpha of .74 and .76 on the self-rated version.
Our findings on the clinician version showed poor internal
consistency (.58), which was similar to other
studies that found low alpha at .45 [36] and .65 [37].
Inter-rater reliability for both scales was found to be
strong and similar to those found in other studies, which
range from 0.72 to 0.96 [17, 18, 27–29].
Concurrent validity between the self-rated version and
the PSC were moderate. The poor correlations between
clinician rated and self-reported HoNOSCA or PSC
scores were similar as in other studies. The initial study
validating the self-report version [16] found it to be
weak when compared with the SDQ. Other studies also
found poor correlations between the clinician rated
HoNOSCA and other adolescent self-reports [17, 22,
29]. The different item scores poorly correlated with
each other on both versions and this was found to be
similar with the original study by Gowers et al. [14]
whose correlations range of correlations were 0.01–0.41,
suggesting that the HoNOSCA is unidimensional scale.
These poor coefficients suggest that there is limited comparability
between the two versions of the scale warranting
further research with specific tools for adolescents and clinicians.
The low concurrent validity of clinician rated
HoNOSCA, requires that we carry out further validation
studies with scales geared for clinicians.
Change in the scores at follow-up were moderately
correlated with initial scores on both scales of the HoNOSCA.
Similar with other studies, our findings show that
both versions are sensitive to change, indicating that
they can be particularly helpful for use in child and adolescent
mental health services [14, 16, 17, 27].
We found a four-factor solution, our factor analysis
did not confirm the areas of functioning as hypothesised
a priori by Gowers et al. [14] or as evidenced by Tiffin
and Rolling [38]. Further investigation is required to assess
the factor structure in our local context as subscales
may not translate easily across cultures.
Strengths and limitations
To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess the
psychometric properties of the HoNOSCA in a LMIC
context, specifically Africa. A strength of our study is
that it looked at both clinician and self-rated versions
concurrently. Some limitations of our study included:
the test-retest took place at different times with a mean
of 5 days (S.D = 4.72) between initial assessment and first
follow-up and 10 days (S.D = 15.38) between first and
second follow-up. This may have influenced internal
consistency of the different versions. Our clinicians (n =
69) varied in academic background and level of expertise
with some having diploma in counselling, bachelor’s in
counselling/nursing, master’s in counselling/ clinical
psychology/ psychiatric social-work/ nursing and doctorate
level, together with the large number of raters may
have influenced the internal consistency of the clinician
rated HoNOSCA. Another limitation is that our study
only recruited patients seeking outpatient services, and
with less severe or complex mental health problems.
The study was also carried out in an urban area and being
a public hospital may draw patients with high levels
of psychosocial disadvantage. The length of treatment
was also not suitable enough to assess outcomes.
Conclusion
The HoNOSCA has proven to be easy to use in routine
care and useful to achieve outcome measurements in
child and adolescent mental health services. We would
benefit from further testing of HoNOSCA in our context
with a larger sample, and strict parameters between sessions.
Internal consistency and concurrent validity of the
clinician version was low warranting further evaluation.