Background
Effective treatment and management of psychotic
spectrum disorders (PSD) is multi-faceted and expensive
[1, 2]. PSD frequently cause severe disability, more often
than other mental health disorders, resulting in significant
health, social and economic burden [1].
In many countries such as the United Kingdom (UK),
evidence-based treatment of PSD involves pharmacotherapy,
family education and psychosocial interventions
[3]. However, care for PSD in low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs) in Southeast Europe (SEE) is characterized
by meetings between clinicians and patients
dominated by pharmacotherapy while psychosocial aspects
tend to be overlooked, reportedly because of the
lack of qualified staff and sufficient funding of mental
health services [4, 5]. This facilitates additional inequalities
of an already highly vulnerable population.
Cost-effective and easily deliverable digital psychosocial
interventions embedded on a device, such as an
application on a tablet [6], offer an opportunity to advance
mental health care to people affected by PSD in
LMICs and to alleviate the burden of psychosis on patients
and their families.
One such intervention is DIALOG+, which is based
on patient-centred communication, quality of life research
and solution-focused therapy and designed to
make routine mental health clinical meetings more
therapeutically effective. The intervention is available as
an app and uses a tablet computer. Each session begins
with the patient rating their satisfaction with eight life
areas and three treatment areas on a DIALOG scale of
1 (totally dissatisfied) to 7 (totally satisfied). The ratings
are displayed on the tablet screen, allowing for comparisons
with ratings from previous sessions. Each rating is
reviewed through positive reinforcement and particular
areas of concern are addressed in more detail in a fourstep,
solution-focused approach which aims to identify
and utilize the patient’s existing resources [7]. Additional
file 1 contains visual representations of DIALOG+.
DIALOG+ builds on the existing clinicianpatient
relationships, which do not require formation of
new services or referrals to other clinicians, making it a
good fit for healthcare systems with scarce resources.
After 3 h of training, a range of clinicians have been
shown to be able to use the intervention [8]. DIALOG+
has proved effective in decreasing clinical symptoms,
increasing quality of life and reducing treatment costs
of patients with psychosis in the UK [8]. A pilot study
in Germany also showed significant amelioration of
schizophrenia and depressive symptoms as well as quality
of life [9]. A process evaluation of the intervention
identified the following likely ‘active ingredients’: 1)
solution-focused structure; 2) patient empowerment; 3)
mobilizing social resources; and 4) self-reflexion and
therapeutic expression [10]. DIALOG+ has been implemented
as a care planning tool and patient-reported
outcome measure in health institutions in England and
Wales [11–13]. It is also being researched in implementation
and effectiveness studies across four continents
[9, 14, 15], emphasizing the flexible use of the
intervention.
Translating evidence-based interventions from highincome
countries (HICs) to LMICs requires an in-depth
understanding of contextual barriers and facilitators to
implementation [16], factors which should be considered
before implementation of any novel intervention to ensure
the greatest chance of a successful outcome [17,
18]. The current literature from HICs points that research
about digital psychosocial interventions has
mainly focused on individual or intervention level implementation
barriers. Findings indicate that attitudes and
beliefs about interventions are crucial for staff and service
users, and that the complexity of interventions is an
important barrier for implementation of digital psychosocial
interventions [19]. Implementation barriers identified
in LMICs are more on the supply side, such as low
staff/patient ratio, and on services users’ side, such as
low digital literacy and poor wireless connectivity limiting
usage of some mental health apps [20].
Therefore, this study aims to identify the perceived implementation
facilitators and barriers of an evidencebased,
digital, psychosocial intervention for patients with
psychosis in five LMICs in SEE. The findings could provide
evidence about the provision of digital psychosocial
treatment for PSD in low-resource mental health settings
and facilitate successful uptake of such interventions.
Methods
Design
This is a multi-country, multi-language qualitative study
of the perceived implementation feasibility of DIALOG+.
It involved primary data collection using qualitative
methods in the form of semi-structured focus groups to
explore perceived implementation facilitators and barriers
of DIALOG+ from the perspective of key stakeholders,
patients with psychosis, carers, clinicians and
policymakers, in five SEE countries (Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Kosovo1, North Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia). Additional file 2 contains SRQR reporting
guidelines [21].
The study is part of the larger research project “Implementation
of an effective and cost-effective intervention
for patients with psychotic disorders in low and middleincome
countries in Southeast Europe” - IMPULSE,
which is funded by the European Commission [22].
Data collection
Participants
The research included 174 participants who participated
in 30 focus groups and two interviews. The participants
were a mix of patients, carers, clinicians and policymakers
(Table 1). There were a higher proportion of female
participants (n = 108; 62%) and most participants
were patients (n = 59; 34%) followed by clinicians (n =
47; 27%), caregivers (n = 40; 23%) and policymakers (n =
28; 16%).
Clinicians, patients and carers were purposively recruited
from mental health services, service user organisations
and mental health non-governmental organisations.
Policymakers and service manages were purposively recruited
from Ministries of Health, National Psychiatric Associations
and mental health medical boards. Patients’
inclusion criteria were: 18 to 65 years of age; in psychiatric
treatment for at least 3 months; clinical diagnosis of
psychosis or related disorder (i.e., ICD-10 F20-29, F31);
and capable of giving informed consent. The inclusion criteria
for clinicians were: professional qualification working
with mental health services and more than 6 months
working experience in mental health. Patients’ carers were
included if they were: at least 18 years of age; a carer for
someone with mental health difficulties or providing support
outside of clinical context; and capable of giving informed
consent. The inclusion criteria for policymakers
and services providers were managerial and/or policymaking
experience in health care, local or national authorities
dealing with mental health services and policies.
Thirty focus groups were conducted: eight with clinicians,
six with policy makers, nine with patients and
seven with carers. Two policymakers were interviewed
because they were unable to attend the focus groups due
to other commitments (Table 1). For the sample size, we
were guided by published recommendations that 5 to 8
participants in focus groups is adequate for achieving
saturation of data and allowing all participants to express
their thoughts and ideas in focus group studies
[23]. A comprehensive description of the setting and
contextual factors where data were collected is included
elsewhere [15].
Topic guides
The topic guides explored participants’ views on barriers,
facilitators and perceived benefits of implementing
DIALOG+. They were based on the same set of topics
for patients/family members and clinicians/policymakers,
but with probes specific for each group (file 3). The
same topic guide was used during the interviews with a
policymakers.
The topic guides were developed in English in an iterative
process, and draft versions were circulated
among all collaborating centres for feedback. The final
versions of the topic guides were translated into the national
languages.
Procedure
The focus groups lasted 59.4 min on average and used
similar methodology in the following sequence: 1) introduction
and explanation of the aim of the focus group;
2) standardized presentation about DIALOG+, lasting
10 min on average; 3) focus group discussion related to
barriers and facilitators to implementation of DIALOG+.
Focus groups took place between July and November
2018, in private rooms at the collaborating SEE mental
health centres by male and female facilitators, who were
local medical doctors and/or psychologists. Additional
training in facilitating focus groups prior to data collection
was provided to ensure a standardized approach.
All focus groups were audiotaped; transcribed verbatim
and de-identified. The transcripts were translated to
English either by local researchers proficient in the English
language or by professional translators.
Ethical procedures
Research activities followed current legislation and regulations
in the participating SEE centres and the guidelines
provided in Declaration of Helsinki. Each SEE
collaborating centre obtained ethical approval from their
local ethical committee prior to study beginning: Ethics
committee of the Clinical Centre of the University of
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (Ref: 03-02-47500,
date approved: 13/09/2018); Ethical Professional Committee,
Hospital and University Clinical Service of
Kosovo, University Clinical Centre of Kosovo (Ref: 904,date approved: 08/06/2018); Ethical Committee for Research with Humans, Medical Faculty at the University
of Cyril and Methodius in Skopje, North Macedonia
(Ref: 03-2237/12, date approved: 21/05/2018); Ethics
Committee for the Clinical Centre of Montenegro,
Montenegro (Ref: 03/01-11066/1, date approved: 19/07/
2018); Ethical Committee of the University of Belgrade
Faculty of Medicine (Ref: 2650/V1-3, date approved: 26/
06/2018). The local researchers provided detailed study
information to potential participants and obtained written
informed consent for research participation before
data collection.
Data analysis
Prior to analysis all data revealing personal identities was
removed. We analysed data using thematic framework
analysis [24] suitable for the large breadth of our dataset,
collected in five different languages. Our research question
was classified within the “diagnostic” and “strategic”
typologies defined by Ritchie and Spencer [24] because
we were interested in identifying both perceived barriers
and facilitators to DIALOG+ implementation (diagnostic)
and how they could potentially be addressed (strategic)
[24, 25].
Four researchers, with previous background in qualitative
studies, conducted the data analysis in Kosovo and
in the UK (AA, JK, TP and JH). First, we familiarized
ourselves with all the transcripts and each researcher
created a preliminary coding list in light of our research
question to identify perceived facilitators and barriers as
well as any other codes developed and interpreted from
the data. The individual preliminary coding lists were
combined in a single one created by consensus through
face-to-face discussions. The coding list was distributed
to the focus group facilitators to check for accuracy.
Additional file 4 contains the coding list.
Next, we grouped the preliminary codes to develop
broad framework categories based on both concerns related
to our research question and other emerging ones
from the familiarization stage. Upon agreement of the
framework, two researchers coded focus groups from clinicians
and policy makers, and two other researchers
coded focus groups from patients and carers using
ATLAS.ti qualitative analysis software. Researchers
coded the same transcripts until there were no discrepancies
between them.
After organizing the data according to the framework
categories, they were summarized for each category in a
chart form. This was followed by mapping and interpretation
of the data to find patterns. This process was on
going until no additional patterns were found.
Local Lived Experience Advisory Panels (LEAP) were
formed in each country to involve patients and carers as
experts by experience in the research. Feedback from
LEAP members was collected during regular LEAP IMPULSE
project meetings in all participating countries.
The LEAP provided feedback on the findings from focus
groups with patients and carers. LEAP members did not
participate in the focus groups. Members were given
material, containing a summary of the methods and titles
of the themes identified thus far from focus groups
with patients and carers, several days prior to the meeting.
Local researchers collected feedback from the LEAP
members on the materials provided, based on prespecified
questions (same for all countries), which was
summarized in the current study.
Results
The results present the major themes related to the research
aim to identify perceived facilitators and barriers
to DIALOG+ implementation by four key groups of
stakeholders. Two developed themes (Frequency of
intervention delivery; Suggested changes to the intervention)
are more broadly associated with DIALOG+ implementation.
Differences between participant groups are
explored within the identified themes. Views from the
interviewed persons were in line with views elicited in
focus groups.
Six major themes were developed: Intervention characteristics;
Attitudes and perceived preparedness of potential
adopters; Carers’ involvement; Perceived potential
patient and organisational benefits; Frequency of intervention
delivery; and Suggested changes to the intervention
(Fig. 1).
Each major theme was developed from subthemes,
summarized in Table 2.
Intervention characteristics
The intervention’s characteristics, likely the starting
point of adopters’ engagement with the intervention,
were largely interpreted as facilitators to the implementation
across participant groups. Clinicians, patients and
policymakers viewed DIALOG+ as clear and easy to use.
Clinician45 from Serbia expressed “[DIALOG+] couldn’t
be simpler”. Yet, a few patients expressed ambiguity
when asked about their understanding of the DIALOG+
rating scale and its items. Previous familiarity with Likert
scales and quality of life measures is likely to influence
how easily patients can understand the rating scale that
is part of the intervention.
Patient31: Yes, [DIALOG+ rating scale] is a classic
Likert scale.
Patient30: [About the rating scale] when there are
such gradations, one gets confused. I think there is
no need for more than five [options]. It should be
simpler.
Clinicians, patients and policymakers viewed DIALOG+
as adding structure to routine clinician-patient
meetings while involving the psychosocial needs of the
patient. Clinicians spoke about DIALOG+ creating a
workflow for patients and clinicians that could lead to
more comprehensive therapeutic approaches. Regularly
using DIALOG+ would make it less likely for clinicians
to omit topics that might be relevant to treatment.
Clinician9: I like that this intervention is wellstructured,
involving all the most important areas of
one’s life and visual approach that doesn’t let us forget
some domain.
Clinicians, patients and carers found the ability of the
intervention to track patients and their treatment progress
as particularly attractive.
Carer11: [With DIALOG+] there will be a follow up
of [the patient’s] condition, which is the most important
thing for the patient, number one issue (…)
Simply, his condition is monitored, how is it today,
is it getting worse or better, are there any
improvements.
Attitudes and perceived preparedness of potential
adopters
Some patients, policymakers and carers expressed that
the resources to implement DIALOG+ in their facilities
are readily usable and available.
Patient19: The medical personnel are sufficient [to
implement DIALOG+]. Policymaker3: [DIALOG+]
is basically free. There are lots of things that I would
like to implement here, but they are expensive (…)
But this can be delivered by nurses as well.
However, when asked about resources that might be
lacking, other participants expressed serious concerns
about the limited resources available, particularly regarding
time, staff, funding and space. Conflicting views regarding
the existing resources to implement the
intervention may reflect resource differences in the explored
services.
Patient2: Medical staff of this clinic, they are
great, but there just aren’t enough of them.
Carer39: I will give a specific example [of a usual
clinical meeting] in my experience as both a caregiver
and a patient. The doctor asks me – “Are
things better? Are life’s problems worse than before?”
but I try to make my conversations with
the doctor as brief as possible. I can see there
are so many patients waiting to be examined. I
can see that patients come from all over the
country with their bags, waiting to be examined.
So with the doctor, I speak shortly and concretely.
[DIALOG+] is something else; this is
likely to last longer.
Policymaker26: In Serbia, it is practically impossible in the conditions of usual ambulatory
controls, we do not have time for it, really.
Clinician34: You have to give tablet computers to
every clinician and pay for tablets and software
and everything else. If there is no money for it,
how...
Clinicians, patients and policymakers viewed DIALOG+
as consistent with existing norms, policies and
procedures in their services. However, participants
from Serbia and North Macedonia questioned the
suitability of DIALOG+ with the current funding policies
that prioritize the quantity of patients examined.
Furthermore, some policymakers expressed that
implementing DIALOG+ might lead to “loss of individualized
approach” to patients. This is likely motivated
by the difference between the current, largely
unstructured clinical meetings in mental health care
compared to the structured procedure of using DIALOG+
supported by technology. It is interesting that
the same characteristics of the digital intervention
which are considered to dehumanize the intervention
by some are also highly appreciated by others.
Policymaker25: DIALOG+ would fit well, I think,
very well in the current practice, because, it is actually
a modification of the practice that is already being
done, but it is more effective and faster.
Policymaker2: I am just afraid of robotizing sessions
after certain period of time.
Opposing views were expressed regarding the motivation
across participants and peers to implement DIALOG+.
Some participants expect that there will be
clinicians’ resistance to innovation. Such views likely reflect
the context of mental health services in the countries,
where digital interventions are not a common
practice.
Clinician9: I think that [using DIALOG+] is related
to the [clinician’s] individual approach; surely some
of our colleagues would be thrilled.
Policymaker4: As a member of a management board,
I strongly believe that this can be implemented in our
routine practice when we do all the legal work needed
for something to become a routine intervention …
certification, coding, and setting up the price. I am
definitely in for implementing this.
Patient5: I could use it every time … I need to talk
more, to tell what’s on my mind, but the doctor never
has enough time.
Policymaker2: I think opinions would be divided. You
cannot expect all [clinicians] to accept something;
some people have resistance towards technology …
For most clinicians in the study it is vital that their
service managers support them in the implementation of
DIALOG+. Clinician14 stated “I think that we must first
have the support of management”.
Additionally, all participant groups reported that skills
and experience to implement DIALOG+ by key stakeholders
are already existent. Some clinicians and patients
asked for more information on how to use DIALOG+.
Participants only received a short presentation describing
the intervention, which is likely the motivation for
such accounts. A few patients reported the need for
training due to their lack of familiarity with smart
phones/tablets.
Clinician3: We would have to get some instructions,
this presentation was great, but we would need detailed
training.
Policymaker8: No, [DIALOG+] won’t be different
[in the skills required] (…) all of these [clinicians]
are trained and they talk to patients – some for
therapy, some for supportive psychotherapy – and
each of them has his own way.
Patient3: I am good with computers, this is too easy.
Patient10: I don’t use a smart phone … so I would
need [training].
An important implementation facilitator interpreted
from the data is the participants’ perceived need for DIALOG+
implementation, particularly as it supports
innovation in mental health care. Patients and carers reported
that the current clinical meetings are too short to
fully understand the patient and thus are limiting in the
scope of conversation.
Patient45: [Clinicians] also pay little attention to the
patient during the appointments, only 10–15 min or
5, irrelevant, but I think [DIALOG+] is already better.
Clinician9: I think that [DIALOG+] is very useful,
that is exactly what we need.
Policymaker17: In the new National Strategy that is
under preparation, we have included a mental
health category. So this project comes at the right
time so that we can think about which services we
can develop. We are very thin in this field. It should
start inter-sector cooperation at the local level. This
project can help us a lot …
Carer26: I think it will succeed, [implementing DIALOG+]
is a step forward in medicine, having in
mind how patients are treated, all is done in the old
fashioned way, and nothing has improved until now.
Participants expressed that poor mental health of patients
can be a barrier to DIALOG+ implementation.
Policymaker2 said that “[DIALOG+ areas are significant
when patients reach remission, when they can handle
real-life situations.” This result highlights that the intervention
may not be suitable for all patients and some selection
criteria may be necessary.
Carers’ involvement in intervention
Participants expressed varying views regarding involvement
of carers in DIALOG+ implementation, although
all participant groups saw carers to have a
facilitating role. Clinicians and carers proposed carers
to be involved in the planning and execution of actions
agreed from the sessions. Clinicians expressed
that DIALOG+ could offer carers psycho-education.
However, patients and clinicians also showed reluctance
about the extent to carers’ involvement during
sessions. The accounts suggest that the level of carers’
involvement with such an intervention requires adjustment
to the patient’s needs.
Clinician10: We should just keep caregivers away
from assessing areas instead of patients.
Policymaker3: I think caregivers should take part in
this. Whether they take part on the sessions or
afterwards … it depends on what the patient wants...
Patient8: I would like [family members to be involved]
in that part where doctor gives tasks to family
members and me. I wouldn’t like them there all
the time.
Patient56: [Carers] could encourage and stimulate
clients, and at the same time they could help clinicians
be better informed about their clients’ problems
– from a different point of view. I think carers
could understand and explain certain issues more
objectively than clients themselves.
Perceived potential patient and organisational benefits
Clinicians, patients and carers reported patient empowerment
and an improved therapeutic relationship
as potential benefits of the intervention to the patient.
Other potential benefits at an organisational level
were also reported: DIALOG+ would help shift the
mental health services away from a typical medical
approach to care by reinforcing a psychosocial care
approach (clinicians, patients, carers); care could become
more patient-centred (patients and carers); the
structure and follow-up of care could be improved
(all participant groups), and DIALOG+ could offer an
opportunity for care to be standardized across services
(by policymakers). These subthemes reflect how
DIALOG+ could add to the routine service delivery
and the elicited views are likely related to what participants
are missing from their current care.
Carer36: The clinician gets closer to the patient,
and the patient increases his confidence in the clinician
[with DIALOG+]. If this intervention goes on
for a longer time, this can only deepen and expand
the relationship.
Patient3: I like that we have freedom, that we can
follow this app and that we have information from
previous sessions. We see if we have made progress
or not, we can see if the doctor’s therapy, advice, or
drug were adequate.
Patient56: It would motivate me to work harder on
myself and spend less time doing nothing but wandering
around.
Policymaker2: [DIALOG+] would be good because
we would standardize appointments in time, content,
and approach.
Clinician3: It increases functionality in every aspect,
what is important for the patient, engages patients
in decision-making process, motivates them. That
increases self-confidence and empowers the patient.
Clinician45: The mere fact that conversations with
my patients would cover eight life areas would bring
change, since that were not part of my routine clinical
practice so far. I think that structured conversation
would allow us to discuss more things in less
time and to be sure that we didn’t miss any important
life area.
Frequency of intervention delivery
Some participants provided brief answers about the frequency
of DIALOG+ delivery. Once per month was the
most common view, particularly among clinicians and
policymakers. Some patients and carers requested more
frequent delivery, for instance weekly or bi-weekly. Less
frequent delivery, such as “once in two months” and “at
least twice a year”, was favoured by some other patients
and carers. From participants’ accounts it was clear that
patients preferred more frequent use compared to clinicians
and policymakers. Carer38 proposed DIALOG+ be
delivered every 6 months because changes to patients’
life satisfaction take time. Carer37 expressed that DIALOG+
“should be applied regularly during outpatient appointments”.
These accounts suggest that the frequency
of DIALOG+ sessions should be determined by the individual
patient’s needs.
Suggested changes to the intervention
Some participants’ accounts contained broad recommendations
about changes to DIALOG+, however these were
not explored in detail. Suggestions about the DIALOG
scale were made, such as adding a miscellaneous field so
patients can discuss topics not included in the scale, and
reducing it to a 5-point Likert scale. Clinician46
expressed that “it might be practical and easy to use
smartphones for [delivering DIALOG+]”. About the area
‘job situation’, policymaker4 said “it should be clearer
that it also refers to education, or how the patient is
dealing with being unemployed.” Clinician36 spoke about
the longer time needed to see changes in patients’ satisfaction
with areas such as ‘job situation’ and ‘accommodation’
than that with their mental health, thus “perhaps
these should be assessed only at a 6-month interval.”
Discussion
Our study’s findings offer important implications for implementation
of digital psychosocial intervention for
PSD in low-resource settings.
Our results show that resources regarding time, staff,
funding and space for the implementation of a novel
intervention in the explored services are perceived as
limited. Lack of financial and human resources have
been found to be key implementation roadblocks for
digital interventions for people with psychosis [19]. The
cost of tablets overall was not considered to be a major
burden in the implementation of DIALOG+ in the context
of SEE. Rather, participants’ accounts focused more
on the lack of human resources. Special consideration
should be provided to psychiatrists’ time limitations that
arise as a result of limited human resources for the number
of patients, because this barrier was mentioned
across stakeholders and countries. To maximize its sustainability,
DIALOG+ should not require much longer
clinical meetings with psychiatrists and other mental
health professionals than usual. The findings suggest inclusion
of other mental health professionals in the implementation
process of DIALOG+ to address the
limited availability of psychiatrists in most of the participating
countries. Such suggestions were also given by
the LEAP and support the stepped care approach in
mental health services [26], especially in contexts with
limited human resources. Digital support tools have
been reported to facilitate a diverse set of mental health
workers in delivering the care needed by patients with
severe mental illnesses in the community, which is of
particular necessity in LMICs [27].
Attractive intervention characteristics, such as clarity
and easiness of use, and ability to provide structure to
patient-clinician meetings, involve patient’s psychosocial
needs and track patient’s progress were implementation
facilitators considered important by the key stakeholders.
‘Perceptions of the innovation’ has been identified as
one of the basic determinants associated with the rate of
implementation of the intervention [28], thus it is paramount
that key stakeholders have positive perceptions of
the intervention. The findings also support previous reports
that the comprehensive structure enabled by DIALOG+
is one of its mechanisms of action [10].
Automated data collection offered by digital
psychosocial interventions is useful to systematically
measure the quality of psychosocial care, a shortcoming
identified with current psychosocial therapies [27].
Despite the identified implementation facilitators, the
findings show the need to consider the patients’ level of existent
familiarity with life and treatment satisfaction questionnaires
using Likert scales when introducing the
intervention, as a few patients found the DIALOG scale unclear.
Patients who used DIALOG+ in the UK also reported
‘difficulty to understand or cope with questions’, although
this was not explored in detail [10]. Similarly, a systematic
review of implementation determinants for digital interventions
for people with psychosis recognized the complexity
of the intervention as an impediment for those with psychiatric
symptoms, low intelligence quotient and low technological
competence [19]. Some clinicians and patients
directly expressed a need to receive more training, largely
explained by receiving only a short presentation of the
intervention prior to the focus group discussions and some
patient’s lack of familiarity with smart phones. Thus, besides
clinicians, patients may also need training to use the
intervention as planned. Such training could be delivered
by the clinicians who can explain key principles and procedures
to the patient during their first sessions.
Additionally, many positive attitudes and sufficient
level of preparedness for DIALOG+ implementation
across potential intervention adopters was reported, particularly
related to the perceived existence of the required
skills and high stakeholders’ motivation. Such
implementation facilitators are of significance because
negative attitudes and scepticism have been shown to reduce
motivation to adopt the interventions for both clinicians
and patients with psychosis [19].
Some participants raised concerns about potential resistance
to innovation in mental health care by clinicians, particularly
to the technological aspect of the intervention as
use of digital interventions is not part of routine mental
health care in the SEE countries that participated in this
study. A study exploring the experiences of using DIALOG+
in the UK also identified ‘initial apprehension to the
technology’ as a barrier [10]. The LEAP similarly stressed
that clinicians need to be adequately trained, motivated and
willing to use DIALOG+, while not having any resistance.
Thus, the potential resistance to innovation should be considered
when developing training for digital interventions.
Moreover, carers and policymakers expressed concerns that
poor mental health would limit patients’ engagement and
thus negatively impact DIALOG+ implementation, further
highlighting that the intervention may not be suitable for
all patients and clinicians. Accessibility and adaptability of
digital interventions for people with psychosis and treating
clinicians are reported as main implementation facilitators
of digital interventions identified in previous studies [19]
and need to be carefully considered.
Despite the views of potential resistance to innovation,
key stakeholders perceived the intervention as needed to
improve the scope of the conversations during routine
clinical meetings. This is promising because stakeholders
not perceiving that a change is needed is an important
barrier to innovation implementation in mental health
care [28].
DIALOG+ was mostly seen as consistent with existing
norms and practices, an aspect that is often reported
among strong enablers of innovation implementation
across health care [29, 30]. However, some important opposing
views regarding the incompatibility of DIALOG+
with the mental healthcare funding policy in North
Macedonia and Serbia and the lack of intervention flexibility
should be considered. Similarly, the LEAP
highlighted that asking questions in a mechanical way
could make the sessions ‘boring and overwhelming’. Previous
research in the UK similarly identified repetitiveness
of DIALOG+ as a barrier [10]. This result highlights the
importance of considering individual patient’s needs regarding
how frequently the intervention is used to avoid
repetitiveness. The UK trial of DIALOG+ suggested that
the intervention be used monthly for 3 months and flexibly
afterwards [8]. However, the initial perception among
participants in this study was that the intervention should
be delivered once a month.
Clinicians expressed that institutional support is a
strong determinant for successful DIALOG+ implementation.
This insight adds to the limited evidence of contextual
and organisational factors regarding implementation
of digital interventions for PSD [19].
Different opinions on the way and the extent to which
carers should be involved were expressed. The findings
together with the LEAP feedback indicate that it is important
to involve carers in the implementation process
and develop their specific role through discussion between
clinicians, patients and carers.
Increased patient empowerment and strengthened
clinician-patient relationship were considered to be important
potential individual benefits of DIALOG+ by all
key stakeholders. This is in line with results from the
UK study researching mechanisms of action of DIALOG+
[10]. The opportunity of DIALOG+ to shift the
typical medical approach to a more psychosocial approach
– an approach that was recognized by all stakeholders
as often neglected – was expressed as a potential
organisational benefit. In this approach, patients would
be at the centre of their treatment and DIALOG+ would
offer improved structure and follow up of sessions.
These views were also shared by the LEAP. The identified
potential benefits from participants’ accounts
present important facilitators to further the implementation
process of digital psychosocial interventions in the
explored context in SEE.
Digital interventions are becoming an integral part
of the transformation of mental health care because
of their potential to advance current services and to
enable new pathways for provision of innovative psychosocial
therapies [31, 32]. The major implementation
barrier identified in our current study was
psychiatrists’ time constrains, which is consistent with
other LMIC settings considering implementation of
digital psychosocial interventions. The process of
implementing a digital intervention can be time consuming
as it requires changes to routine services at
an individual and an organisational level that frequently
do not occur successively [33]. The collaboration
between key stakeholders in the development
and implementation of digital interventions is a crucial
promoter of implementation of digital interventions
for people with psychosis [19]. In order for
technology to meaningfully ‘disrupt’ the current approach
to mental health care, it needs to be inclusive
of people with severe mental illnesses, consider how
mental health providers can use such technologies
most adequately and develop digital interventions
with having low-resource settings in mind.
Strengths and limitations
A major strength of this study was the inclusion of
perspectives from four key stakeholder groups and
feedback from LEAP across five LMICs in SEE,
which is rarely seen in the literature. Early communication
with key stakeholders is crucial to
innovation development and successful implementation
as it enables an increased understating of the
context in which intervention implementation occurs
[34]. The findings from this study contribute to the
field of implementation science because they provide
insight into currently limited knowledge of perceived
facilitators and barriers of implementing a digital
psychosocial health intervention in low-resource settings
for PSD.
The study has several limitations. Participants’ responses
about changes to DIALOG+ and its delivery
frequency were not explored in detail during the
focus groups, limiting the subsequent data analysis.
Nonetheless, these data were included since this they
were related to the study’s research aim; however future
research should explore the related themes further.
Although all focus groups facilitators received
training and had topic guides, the quality and depth
of information varied across focus groups. This might
have occurred because of various styles of individual
facilitators and differences in their background (e.g.,
medical vs. psychological), as well as because of the
varied motivation of participants to contribute to a
theme. This is often reported as a challenge when
conducting cross-national and cross-disciplinary
qualitative research as each team member has their
own combination of theoretical, national and linguistic
underpinnings, as well as varying levels of methodological
experience [35]. Additionally, all
transcripts were translated into English from five different
languages, which introduced a risk of losing
contextual-specific meaning and traits [35]. However,
this was a pragmatic decision as early stage translation
enabled collaboration in the analysis process
within the research team. The transcripts were not
back-translated or checked with focus group participants;
thereby, the process of translating transcripts
could have introduced a bias that might have influenced
the analysis of transcripts. However, the analysis
team was in regular contact with focus group
facilitators to clarify any ambiguous meaning of
words. The analysis team consisted of researchers
that were both proficient in English and some of the
SEE languages and were able to go back to original
transcripts where necessary. Additional limitation of
the study was not analysing data after each focus
group in order to determine the saturation of data.
To future cross-national, multi-disciplinary research
teams conducting qualitative studies, we recommend
in-depth training in qualitative methods, involving researchers
from all countries in the analysis process
and maintaining transcripts in their original languages.
We hope that our approach and lessons
learned can contribute to the literature on conducting
such qualitative research.
Conclusion
This study provides increased understanding from different
stakeholders’ perspectives regarding the implementation
of a digital psychosocial intervention for
PSD in five LMICs in SEE. Implementation of DIALOG+
is supported by the key stakeholders, who
overwhelmingly reported implementation facilitators
compared to barriers, and as such is promising to advance
care for PSD patients in SEE. DIALOG+ fits
well with the organisational goal of the mental health
centres of interest, but would require transformation
of the nature of routine clinical meetings in mental
health care, which can be challenging for both clinicians
and patients. Identification of potential barriers
and facilitators promotes successful uptake of the
intervention, minimizes waste of scarce resources and
provides evidence about the provision of digital psychosocial
treatment for PSD in LMICs. Working towards
implementation of DIALOG+ is an opportunity
to move beyond lip service that mental health services
need to pay more attentions to psychosocial aspects.
These findings, together with the existing evidence
base, provide support for further examination of the
effectiveness and implementation of DIALOG+ in
LMICs in SEE with the expected impact of improving
management of PSD in this region.