Background
Psychological well-being is a multidimensional construct
that refers to optimal psychological functioning
and experience [1]. The use of subjective well-being as
the overall measure of prosperity has gained prominence
over the last few years, moving away from traditional
macro-economic indicators like GDP [2]. Much evidence
suggests that some of the skills that could contribute to
achieving psychological well-being rely on higher-order
cognitive processes of general intelligence [3–5] and
executive function [6–8]. General intelligence, usually
measured using intelligence quotient (IQ) tests, is the
ability to acquire knowledge and use it in novel ways [9].
Executive function refers to the cognitive process responsible
for controlling and regulating thoughts, emotions,
and behaviors in pursuit of personal goals [10].
Much of what is known about intelligence and executive
function derives from studies conducted in Western,
Educated, Industrialized, Rich and Democratic (WEIRD)
countries [11]. This is a limitation to the generalizability
of cognitive models because it remains unclear whether
they apply to non-Western contexts. In addition, the
limitations of applying tests of cognitive ability from one
ethnic group to another without appropriate standardization
are well-recognized [12, 13].
Although most research on intelligence and executive
function has been conducted in high-income countries,
growing evidence points to similar findings in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs), including links
between IQ and executive function with psychological,
social, and mental health outcomes. These studies show
that higher IQ predicts better income [3, 5] education
attainment, reduced criminal and delinquent involvement
[5], and higher life satisfaction [4]. Similarly, higher
executive function has been associated with academic
achievement [6], higher income, lower substance abuse,
and criminal offending outcomes [7]. Executive function
has also been linked to mental health outcomes [8], with
studies suggesting that it serves as an important cognitive
resource, involved in the ability to cope with stressful
events and regulate mood and thoughts [14].
A substantial body of research has examined the influence
of coping resources (i.e., social support, religion,
and spirituality) on promoting psychological well-being.
In LMICs, positive links of social support with subjective
well-being and mental health outcomes have been
reported [15–18]. Similarly, studies have found that people
with strong spiritual or religious faith report higher
levels of happiness, life satisfaction [19], fewer symptoms
of depression [20, 21], and substance abuse [21], and have
higher levels of social support [22].
While much about the association of subjective
well-being and mental health with cognitive and
socioemotional factors has been investigated, most studies
have been conducted in developed countries and
populations experiencing psychiatric and medical conditions
or among the elderly. Very little research has been
conducted among populations born in contexts of poverty
and malnutrition that may restrict developmental
potential. It is well established that childhood adversities
leave long-lasting imprints on the neural mechanisms of
cognition and emotion [23, 24]. Thus, it is important to
examine the factors that could influence psychological
well-being and mental health in these populations. This
information could provide valuable data to inform the
future development of targeted intervention programs.
The objective of this study is to examine the cognitive
and socioemotional correlates of psychological wellbeing
and mental health in a cohort of Guatemalan adults
who were born in contexts of poverty and malnutrition.
This study focuses on a small subset of factors that have
been shown to influence psychological wellbeing. Except
for emotional support, this study does not address socioecological
aspects.
Methods
Study population and setting
The population in our study had participated in a community-
randomized food supplementation trial in early
childhood. The intervention was implemented between
1969 and 1977 by the Institute of Nutrition of Central
America and Panama (INCAP) in 4 rural communities
in eastern Guatemala (n = 2392). At the time of the
intervention, child undernutrition and infectious diseases
were endemic in the study villages, and most adults
were illiterate [25]. The nutritional trial was designed to
assess the impact of improved nutrition on child growth
and cognitive development. The communities where the
study was conducted were predominantly ladino (mixed
Spanish and indigenous descent) with a very low Mayan
population density. Participants in the study were also
Ladino, as a result all participants were Spanish speaking.
Complete details of the original trial and subsequent
follow-up studies are published elsewhere [26, 27].
Training and data collection
This paper utilizes data collected from Dec 2017 to Apr
2019 in 1268 participants, with a mean age of 47 years. In
the 2017–19 follow-up, out of the 1643 cohort members
presumed alive and living in Guatemala (68.7% of the
original cohort), 261 declined or were physically unable
to participate, and 114 could not be contacted after multiple
attempts. Apart from sex, characteristics of participants
who were lost to follow-up were similar to those
who participated in the 2017–19 study (Additional file 1:
Table 1).
All survey instruments (details below) were tested
before the commencement of the study. Participants
were interviewed in a research facility established in a
rented building in each village or at INCAP headquarters
in Guatemala City. Survey instruments were administered
by trained enumerators. Details on training,
adaptation, and administration of the cognitive tests are
published elsewhere [28].
The Institutional Review Boards of Emory University
(Atlanta, GA) and INCAP (Guatemala City, Guatemala)
gave ethical approval for this study. All methods were
carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and
regulations and all participants gave written informed
consent.
Measurements
Psychological well‑being
We adopted a model that captures both hedonic and
eudaimonic aspects of psychological well-being. The
hedonic approach defines well-being in terms of pleasure
attainment and pain avoidance (e.g., happiness; life satisfaction),
and the eudaimonic approach defines well-being
in terms of psychosocial functioning (e.g., meaning and
purpose; self-efficacy) [1, 29, 30].
We measured happiness using the Lyubomirsky Scale
of Global Subjective Happiness [31]. Participants were
asked to rate four items on a 5-point Likert scale ranging
from 1 (Very unhappy or not at all) to 5 (Very happy or
a great deal). A total score was calculated by computing
the mean of the four items, with higher scores signifying
greater happiness [31].
We assessed life satisfaction using the NIH Toolbox
General Life Satisfaction Survey consisting of five
items assessing global feelings and attitudes about one’s
life [32]. Participants rated these items on a 5-point
Likert scale ranging from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5
(Strongly agree). Final scores were computed as the sum
of item scores, with higher scores signifying higher life
satisfaction.
Meaning and purpose in life was measured using the
NIH Toolbox Meaning and Purpose Survey. Participants
rated nine items on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1
(Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree) [32]. Final scores
were computed as the sum of item scores, with higher
scores signifying greater meaning and purpose.
Self-efficacy is defined as a person’s belief in his/her
capacity to manage, function, and have control over
meaningful events [33]. We assessed self-efficacy using
the NIH Toolbox Self-Efficacy Survey [34]. Participants
rated ten items on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from
1 (Never) to 5 (Very often). Final scores were computed
as the sum of item scores, with higher scores signifying
greater self-efficacy.
Socio‑emotional measures
Emotional support Emotional support is one component
of social support that refers to the experience of
being cared about, valued, and loved by people in one’s
social network [35]. We assessed emotional support using
the fixed 8-item form of the NIH Toolbox Emotional Support
Survey [36]. Each item administered has a 5-point
Likert scale. Total scores were the sum of all items, with
higher scores signifying higher emotional support.
Spirituality and religion While the terms spirituality
and religion are used interchangeably, they have different
meanings. Religion functions in the context of an organized
institution that places spirituality under a specific set
of beliefs, values, and practices. On the other hand, spirituality
is a subjective experience that involves a sense of
connection and transcendence with a greater force [37].
Thus, religion can be considered a specific form of spirituality,
while spirituality is a broader concept.
We assessed spirituality and religion using the faith
and hope facets of the World Health Organization Quality
of Life Spirituality, Religiousness, and Personal Beliefs
WHOQOL-SRPB questionnaire [38]. The WHOQOLSRPB
questionnaire does not tie spirituality to religion,
and questions are phrased in ways that apply to individuals
with a wide range of religious and non-religious
beliefs. Each facet included 4-items on a 5-point Likert
scale and was scored through summative scaling, with
each item contributing equally to the facet score. Mean
scores were then calculated, where higher values reflect
higher levels of spirituality and religion [38].
Mental health
We used the WHO Self-Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ-
20) to assess mental health. The SRQ-20 is a screening
tool for mental disorders specifically designed for developing
countries, consisting of 20 yes/no questions, with
a maximum score of 20 [39]. Higher values are indicative
of worse symptomology. For consistency with the
other measures collected, we reverse-scored the items so
that higher mean values are indicative of greater mental
health.
Cognitive measures
Non‑verbal fluid intelligence (IQ) We assessed non-verbal
fluid intelligence using the Raven’s Progressive Matrices
Test [40]. The test consists of a series of increasingly
complex patterns, for each of which there is a piece missing.
Participants were asked to select which piece completes
the pattern from several options. Three of the five
scales (A, B, and C, with 12 questions each) were administered
since previous administrations of the instrument in
this population showed that only few participants could
progress beyond the third scale. Scores were computed as
the sum of correct responses, for a maximum total score
of 36. Since language is not required for its administration,
the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test is typically
viewed as a relatively culture-fair test [41].
Executive function We measured executive function as a
latent construct that includes working memory, inhibitory
control, and cognitive flexibility as building blocks [42,
43]. We administered computerized Spanish-language
tests of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Toolbox
cognition battery. To assess working memory capacity, we
used the List Sorting Working Memory Test [44]. The task
requires participants to remember information that is
visually and auditorily presented with illustrated pictures
(either foods, animals, or both) in size order from the
smallest to the largest. Item substitutions were made to
the List Sorting Working Memory test to increase cultural
appropriateness. Specifically, pumpkin was substituted
with papaya, cherry with nispero (loquat), and blueberry
with nance (a small tropical fruit). These adaptations were
approved and implemented by the NIH Toolbox development
team. Final scores were computed as the sum of
correct responses for a maximum score of 26. Inhibitory
control was assessed using the Flanker Inhibitory Control
and Attention Test [45]. The task requires participants to
indicate the left–right orientation of a centrally presented
stimulus while inhibiting potentially irrelevant information
from the flanking stimuli [46]. We used the Dimensional
Change Card Sort (DCCS) Test to assess cognitive
flexibility. Participants were asked to switch between
matching pictures by color and matching pictures by
shape [45]. For Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention
and DCCS Tests, we used the NIH toolbox computed
scores, which uses a two-vector algorithm that combines
accuracy and reaction time [47]. Higher values indicate
greater cognitive flexibility and inhibitory control. Computed
scores range from 0 to 10, and a score between 0
and 5 indicates that the participant did not score high
enough in accuracy (80% correct or less).
Statistical analysis
In all scales with missing items (< 1%), we applied a
two-way imputation approach [48]. We used Structural
Equation Modelling (SEM) techniques to examine the
factor-loadings patterns of studied domains and to assess
their intercorrelations. Under the SEM framework, we
used first-order Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) to
investigate whether the established dimensionality and
factor-loadings patterns for executive function and scales
assessing happiness, life satisfaction, meaning and purpose,
self-efficacy, emotional support, faith and hope
fitted our sample population. For second-order factor
structures (i.e., psychological well-being and spirituality
and religion), we used hierarchical CFA to determine
the degree to which factors loaded on their underlying
sub-constructs.
Our final model included the individual Likert-item
responses from the scales assessing happiness, life satisfaction,
meaning and purpose, and self-efficacy as latent
sub-domains of “psychological well-being." Likert-item
responses from the NIH Emotional Support Scale were
used to model emotional support. Likert-item scale
responses from the faith and hope facets of the WHOQOL-
SRPB scale were modeled as latent sub-domains
of “spirituality and religion." Mental health and IQ were
modeled as observed variables using computed scores.
List Sorting Working Memory, Flanker Inhibitory Control
and Attention, and DCCS Tests scores (cognitive
flexibility) were modeled as latent "executive function."
(Fig. 1).
Additionally, for comparison purposes, we tested a
model in which the hope and faith facets were modeled
together with happiness, life satisfaction, meaning and
purpose, and self-efficacy as additional subdomains of
psychological well-being.
We assessed model fit using the root mean square
error of approximation (RMSEA), Comparative Fit Index
(CFI), and Tucker–Lewis index (TLI). A good model fit is
indicated by RMSEA < 0.08, CFI > 0.90 and TLI > 0.95.
We interpreted correlation coefficients > 0.70 as strong,
between 0.70 and 0.40 as moderate, and < 0.40 as weak.
Our analysis accounted for clustering of subjects within
family, and models were sex stratified. All analysis was
conducted using MPLUS 8.0 using the Weighted Least
Square Mean and Variance (WLSMV) estimator for categorical
and ordinal responses using pairwise deletion of
missing values [49].
Results
Study participants (704 women; 564 men) had a mean
age of 47 years. Table 1 shows means and SD of the scores
of completed tests. Models in women and men showed
adequate fit (RMSEA = 0.04; CFI = 0.95, TLI = 0.95, and
RMSEA = 0.04, CFI = 0.95, TLI = 0.94, respectively).
Models combining the hope and faith facets with the
psychological well-being components indicated a small
decrease in goodness-of-fit indices (RMSEA = 0.05,
CFI = 0.94, TLI = 0.93 in women, and RMSEA = 0.04,
CFI = 0.94 and TLI = 0.93 in men). Thus, we decided to
keep the model that differentiates spirituality and religion
from psychological well-being.
First-order factor loadings for scales assessing happiness,
life satisfaction, meaning and purpose, self-efficacy,
emotional support, hope, and faith are presented
in Additional file 1: Table 2. Second-order CFA showed
that the theorized subcomponents for psychological
well-being, and spirituality and religion were highly
loaded into their underlying constructs. We also found
computed scores for List Sorting Working Memory,
Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention, and DCCS
tests loaded onto the executive function latent construct
(Table 2).
Intercorrelation matrices between latent domains and
observed variables in women and men are presented in
Tables 3 and 4, respectively. In women, psychological
well-being was moderately associated with spirituality
and religion (r = 0.68, p < 0.001), weakly correlated with
emotional support (r = 0.34, p < 0.001), mental health
(r = 0.32, p < 0.001) and IQ (r = 0.15, p < 0.001), and
showed no association with executive function. Mental
health was weakly correlated with emotional support
(r = 0.18, p < 0.001), spirituality, and religion (r = 0.16,
p < 0.001), and showed no association with IQ and executive
function. We also found moderate correlations
between executive function and IQ (r = 0.63, p < 0.001)
(Table 3).
The correlation matrix in men showed similar results.
We observed a moderate correlation between psychological
well-being and spirituality and religion (r = 0.70,
p < 0.001). Psychological well-being was weakly correlated
with emotional support (r = 0.35, p < 0.001), mental
health (r = 0.35, p < 0.001), IQ (r = 0.25, p < 0.001) and
executive function (r = 0.23, p < 0.001). Mental health
was weakly associated with emotional support (r = 0.09,
p < 0.05), spirituality and religion (r = 0.12, p < 0.05), and
IQ ( r = 0.09, p < 0.05), and showed no association with
executive function. We also found moderate correlations
between executive function and IQ (r = 0.70, p < 0.001)
(Table 4).
Discussion
We investigated associations of psychological well-being
and mental health with executive function, IQ, spirituality
and religion, and emotional support in a population
of Guatemalan adults born in contexts of poverty and
malnutrition. Our results derived from CFA support the
Intercorrelation matrices between latent domains and
observed variables in women and men are presented in
Tables 3 and 4, respectively. In women, psychological
well-being was moderately associated with spirituality
and religion (r = 0.68, p < 0.001), weakly correlated with
emotional support (r = 0.34, p < 0.001), mental health
(r = 0.32, p < 0.001) and IQ (r = 0.15, p < 0.001), and
showed no association with executive function. Mental
health was weakly correlated with emotional support
(r = 0.18, p < 0.001), spirituality, and religion (r = 0.16,
p < 0.001), and showed no association with IQ and executive
function. We also found moderate correlations
between executive function and IQ (r = 0.63, p < 0.001)
(Table 3).
The correlation matrix in men showed similar results.
We observed a moderate correlation between psychological
well-being and spirituality and religion (r = 0.70,
p < 0.001). Psychological well-being was weakly correlated
with emotional support (r = 0.35, p < 0.001), mental
health (r = 0.35, p < 0.001), IQ (r = 0.25, p < 0.001) and
executive function (r = 0.23, p < 0.001). Mental health
was weakly associated with emotional support (r = 0.09,
p < 0.05), spirituality and religion (r = 0.12, p < 0.05), and
IQ ( r = 0.09, p < 0.05), and showed no association with
executive function. We also found moderate correlations
between executive function and IQ (r = 0.70, p < 0.001)
(Table 4).
Discussion
We investigated associations of psychological well-being
and mental health with executive function, IQ, spirituality
and religion, and emotional support in a population
of Guatemalan adults born in contexts of poverty and
malnutrition. Our results derived from CFA support the
findings
demonstrate the construct validity of first order (i.e.,
happiness, life satisfaction, meaning and purpose, selfefficacy,
emotional support, faith, hope and executive
function) and second order (i.e., psychological well-being
and spirituality and religion) factor structures. In both
sexes, spirituality and religion was moderately correlated
with psychological well-being and weakly correlated with
mental health. Much debate has revolved around whether
there is a meaningful differentiation between spirituality
and religion from psychological well-being components.
In agreement with previous studies [50], our findings
support differentiation between these two constructs.
The positive association of psychological well-being
with spirituality and religion is well documented [51–53].
Our study findings show positive correlations of spirituality
and religion with subjective well-being (r = 0.68 in
women and r = 0.70 in men), that are in line with previous
research conducted in non-Western contexts, indicating
small but consistent positive associations between
religiosity and psychological well-being [19, 53], even
after controlling for difficult life circumstances [53].
Using data from 153 nations, Diener and collaborators
found that in religious societies experiencing difficult life
circumstances (e.g., poverty, low education, malnutrition,
low life expectancy, etc.), religious individuals had greater
levels of subjective well-being than non-religious individuals,
and this association was mediated by social support,
respect and purpose in life [53]. It is possible that
organized religion provides supportive social structures
that can, to some extent, diminish the harmful effects
of difficult life circumstances. Furthermore, the authors
found that difficult individual circumstances were associated
with religiosity at the individual level (r = 0.29) and
country level (r = 0.65), suggesting that difficult life circumstances
could lead to greater religiosity [53].
The mechanism by which spirituality and religion could
influence psychological well-being has been suggested
to involve psychosocial factors such as providing a sense
of identity and social support and promoting an active
and socially engaged lifestyle [54]. Our study found weak
associations of emotional support (our measure of social
support) with psychological well-being, and spirituality
and religion, in both sexes. However, our social support
measure was limited to emotional aspects and did not
include components of instrumental support or social
networks, which could be underestimating the associations.
The religious landscape in Guatemala may provide
additional insights into the observed associations. Pentecostal
congregations rose in popularity in Guatemala
during the late 1970s, turning it into one of the most
Protestant countries in Latin America [55]. This is relevant
because pentecostal churches are very supportive
of their adherents, providing them with various social
services. The extent to which social support mediates the
association of spirituality and religion with psychological
well-being in this population remains to be investigated.
We measured three core executive functions (working
memory, inhibitory control, and cognitive flexibility) that
facilitate higher-order executive function: problem-solving,
reasoning, and planning. It is well established that
the cognitive processes involved in executive function are
critical to mental health and psychological well-being.
Research has shown that people show better executive
function capacities when they feel happy, socially supported,
and healthy [56]. Conversely, deficits in executive
function have been associated with depression, and various
psychopathologies [57]. Our findings suggest that in
this population of Guatemalan adults, executive function
had little if any association with psychological well-being
and mental health constructs. The mechanisms through
which greater executive function positively influence
various aspects of well-being (e.g., good relationships,
health, and academic achievement) have been shown to
involve the ability to inhibit automatic responses (i.e.,
self-control) and delay of gratification [58]. These proposed
mechanisms have been derived from studies conducted
on children and adolescents in high-income
countries [59–62]. More cross-cultural research is
needed to understand the underlying mechanisms influencing
better outcomes among those with higher executive
function.
We also found that executive function was moderately
correlated with spirituality and religion. These findings
are in line with previous studies documenting associations
of spiritual and religious involvement with better
inhibitory control and lower cognitive decline [63]. Proposed
mechanisms include the stimulation of higher
cortical functions related to abstract thinking [64] and
promoting a stimulating and socially engaged lifestyle
that may help prevent cognitive decline [63].
Our study also showed that executive function was
moderately and positively correlated with general intelligence
measures (IQ). These findings are consistent with
previous studies indicating that performance on executive
function tests, particularly on tasks assessing working
memory capacity, is associated with measures of
intelligence [65, 66].
There are important considerations to be made given
the well-known debate around cultural bias in cross-cultural
assessment [67]. Most of the measures used in our
study derived from the Spanish-language version of the
NIH Toolbox. These measures were evaluated for cultural
appropriateness with Hispanics/Latinos living in
the United States whose primary language was Spanish
[68]. The assessment of the Spanish-language version of 
the NIH Toolbox showed good psychometric properties
and supports its use to measure cognitive and behavioral
functioning among Spanish-speaking individuals in the
United States [69]. We investigated the construct validity
of these measures in our study population using CFA.
Our results supported their factor structure, but it should
be acknowledged that this method of validation is limited
for cross-cultural settings. Ideally, a cross-cultural
validation should be implemented using quantitative and
qualitative methods, and measures compared against a
gold standard [67]. Our study is also limited by the data’s
cross-sectional nature, which does not allow for directionality
or causality to be inferred. Another limitation
is the limited generalizability of our findings, which may
only apply to populations with similar characteristics to
those of our study sample.
Our study also has strengths. We applied cognitive and
socio-emotional measures with good psychometric properties
in a large sample of men and women living in rural
areas of Guatemala or Guatemala City. Moreover, structural
equation modeling techniques allow examining
interrelationships among factors and observed variables
while accounting for measurement error.
Conclusions
Our findings contribute to the understanding of factors
that could help strengthen psychological well-being in
populations born in contexts of poverty and malnutrition
in LMICs. Our findings suggest that spirituality and
religion may help people cope with difficult life circumstances.
Future research should examine mediators of
this association and use longitudinal designs to determine
the directionality of the religiosity and subjective
well-being relationship.