Background
The world’s older population is projected to continue to
grow at an unprecedented rate due to improvement in life
expectancy and health care techniques [1]. Aging is a
period of life in which older people are exposed to potential
threats such as chronic conditions, loneliness, isolation,
lack of social support, and a decline in independence
[2, 3]. Additionally, both physical and psychological (e.g.,
dementia) chronic diseases tend to become more common
with age [3]. Aging is a well-known risk factor for
the increase of multiple chronic diseases, including cardiovascular
disease, stroke, cancer, osteoarthritis, and
dementia [4]. Approximately 80% of older adults have at
least one chronic disease; the cost and duration of treatment
for these diseases is 20–30 times higher than acute
illnesses [2].
One of the major health problems among older adults
is stroke, which is the third leading cause of death in the
world after cardiovascular diseases and cancer [5, 6].
Stroke is one of the most severe neurological disorders
which results from a decrease in cerebral blood flow in
certain parts of the brain due to vascular injuries [7]. It
is one of the most debilitating neurological conditions
that cause chronic and severe disabilities [8, 9]. Stroke
patients are very often dependent on their families for
their physical and emotional needs after discharge from
the hospital [10]. Given that patients often need longterm
care, the role of home caregivers is critically important
[11].
Essential caregiving for stroke survivors plays an
important role in the recovery process, and in preventing
additional strokes and improving patients’ overall health
[12]. Informal, or home caregivers are critical for longterm
care and are often composed of family members,
friends, and relatives [13]. Informal caregivers are defined
as individuals who provide some type of unpaid, ongoing
assistance with activities of daily living or instrumental
activities of daily living for individuals with a chronic illness
or disability [14]. Oftentimes, one individual serves
as the primary caregiver and is assigned to be primarily
responsible for most of the physical care and supervision
[15]. Caregiving is a difficult task, particularly for
untrained primary caregivers who are taking care of an
individual with serious, chronic health problems [16].
Unsurprisingly, caregiver stress is common and is caused
by the ongoing emotional and physical strain of caregiving
[17].
Caregiver burden can be defined as the strain that is
experienced by a person who cares for a chronically ill,
disabled, or older family member [18]. The burden of
care is used to describe the side effects of care that are
extremely problematic for the patients and their families
[19]. It is a multidimensional response to physical, psychological,
emotional, social, and financial stressors associated
with the caregiving experience [20, 21]. Caregivers
are hidden patients who, as a result of their involvement
with caregiving responsibilities, may not be able or eager
to seek care for their own health needs [22]. Caregiver
burden and strain have been associated with increased
health-risk behaviors (such as smoking) and higher rates
of drug use [23]. Caregiver mental health can be even
more at risk when caregivers perceive that the patient’s
care needs exceed their caregiving capabilities [10]. Most
studies of family caregivers of stroke survivors have
reported that caregiving had negative impacts on the caregivers’
health and well-being [24, 25]. Due to the abrupt
onset of disability and the chronic nature of stroke recovery,
caring for a stroke survivor has been found to have
a negative impact on the physical, mental, and psychological
health of caregivers [26, 27]. Primary caregivers of
stroke patients tend to report more somatic and depressive
symptoms, sleep disorders, stress and social isolation
than general population [28].
Support is needed to enable informal caregivers to
continue in their role as long as possible, without compromising
their physical or mental health. Effective and
adaptive coping strategies may play a protective role
in reducing the caregiver’s distress [29]. According to
Lazarus and Folkman et al. [30], coping is a process that
addresses how people respond and act both when experiencing
stress and when the level of exposure to stress
rises. Coping strategies are the cognitive and behavioral
efforts of individuals to interpret and overcome problems
and challenges [31, 32]. It has been proposed that females
and males use different coping strategies to deal with
stressors [33]. Previous studies about gender differences
in the use of coping strategies showed that differences in
preferred coping strategies existed [34–36].
Coping strategies have been conceptualized in a variety
of ways in the literature, however more broadly, they
have been considered to fall into two main categories:
problem-focused and emotion-focused [37]. Problemfocused
coping strategies aim to change the situation and
take control of the source of stress. They involve evaluating
the source of stress and actively considering and
implementing potential solutions to reduce the aversive
effects of the stressor [38, 39]. On the other hand, emotion-
based coping involves emotional response to stressors.
Emotion-focused coping strategies can also entail
enlisting emotional support from others [40].
Eight ways of coping are identified based on the ways
of coping (WOC) Questionnaire by the Folkman and
Lazarus. These include: Confrontive Coping and Planful
Problem-Solving classified under problem-focused
coping, and Distancing, Self-Controlling, Accepting
Responsibility, Positive Reappraisals, and Escape-Avoidance
considered to be emotion-focused coping. The coping
strategy of Seeking Social Support functions as both
problem and emotion-focused coping.
Confrontive coping refers to the aggressive effort to
modify stressful situations while planful problem solving
involves analytic approach to providing solutions
to problems [41]. Detaching oneself from stressful situations
is described as distancing and this strategy may
be common for caregivers who do not feel they have the
coping resources to face a particular scenario they find
confronting [30]. Distancing relates to denial, distracting,
or detaching [42]. This may be seen when a family member
is diagnosed with a stroke where a caregiver may turn
to distractions to avoid acknowledging the problem.
Self-controlling is the individual’s effort to manage
their own emotions and actions. Accepting responsibility
involves acknowledging one’s contribution to the
problem and doing the right thing [43, 44]. For caregivers
this can be considered an adaptive and useful coping
strategy. Accepting the situation and acknowledging
they are in control of how they can respond and cope
to it can be an important part of managing news of a
stroke. This may assist with managing negative psychological
sequalae that may result to death-related
depression or anxiety as well as preparatory grief and
loss [45–48].
Another coping strategy that is focused on positively
interpreting situations is positive reappraisal, wherein
thinking about stressful event may be re-framed to be
considered as benign, valuable, or beneficial [43, 44]. It is
often associated with personal growth and some religious
dimensions [32]. For caregivers, positive appraisal may
involve considering stroke as unavoidable or inevitable.
They may consider the situation as fortunate in that it did
not result in death. Unlike hope and optimism [49–53],
reappraisal-type strategies are often used in cognitive
behaviour therapy [54] and could be seen as a productive
and rational coping strategy.
Escape-avoidance is described as the thoughts and
behavioral efforts to escape stressful situations or problems
[47]. This may involve actively avoiding the problem
or withdrawing from others or the situation causing
stress. It can also involve wishful thinking. Escape-avoidance
and distancing can have negative implications on a
person being cared for [42]. A caregiver who withdraws
support and care can either physically or psychology,
place people with a chronic disease or injury at great risk.
Seeking social support is a commonly used adaptive
coping strategy which refers to sharing feelings and
thoughts, or seeking care, resources, or emotional support
from others [55, 56]. Caregivers may seek social support
from family or friends, or elicit information from
professionals which can be a form of social support as
well [57]. Social support and intergenerational contact
has been found to be essential for health outcomes in
older adults, ageing, and ageism [58].
Despite the high prevalence rates of stroke in Iran [59]
and caregiving responsibilities of family members [60]
as well as the reported negative impacts of caregiving on
caregiver health status, psychological problems, and the
quality of life of caregivers [61], only few studies have
examined the coping strategies adopted by caregivers of
stroke patients in Iran. Therefore, the aim of this study
was to determine the relationships between caregiving
burden and coping strategies used by a group of caregivers
of older patients with a history of having a stroke to
better understand this area of healthcare.
We aimed to answer the following questions:
• What is the level of care burden in caregivers of older
patients with a stroke?
• What are the most common coping strategies used
by caregivers of older patients with a stroke?
• What kind of relationship is there between care
burden and coping strategies in caregivers of older
patients with a stroke?
• Do coping strategies used differ based on the gender
of the caregiver?
Methods
This cross-sectional and correlational study was conducted
on 110 caregivers of older patients with a history
of stroke. The convenience sampling method was used
for selecting the representative sample. To identify the
caregivers, medical files of stroke patients hospitalized
in the Valiasr hospital in the six-month period before
the start of the study were extracted and reviewed. Contact
information for the caregivers of stroke patients was
extracted from the files, and they were then called for the
initial screening. Valiasr hospital is the only hospital in
Zanjan, Iran that admits stroke patients.
Inclusion criteria for primary caregivers included a
willingness to participate, aged 18 years old or over, being
able to communicate, having at least a primary level education,
being the principal caregiver for a minimum of
1 month, not being paid for the care provided, and having
a family relationship with the older patient. Caregivers
who were caring for multiple patients were not considered
for inclusion in this study. Older patients who were
included in the study are 60 years old and above, have
been diagnosed with stroke, and have a family caregiver.
Those who met the inclusion criteria based on their
report were invited to come to the rehabilitation centers
or clinic of neurology, depending on the region where
they resided. At the time of the phone call, an explanation
about the study purpose and procedures were provided
to the potential participants.
It was determined that 100 participants were needed to
find a correlation coefficient (r = 0.25) between care burden
and coping strategies, extracted from a similar study
by Alnazly et al. [34], at an alpha level of 0.05, and 90%
power. By considering a 10% nonresponsive rate, a sample
size of 110 caregivers was finalized for this study.
Data collection was carried out from December 2017
to May 2018. The questionnaires were completed by the
primary caregivers of the older patients.
Instruments
Zarit Burden Interview (ZBI), Lazarus coping strategies
questionnaires, and demographic checklists were used to
gather the data.
The ZBI questionnaire was used to measure caregiving
burden. It is the most widely used instrument
to assess perceived caregiving burden in clinical and
research settings [62], which measures the physical,
emotional-psychological, social, and economic impacts
of caregiving. This questionnaire is consists of 22
items and is scored on a five-point Likert scale where
0 = “never” and 4 = “nearly always.” The total ZBI score
ranges from 0 to 88 points. Higher scores indicate greater
burden [63]. The ZBI is a validated instrument for Iranian
populations. Navidian et al. [64] have culturally adjusted
this scale; its congruent validity was confirmed with
a positive correlation with the Hamilton anxiety scale
(r = 0.89) and Beck depression inventory (r = 0.67).
The Lazarus coping strategies questionnaire [30] consists
of 66 questions about coping with a stressful situation.
Responses are given on a 4-point Likert scale,
ranging from 0 = “does not apply and/or not used” to
3 = “used a great deal.” It measures 8 subscales consisting
of confrontive coping (6 questions), distancing (6
questions), self-controlling (7 questions), seeking social
support (6 questions), accepting responsibility (4 questions),
escape-avoidance (8 questions), problem-solving
(6 questions), and positive reappraisal (7 questions). The
remaining questions are distractor items. Higher scores
in each subscale indicate greater use of that particular
coping strategy [65]. The Lazarus coping strategies questionnaire
was validated in Iranian students [66]. Internal
consistency of this questionnaire is high (Cronbach’s
alpha = 0.85) as confirmed by Ramzi et al. [67].
Demographic characteristics for caregivers included
age, gender, marital status, educational level, financial
status, job, and history of chronic illnesses. Demographic
characteristics for the older patients included age, gender,
marital status, and level of education.
Ethical considerations
All stages of the study were based on the Provisions of
the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975. After giving information
about the purpose and procedure of the study and
prior to completing the questionnaires, written informed
consent forms were signed by all the caregivers. The
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Qazvin
University of Medical Sciences, Qazvin, Iran (IR.QUMS.
REC. 1396.371).
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were conducted using the Statistical
Package for Social Science version 19 (SPSS IBM V.19,
New York). Descriptive statistics were used to report
the characteristics of the caregivers and the severity of
burden of care. Continuous variables were presented as
mean and standard deviations and categorical data were
reported using frequencies and percentages.
Pearson’s correlations were used to examine the association
between caregiver burden and coping strategies.
Differences in the mean scores of coping strategies scales
for gender were analyzed using independent t-tests. The
statistical significance level was set at p < 0.05.
Results
A total of 110 caregivers with mean age of
32.09 ± 8.80 years participated in this descriptive and
cross-sectional study. Caregivers were predominately
women (n = 77, 70.0%), married (n = 75, 68.2%), unemployed
(n = 76, 79.1%), and had children (n = 67, 60.9%).
Nearly half of the sample had a diploma or academic
education (n = 56, 50.9%) and had a self-reported middle‑range
income (n = 60, 54.5%). Nearly 90% of the caregivers
reported not having any chronic diseases.
The mean age of care recipients was 69.91 ± 10.50 years
old. More than half were female (n = 57, 51.8%), the
majority were married (n = 82, 74.5%), and illiterate
(n = 82, 74.5%; see Table 1).
The mean of caregiving burden was 32.80 ± 11.97. The
majority of the caregivers suffered from mild (n = 58,
52.7%) to moderate (n = 51, 46.4%) burden and just one
caregiver (0.9%) was under severe burden. The results
showed that the most common coping strategies used
were positive reappraisal (15.16 ± 5.18) and seeking
social support (8.58 ± 2.90), and the least were direct
confronting (6.58 ± 2.70) and escape-avoidance
(14.37 ± 4.98). The greatest caregiver burden was physical
burden (15.49 ± 5.06) and the least was social burden
(4.68 ± 3.56) (see Table 2).
Figure 1 shows the average range of coping strategies
used amongst caregivers of older patients with a history
of stroke based on gender. Results of the independent
t-test showed that male caregivers used the positive reappraisal
strategy (t(108) = 2.76; p = 0.007) and accepting
responsibility (t(108) = 2.26; p = 0.026) significantly more
than female caregivers.
The information displayed in Table 3 shows that the
burden of care was significantly and positively correlated
with use of the escape-avoidance coping strategy
(r = 0.245, p = 0.010) and distancing coping strategy
(r = 0.204, p = 0.032).
Discussion
Coping strategies are common ways for dealing with
demands and in situations that are perceived as threatening
[68]. Therefore, the present study aimed to determine
the associations between caregiving burden and use
of coping strategies among caregivers of older patients
with a history of stroke. It also sought to determine the
differences in coping strategies used by male and female
caregivers.
The present study findings revealed that the care burden
reported by the majority of caregivers of stroke survivors
was mild to moderate. The findings are partially
supported by Kumar et al. [16] who reported that 63%
of caregivers of patients with stroke suffered from mild
to moderate care burden. However, Rawat et al. [69]
reported that more than half (56.67%) of stroke caregivers
felt exhausted (high/extreme burden). The reason for
these different results in the care burden of caregivers of
stroke patients may be related to the degree of dependence
of the patients for the daily living activities. In this
regard, Baumann et al. [70] found that a decrease in
patients’ ability to perform daily activities was significantly
associated with an increase in the care burden of
caregivers of stroke patients.
Based on the results of this study, women compromised
a large majority of caregivers. This is consistent
with national [71, 72] and international [73–75] studies
which have found that most caregivers are women.
A possible explanation for this might be that women
believe that caregiving is their role and responsibility,
as caregiving of children and other family members is
often undertaken by women. Furthermore, women are
more emotional than men and are willing to sacrifice
their social life for their family [72], and they request little
assistance from others, even if social support is available
[76]. The results of the present study did not find
any differences between men and women in the burden
of caregiving. Although other studies have not detected
any significant relationship between gender and caregiver
burden even across different types of burden [77, 78],
some previous studies have reported that female caregivers
experience more caregiver burden than their male
counterparts [74, 79]. This discrepancy may be related to
Iranian culture, where women believe that caregiving is
their duty and is expected of them from family members
and society.
The results showed that caregivers used more positive
reappraisal and social support. Likewise, Alnazly [34]
showed that caregivers of dialysis patients used more
self-control and positive reappraisal. Ayuarno et al. [29]
also found that caregivers of patients with Alzheimer’s
disease were more likely to use emotion-focused strategies
[80]. Similarly, García-Alberca et al. [81] reported
that the use of emotion-focused or problem-solving coping
strategies is significantly associated with the level of
psychological distress in Alzheimer disease caregivers.
Papastavrou et al. [82] also found that the type of coping
strategy used among caregivers of cancer patients is
related to the levels of care burden. Furthermore, coping
strategies are typically related to the task/problem that
the caregiver is facing [83].
The results of this study showed that male caregivers
were more likely to use the strategies of positive reappraisal
and accepting responsibility compared to female
caregivers. Consistent with the results of this study, Hassan
et al. [35] reported that male caregivers of patients
with schizophrenia were more likely to use reappraisal
coping strategies than their female counterparts. However,
Alnazly [34] found that male caregivers of patients
undergoing hemodialysis used distancing more than
women caregivers. In addition, Suriyamoorthi et al. [36]
showed that male caregivers of patients with bipolar disorder
used self-distraction and substance use as coping
strategies while females used religion and denial. These
different results may be related to the type of care needed
based on the differences in patients’ illnesses.
Based on the results of the present study, caregivers
with higher care burden used more emotion-focused
strategies such as escape-avoidance and distancing. The
results of many previous studies are in line with this
result. Kumar et al. [68] reported that caregivers of stroke
patients under greater burden used emotion-focused
coping strategies. Abbasi et al. [83] also showed that
there was a direct and significant relationship between
the use of emotion-focused coping skills and increasing
care burden of the caregivers of cancer patients. As caregivers
with high burden care did not adopt appropriate
coping strategies and tended to employ emotion-focused
coping [82, 84]. In other words, increasing the burden of
care beyond the caregiver’s ability can result in reliance
on less effective emotion-based strategies rather than
more effective problem-focused coping strategies and
consulting with others [85].
Limitations
The present study includes a few limitations. This study
only focused on caregivers of older patients with a history
of stroke. As the literature shows a variety of other
coping strategies are used depending on the type of illness
present, the findings cannot be extended to caregivers
of all older patients. Second, since this study was
conducted on Iranian caregivers, it may be difficult to
extend the findings to other countries or cultures. Third,
convenience sampling was used, which reduces generalizations
to all caregivers of older patients with a history
of stroke. Fourth, the limited sample size of the male 
caregivers (N = 33) may not have been sufficient to find
other statistical differences across the subscales. Finally,
the nature of the study and the type of analyses used limit
the findings to associations and not causal influence.
Conclusion
Caregivers adopted varied types of coping strategies to
overcome burden and the adoption of coping strategies
was associated with the severity of burden in caregivers
of stroke patients. The informal caregivers with higher
burden of care used emotion-focused strategies which
often do not help in reducing caregiver stress. As such,
training programs that teach caregivers efficient coping
strategies are needed in order to increase their use of
effective and healthy coping strategies. Furthermore, psychosocial
support should be provided by governmental
and nongovernmental organizations to reduce the care
burden of caregivers of older stroke patients.