Background
Smartphones possess the means to enrich learning activities
from medical education in undergraduate and postgraduate
training [1]. For example, smartphones are
used in the pursuit of finding solutions to patient care,
improving lifelong medical education, and professional
partners through the use of social media [2]. With the
advent of smartphones, its uses in higher education cannot
be ignored and need to be examined to explore the
consequences of its application. Smartphones can be defined
as a hand-held device built as a mobile computing
platform with advanced computing ability and connectivity.
It serves to combine the functions of portable
media players, low-end compact digital cameras, pocket
video cameras, and GPS navigation units [3]. Furthermore,
smartphones are being used for more than just a
phone but rather a device that provides multiple functions
including surfing the internet, email, navigation,
social networking, and games [4].
Smartphones are gaining increasing importance in
health care and researchers and developers are enticed
with their applications related to health [5]. These devices
have multiple features that can be positively
employed which include speedy access to information,
enhanced organization, and instantaneous communication
[6] and can with certainty be used to enhance education
[7]. However, smartphone addiction is a vital
issue in the global population with problems comprising
physical difficulties like muscular pain and eye illnesses,
and psychological difficulties such as auditory and tactile
delusion [8].
The use of smartphones reached figures over 50% in
the majority of developed countries [9]. Malaysian Communications
and Multimedia Commission (MCMC) has
reported that in Malaysia, 24.5 million users have access
to the internet in 2016 [10]. Smartphone stays as the
most popular gadget for users to enter the internet
(89.4%) creating a mobile-oriented country [10]. Over
the past several years, there has been an increasing
amount of studies that explored smartphone addiction
[11–14]. The bulk of these studies focused on smartphone
addiction and its potential influences on individuals
[15]. On top of that, among Malaysian medical
schools, two studies showed the prevalence of at-risk
cases of developing smartphone addiction: 46.9% in Universiti
Putra Malaysia (UPM) [16] and 52.2% in Universiti
Teknologi MARA (UiTM) [17]. Several studies have
reported a high prevalence of smartphone addiction: the
prevalence of smartphone addiction in a Malaysian medical
school was 46.9% [16], Saudi Arabian university students
was 48% [18], Saudi Arabian dental students was
71.9% [19] and Indian medical students was 85.4% [20].
Conversely, some studies have reported a low prevalence
of smartphone addiction: the prevalence of smartphone
addiction in Chinese medical college students was 29.8%
[4], Saudi Arabian students was 33.2% [21] and Saudi
Arabian medical students was 36.5% [22]. These results
suggested more than a quarter of students in higher education
experienced smartphone addiction that requires
further exploration of possible factors contributing to it
as well as its consequences on students’ wellbeing.
Previous studies have shown links between smartphone
addiction and depression [23–25], smartphone addiction
and anxiety [26–29], smartphone addiction and stress [11,
30], smartphone addiction and neuroticism [27, 31]. However,
these studies are in the general population and university
students. Our study is looking at the specific
population of medical students in a public medical school.
Also, to the best of our knowledge, there are no studies in
medical students that links smartphone addiction, psychological
distress, and neurotic traits. Medical students use
smartphones to facilitate retrieving information resources
[32–34]. There is almost universal ownership of smartphones
among medical students [35]. The applications on
smartphones in medical education have reported to increase
student involvement, improve the feedback process,
and enhance communication between student and teacher
[36–39]. Instant messaging smartphone applications such
as WhatsApp can be used as a method to facilitate communication
and education among groups of medical students
[40]. It is important to know the effect of the
increased use of smartphones in relation to psychological
distress among medical students.
The study of smartphone addiction among medical
students become vital as it enlightens us on smartphone
usage. In Malaysia, there have been numerous studies on
smartphone addiction [41, 42]. However, there are not
many studies done on smartphone addiction and its effects
on medical undergraduates. Individuals measured
with the personality trait that is high in neuroticism may
be predisposed to addiction and behavioural problems
[43]. Thus, we also decided to include the personality
trait neuroticism as it is linked to addiction [44, 45], and
we are interested in studying the relationship between
neuroticism and smartphone addiction. Neuroticism is
present among medical students [46]. Medical students
with neurotic tendencies behave negatively to academic
stress, and this becomes a contributing factor to low academic
performance [46]. Students with neuroticism are
more vulnerable to smartphone addiction which can lead
to psychological distress. The current research may play
a role in developing intervention measures such as behavioral
therapies and counseling. It also may serve to
help medical students improve their awareness of their
emotionality and its effect on smartphone use. Therefore,
the primary focus of this study is to investigate the
relationship of smartphone addiction with psychological
distress and neuroticism among medical students.
Research hypothesis
1. The prevalence of smartphone addiction among
USM medical students is more than 40%.
2. There is a significant correlation between
smartphone addiction and depression among USM
medical students.
3. There is a significant correlation between
smartphone addiction and anxiety among USM
medical students.
4. There is a significant correlation between
smartphone addiction and stress among USM
medical students.
5. There is a significant correlation between
smartphone addiction and neuroticism among USM
medical students.
6. Depression, anxiety, stress, and neuroticism
significantly predict the smartphone addiction level.
Methods
Study sample
A cross-sectional study was carried out on year 1 to year
5 medical students in a public medical school in
Malaysia. Before handing out the questionnaires, all students
were informed about the study and their participation
was voluntary. An informed consent to participate
and publication was obtained from all participants. Bias
was not explored in this study.
Sampling method and calculation
The sample size was determined by the single proportion
size formula. The initial sample size calculation was
based on a pilot study that involved students and staff
[17] and the largest sample size needed was 384. After
taking into account, 30% drop-out rate, the total number
of sample size was 384/ (1–0.3) = 548. All medical students
were included, those who did not sign the consent
form were excluded from the study.
Data collection tools
There were three psychometric instruments used in this
study; 1) Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS-21); 2)
modified USM Personality Inventory (USMaP-i); and 3)
Smartphone Addiction Scale – Short Version (SAS-SV).
DASS-21
The DASS instrument was first introduced by Lovibond
and Lovibond (1995) and delivered a self-reporting
measure, which was created to evaluate the features associated
to anxiety, stress, and depression. For each
DASS-21 subscale, the score must be multiplied by two
to simulate the DASS-42 version: the range of score
from 0 to 42. A high score in each subscale is equal to a
high degree of symptoms [47]. In a validation study
done, the internal consistency of each subscale was high
ranging from 0.70 for the stress sub-scale to 0.88 for the
overall scale. The scores on each of the three subscales
and the combinations of two or three of them were able
to identify mental disorders of depression and anxiety in
women with a sensitivity of 79.1% and a specificity of
77% at the optimal cut off of > 33 [23].
Modified USMaP-i
The USM Personality Inventory was created to measure
the Big-Five Personality traits and is identified to be a
reliable and valid instrument to evaluate the personality
traits of prospective medical students [48]. This inventory
was created explicitly to identify personal traits of
Malaysian candidates who seek to apply to the medical
course in USM [48]. The 15-item version of USMaP-i
showed an acceptable level of internal consistency with
each personality domain ranged from 0.64 and 0.84 as
reported on the International Personality Item Pool
Website [49]. We selected the 3 items that represent
neuroticism to assess the neuroticism personality trait.
Neuroticism is usually associated with features like depression,
distress, anxiety, moodiness, poor coping ability,
and sadness [50]. The total Cronbach alpha for the
neuroticism subscale for USMaP-I is 0.722 [26, 49].
SAS-SV
The smartphone addiction scale was first developed and
validated by Kwon, Lee et al. (2013) as a way to evaluate
smartphone addiction in teenagers. This scale has shown
to be validated with high psychometric sound properties
in various countries [3, 12, 16, 27, 51]. The Smartphone
Addiction Scale - Short Version (SAS-SV) is a validated
scale that consists of ten items in the questionnaire that
are used to measure the levels of smartphone addiction
[3]. The total score is from 10 to 60. The coefficient for
Cronbach alpha correlation obtained is 0.91 for Smartphone
Addiction Short Version [3]. The strength of
SAS-SV is that it can be used to discern a potentially
high-risk group for smartphone addiction, both in the
educational field and community [3]. The cut-off point
for significant smartphone addiction for male is 31 and
female is 33 based on the recommendation by Kwon
et al. (2013).
Data collection
Data collection was performed via a self-guided questionnaire.
Individuals were screened for one inclusion
criteria and one exclusion criteria. Individuals who were
medical students were eligible to participate (inclusion
criteria). Individuals who were not willing to participate
were not included in the study (exclusion criteria). Participants
who submitted incomplete responses were excluded
from this study.
Ethical consideration
Ethical clearance was obtained from the Human Research
Ethics Committee of USM (JEPeM) with study protocol
code (USM/JEPeM/18070352). Signed consents were taken
from medical students. Instructions and information about
this study were given to them. Each medical student was
given an ID for tracing and profiling purposes. They were
informed that the results of this study will not affect their
academic results in any way. The questionnaires were distributed
to all medical students after lecture sessions.
Statistical analysis
The data was analyzed using Statistical Package for Social
Sciences (SPSS) version 24. Spearman correlation
and simple linear regression tests were performed to
examine the relationships of smartphone addiction with
psychological distress and neuroticism. To accurately
represent the relationship of smartphone addiction and
neuroticism, the items in the modified USMaP-i were
recoded due to negative items present in the neuroticism
subscale: (Question 6 + Question 10 + Question 14). In
the regression analysis, depression, anxiety, stress and
neuroticism are independent variables and smartphone
addiction is the dependent variable. A single regression
analysis is used to account for the effects of multicollinearity
because the correlation coefficient values of
stress, depression, anxiety and neurotic tendencies are
large. This research was not designed to investigate the
gender differences and its correlations with depression,
anxiety, stress and neuroticism. Further gender issues
are not within the scope of this study.
Results
Response rate
The survey’s response rate was 83.9% (574 out of 674).
There was a higher proportion of female medical students
(68.5%) than male medical students (31.5%). Malay
students were the majority (65.3%) followed by Chinese
(16%), Indian (15.5%) and other races (3.1%). The majority
of students were between 19 and 23 years old. The
proportion of students in each year of study was more
or less similar or equal in numbers. Medical students
that did not participate in the survey for reasons of lack
of interest, time constraints, and fatigue.
In this study, the prevalence of smartphone addiction
found was 40.6%. There is a higher prevalence of male
students addicted to smartphone (49.2%) compared to
the female students (36.6%). The results of this analysis
can be seen in Table 1.
Correlation of smartphone addiction, psychological
distress and neuroticism
The correlation analysis for smartphone addiction with
psychological health and neuroticism is shown in
Table 2. The result showed a fair positive correlation between
smartphone addiction and psychological health
among USM medical students (rdepression = 0.277, pvalue
< 0.001; ranxiety = 0.312, p-value < 0.001; rstress =
0.329, p-value < 0.001). However, there was a poor positive
correlation between smartphone addiction and
neuroticism (r = 0.173, p-value < 0.001).
Assumption was not met as normality of distribution
was violated.
Linear regression of smartphone addiction, psychological
distress and neuroticism
The regression analysis for smartphone addiction with
psychological health and neuroticism is shown in
Table 3. The simple linear regression study showed a
significant increase in depression, anxiety, stress and
neuroticism levels upon one unit increase in smartphone
addiction (bdepression = 0.101, p-value < 0.001; banxiety
= 0.120, p-value < 0.001; bstress = 0.132, p-value <
0.001; bneuroticism = 0.404, p-value < 0.05). These results
indicated significant relationships between smartphone
addiction, psychological health and neuroticism.
Smartphone addiction is a significant relationship factor
of depression, anxiety and stress, while neuroticism is a
significant relationship factor of smartphone addiction.
Discussion
Prevalence of smartphone addiction
The prevalence of smartphone addiction among USM
medical students was 40.6%; hypothesis 1 assumes the
prevalence of smartphone addiction among USM medical
students is more than 40%. This study reported that
there is a higher prevalence of smartphone addiction
among male medical students compared to female medical
students, which is similar to a few other studies [4,
52, 53]. Other studies found a higher prevalence of
smartphone addiction in females compared to males [3,
12, 22, 54, 55]. Interestingly, previous studies [24, 25]
did not report that gender is associated with smartphone
addiction. The high prevalence of smartphone addiction
(40.6%) in this study may be explained by smartphones
becoming the main communication device among
Malaysians and elsewhere. The percentage of smartphone
consumers gradually rose from 68.7% in 2016 to
75.9% in 2017 [10]. Another observation is that medical
students are using smartphones for social media messaging
services such as WhatsApp and WeChat for communication
purposes as well as for their studies, hence
smartphones are becoming a vital tool in personal and
professional life [56]. A study reported that WhatsApp
assisted in easy learning and provided a way for clear
communication of knowledge in shorter periods [57].
The higher prevalence of smartphone addiction in male
medical students may be due to male medical students
using their smartphone more for their entertainment
such as online games while females use their smartphones
for social interactions [58–60].
Relationship between smartphone addiction and
depression
This study found a significant and fair positive correlation
(r = 0.277) between smartphone addiction and depression,
as in research hypothesis 2. Likewise, previous
studies among adults reported a strong positive correlation
between smartphone addiction and depression
[28]. Other findings further support the fact that high
levels of smartphone addiction were correlated with depression
[29]. In the Malaysian context, a study among
university students showed students who had high
scores of smartphone addiction reported high scores of
depression [61] that suggests a relationship between
smartphone addiction and depression. Another study
found that the group with high smartphone use showed
greater levels of depression compared to the low
smartphone use group among university students in
Turkey [12]. However, other studies have found no relationship
between smartphone addiction and depression
[62]. These facts consistently suggested a positive correlation
between smartphone addiction and depression.
The regression analysis showed the increase of smartphone
addiction scores leads to the increase of depression
scores, indicating it is a relationship factor. These
results are similar to previous findings, in which smartphone
addiction was reported to be found as a predictor
of depression for undergraduates in a local Malaysian
university [61]. Another study also supports this finding,
in which it reported the severity of smartphone use predicted
depression [12]. Conversely, previous studies reported
vice-versa whereby depression predicted
smartphone addiction among university students [25, 30,
63]. These facts suggested that smartphone uses among
university students should be considered as high-risk behaviour
that negatively affects their psychological health.
There are several possible explanations for our results.
Individuals with mood disorders are more prone to become
a smartphone addict [64]. Lemola et.al (2015) reported
that using electronic media at night is associated
with sleep disturbances and depressive symptoms. One
study stated that individuals with lower levels of selfperceived
health conditions and emotions tended to display
an excessive use of smartphones [65]. This suggested
that individuals were in a constant cycle of
attempting to compensate for their perceived health status,
without being fully aware that smartphone addiction
has undesirable implications to their physical, emotional,
and social well-being.
The relationship between smartphone addiction and
depression is evident in this study and shows that medical
students that have smartphone addiction are at risk
of having depression. Medical students displaying high
levels of smartphone addiction and depression should be
observed and given help if necessary. This can be done
by promoting the responsible usage of smartphone use
among medical students in activities. Sensible usage of
smartphones is suggested, especially on younger adults
who could be at greater risk of depression [28].
Relationship between smartphone addiction and anxiety
The results of our study indicate that there was a fair
positive correlation between (r = 0.312) smartphone addiction
and anxiety, as in research hypothesis 3. Demirci
et, al. (2015) has found that smartphone use severity was
positively correlated with anxiety and that corresponds
with the findings in our study. Several other studies describe
smartphone addictions are reported to increase
with anxiety levels [54, 55, 66, 67].
Our regression analysis revealed that increased smartphone
addiction scores are a significant relationship
factor in increased anxiety scores. Demirci et, al. (2015)
reported that smartphone use severity predicted anxiety
and it is consistent with our findings. A study reported
that smartphone addiction was reported to be found as a
predictor of anxiety in Malaysian undergraduate students
[61]. In contrast, previous studies reported that
anxiety significantly predicted smartphone addiction [25,
31, 63].
A possible explanation for our results is medical students
may habitually check their smartphones in the
likelihood of reducing their anxiety by receiving assurance
through messages from their friends. The pattern
of an individual checking his or her phone and receiving
notifications also function in getting social reassurance
behaviour from friends [68]. This behaviour of seeking
reassurance can generally include symptoms of loneliness,
depression, and anxiety that is the driving factor
for reassurance seeking [68].
Relationship between smartphone addiction and stress
The results of this study indicate that there was a fair
positive correlation between (r = 0.329) smartphone addiction
and stress, as in research hypothesis 4. In another
important finding, Samaha et, al. (2016) show the
results between the risk of smartphone and perceived
stress, reporting a slight positive correlation with an elevated
risk of smartphone addiction associated with elevated
levels of perceived stress which supports our
study. Previous studies reported that stress leads to
smartphone use [56, 69], while another study proposes
that smartphone use may cause stress [70]. In our regression
analysis, increased smartphone addiction scores
are a significant relationship factor in increased stress
scores. Conversely, in a sample of Taiwanese university
students reported a positive predictive effect of family
and emotional stresses on smartphone addiction [11].
There are several explanations for the study results.
Medical students are under stressful medical training
[71], therefore they are prone to being under stress
which in turn lowers self-control which may increase
their chances of smartphone addiction. Smartphone addiction
is influenced by self-control [72]. Self-control is
defined as the capacity to alter one’s responses, such as
overriding some impulses to bring behavior in line with
goals and standards [73]. According to Cho et, al.
(2017), an increase in stress degree results in a lowered
self-control ability, and reduction in self-control further
increases the chances of smartphone addiction.
Relationship between smartphone addiction and
neuroticism
In this study, the results indicate that there is a poor
positive correlation between (r = 0.173) smartphone addiction
and neuroticism, as in research hypothesis 5.
Neuroticism was reported to be significantly related to
excessive use of smartphones [55] and corresponded
with the findings of our study. These results are similar
to other study findings reported that individuals who
possessed high levels of neuroticism also report a high
level of smartphone addiction [74]. In another study,
neuroticism predicts problematic smartphone use [75].
However, the study [76] did not report a significant relationship
between neuroticism and problematic phone
use. In our regression analysis, increased neuroticism
scores are a significant relationship factor in increased
smartphone addiction scores. It was found neurotic personality
increased the degree of smartphone addiction
[55]. Problematic mobile use is positively associated with
neuroticism [77]. There are several explanations for this
result, medical students may be more vulnerable to
smartphone addiction. The neuroticism trait has been
linked to smartphone addiction [78, 79]. A study stated
that neuroticism is associated with a chain-mediating effect
with smartphone addiction and depression, all vital
variables that deteriorate the quality of life [80]. Apart
from that, another study showed that there is a positive
relationship between neuroticism and smartphone use
while driving [81]. Another possible explanation is that
medical students with neuroticism may depend on their
smartphones to get reassurance from their friends. Individuals
with high neuroticism tend to use their smartphones
to get emotional and social reassurance from
their relationships [82].
Implications and future research
Depression, anxiety, stress and neuroticism significantly
predict smartphone addiction level, as in research hypothesis
6. The results show that there is a high prevalence
of smartphone addiction among medical students.
This means that a large proportion of students are affected
by smartphone over usage and suggests a widespread
occurrence that needs to be addressed by all
relevant parties. It raises a deep concern because academic
performances may be affected by a large number
of medical students with smartphone addiction. As a
consequence of smartphone addiction, individuals with
smartphone addiction might meet with difficulties such
as interpersonal adjustments, managing time, and academic
performance [83]. This might affect the performance
of the medical school as a whole in terms of
academic results. The high prevalence of smartphone
addiction in this study shows that they are at risk to
have problems. Medical students displaying high levels
of smartphone addiction should be monitored and given
further help. Prevention is better than cure, thus smartphone
addiction among medical students is recommended
for early detection so that appropriate
interventions can be planned accordingly. We also have
to take into account the high prevalence of male medical
students. Several approaches can be suggested to medical
students who require further help for smartphone
addiction; namely cognitive-behavioral approach, motivational
interviewing, and behavioural cognitive treatment
[84]. The implications for the intervention from the results
of the study are to provide a baseline for research
incorporating approaches tailored for medical students
with smartphone addiction. This should address the
most vulnerable group of students with the neuroticism
personality trait.
Limitations and future research
Considering limited undergraduate smartphone addiction
studies in the local setting, the results reported in
this study provide insights into the professional health
care team. It should be noted that smartphone usage is
culturally bound experience and will contrast across
countries with varying degrees of technology availability
and advances in that region. This study does not report
cause and effect relationships. Confounding variables
were not studied. For example, in the curriculum at the
medical school, each student has to go through elearning
(teaching and learning activities) and assessment
that requires smartphone use. This suggests that
in reality the medical students may be tasked with activities
that require them to use their smartphones for education
purposes, i.e. hours spent on smartphones for
assignments and lectures. Further research can build
upon our findings and investigate screening and interventions
for smartphone addiction among medical
students.
Conclusions
This study found the prevalence of smartphone addiction
among medical students was high, particularly in
male medical students. The smartphone addiction might
lead to psychological problems and the most vulnerable
group was students with the neuroticism personality
trait. Thus, there is a need to create and implement programs
to promote healthy smartphone usage to
minimize the impact of smartphone addiction on psychological
health. By doing so, one may implement effective
intervention and prevention strategies to groups
of students with smartphone addiction. We believe that
with a proper guidance; students may be able to use
their smartphones more responsibly.