Introduction
Endometriosis is a benign gynecological condition in
which ectopic, endometrium-like cells are located outside
of the uterine cavity [1]. The condition affects up
to 10% of women of fertile age, with up to 70% being
symptomatic [1, 2]. The main clinical symptom of
endometriosis is severe pain during menstruation (dysmenorrhea)
[1]. Pain during intercourse (dyspareunia)
is also common, as well as the development of chronic
pelvic pain (CPP) [1, 2]. Other conditions associated
with endometriosis include irritable bowel syndrome,
painful bladder syndrome, abdominal pain, migraine,
loss of quality of life and fatigue [2–4]. It is hypothesized
that a specific immunological and inflammatory
pathway is common to all of these conditions and endometriosis
[3, 5]. It takes a mean of 8 years to diagnose
the endometriosis, during which musculoskeletal disorders
secondary to endometriosis as well as psychological
disorders may develop [6, 7].
There is no definite cure for endometriosis, and so
the main focus of management is to control the associated
pain, which is achieved by hormonal suppression
of the disease or surgical excision [8]. Unfortunately,
hormonal treatment can have intolerable side effects or
become ineffective over time, while the effect of surgery
is often short-lived [8]. Advances in the understanding
of endometriosis have expanded the focus on less invasive
and nonpharmacological treatments [8, 9]. International
clinical guidelines have suggested focusing on the
role of physical activity (PA) and exercise as part of the
therapeutic approach for women suffering from endometriosis-
associated symptoms [10]. The inflammation
that defines endometriosis causes sensitization of pelvic
organs and, ultimately leading to CPP [11]. This mechanism
makes it plausible for the anti-inflammatory effect
of PA and exercise to impede the development of the disease
and ameliorate the associated pain [12].
PA and exercise were introduced for treating endometriosis-
associated symptoms more than 3 decades ago
[13]. However, these interventions have been studied
mostly in terms of their ability to reduce the risk of developing
endometriosis [12, 14, 15], and so little is known
about the effect of PA and exercise on symptom improvement
in women with endometriosis [12]. Some effect
of PA and exercise has been found in women with CPP
without endometriosis [16], but it is unclear whether this
effect is transferable to women with endometriosis-associated
pain [10].
Two previous systematic reviews have addressed the
effect of PA and exercise on endometriosis-associated
symptoms [17, 18]. However, these studies mainly
focused on other complementary and alternative treatment
options for endometriosis, such as mind–body
interventions and acupuncture. The effect of PA and
exercise specifically remained unclear since their
searches were limited to a few databases, the search
terms were not specified [18], or “PA” and “exercise” were
not included as search terms [19]. This raises the possibility
that relevant studies on this subject were overlooked.
The present systematic review attempted to identify
interventional studies of high quality to assess the effect
of PA and exercise specifically in treating women with
endometriosis-associated symptoms.
Review question
What is the effect of PA and exercise on endometriosisassociated
symptoms?
Methods
This systematic review was registered in the International
Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews
(CRD42021233138), and was performed in accordance
with the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines [20] (Additional
file 1).
Eligibility criteria and search strategy
Studies of interventions involving any type of PA and
exercise were eligible for inclusion. PA was defined as
“any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles
that requires energy expenditure” [21] and exercise was
defined as “PA that is planned, structured, and repetitive
for the purpose of conditioning the body” [21], consisting
of cardiovascular conditioning, strength and resistance
training, and flexibility.
The study population consisted of women with any
degree of endometriosis as diagnosed with an imaging or
surgical modality, who presented with pain in the pelvic
region (including dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, or CPP).
The primary outcome measure was the pain intensity, but
all outcomes were accepted.
Exclusion criteria were data presented in short communications,
reviews, letters to the editor, and congress
abstracts, and the application of passive interventions
such as manual therapy to patients. The literature search
was completed with support from a trained medical
librarian. The search included the Cochrane Central Register
of Controlled Trials, Embase, PubMed, MEDLINE,
PsycInfo, CINAHL, AMED, Scopus, Web of Science,
PEDro, and SveMed + , without time limitation up to
December 2020. Publications could be in English, Swedish,
Norwegian, Danish, or German. Search terms were
identified through a pilot search for relevant literature.
The electronic search strategy for this systematic review
is presented in Additional file 2. In addition, the reference
lists of included articles and identified reviews on the
topic were scanned, and manually searched for further
studies.
Study selection and quality assessment
In the first step, all obtained references were independently
screened on the basis of the title and Abstract by
M.K.T. and T.T. using the Rayyan web application [22]
that allows blinded assessments. In the second step, all
Abstracts with conflicting decisions were reviewed by
both authors until consensus was reached. In the third
step, the same authors independently assessed the methodological
quality of the manuscripts that met the inclusion
criteria, using quality assessment questionnaires
appropriate for the design of each study as provided by
the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute [23]. We
applied the method of “quality assessment of controlled
intervention studies” for randomized controlled trials
(RCT), and the “quality assessment of before-after (prepost)
studies with no control group” for intervention
studies with no control group while adding relevant questions
to determine exposure, risk, and confounding variables.
The assessment tools include several criteria rated
“yes,” “no,” and “other: CD, cannot determine; NA, not
applicable; NR, not reported.” The quality of the included
studies was rated as good, fair, or poor. We also used the
Consensus on Exercise Reporting Template (CERT) [24],
which is a 19-item checklist that yields a detailed description
of the minimum criteria that should be reported in
an exercise intervention. The template provides individual
scores for each included article (ranging from 0 to
19), in addition to a summary score for each item.
Data extraction
The full text of eligible articles was read by two reviewers
(M.K.T. and T.T.), who independently extracted the following
data: author(s), year of publication, study period,
country of origin, study design, sample size, inclusion
and exclusion criteria, intervention type, description of
intervention, follow-up period, primary and secondary
outcomes, and dropout rate.
Data reporting and summary measures
A meta-analysis was planned, but it could not be performed
due to the substantial heterogeneity found in
study designs and outcomes. Results from the studies are
reported as between- and within-group differences using
mean ± standard-deviation values or numbers with percentages,
according to availability. Probability values were
rounded to two decimal places, with the exception of
p < 0.001. Confidence intervals were provided if available.
Results
Study selection
This study identified 1879 citations (Fig. 1). After
removing duplicates, the remaining 1045 citations were
screened for eligibility based on the title and Abstract.
Seventeen publications were assessed for further inclusion
reading the full-text versions of the articles, and
four publications were included for quality assessment
[25–28]. We identified four studies that described an
intervention incorporating PA and/or exercise: two were
RCTs [27, 28] and two were pre-post studies with no control
group [25, 26] (Tables 1, 2).
Quality assessment, risk of bias, and exercise intervention
assessment
One study was rated as being of fair quality [27], while
three were rated as poor quality [25, 26, 28]. The detailed
assessment including signaling questions are presented
in Tables 1 and 2. The RCT of Carpenter et al. [27] was
judged as being of fair quality (Table 1). The main limitation
of that RCT for the purpose of this review was
that the participants were treated with danazol, which
is a potent drug for treating endometriosis. Though having
a control group, the study was underpowered for
determining whether exercise had an additional effect to
danazol. However, since the study was designed to investigate
if exercise could alleviate the side effects of danazol,
it was not flawed per se. Moreover, the sample was
too small to allow comparisons of individual side effects,
important secondary outcomes (pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea,
and dyspareunia) were not reported, and the methods
of randomization and outcome assessment were not
reported.
The RCT of Goncalves et al. [28] was judged as being
of poor quality due to significant differences in the baseline
characteristics between the intervention and control
groups (Table 1). The intervention group had a higher
level of education, a high percentage of homemakers,
and a lower rate of employment, which is a confounder
for quality-of-life assessments. Also, one of the inclusion
criteria was the presence of therapy-resistant CPP, which
is a possible confounder for endometriosis-associated
symptoms. Furthermore, the control group also received
physiotherapy. Finally, the dropout rate in the intervention
group was very high, at 30% (vs 0% in the control
group).
The study of Friggi Sebe Petrelluzzi et al. [25] was
judged as being of fair quality (Table 2). As in Goncalves
et al. [28] only women with endometriosis and therapyresistant
CPP were included, representing a confounder.
Furthermore, a sample-size calculation was not reported,
and there was no control group. The intervention consisted
not only of PA and exercise, but also a range of
modalities including behavioral cognitive therapy, which
confounds the contribution of PA and exercise to symptom
improvement.
The study of Awad et al. [26] was judged as being of
poor quality (Table 2). It was ultimately excluded from
the synthesis since its design was fatally flawed by initiating
medroxyprogesterone acetate, an effective hormonal
treatment for endometriosis, at the same time as the
intervention but without including a control group. Furthermore,
no sample-size calculation was provided, and
the inclusion and exclusion criteria appeared to be random
from a clinical perspective.
The individual scores for the articles based on the
CERT checklist (Additional file 3) ranged from 7 to 14.
None of the articles provided a description of exercise
progression [25–28], and only one included a description
of individually tailored exercises [27]. Exercise adherence
was measured adequately in one study [27], as were motivational
strategies [25]. The level of exercise was only
described for two studies [27, 28].
Study populations
The total study sample consisted of 109 participants
[25, 27, 28] (Table 3). Two studies included women
with surgically confirmed endometriosis [25, 27], while
it was not specified how endometriosis was diagnosed
by Goncalves et al. [28]. The stage of endometriosis
was not reported for any of the studies. The age of the
included women was provided for two studies [25, 28].
All of the women in two studies [25, 28] also had CPP.
Details of prior hormonal or surgical treatments were
not provided for any of the studies.
Interventions
The performed interventions are listed in Table 1. No
study performed a follow-up after the intervention had
finished. Confounding interventions to PA and exercise
were identified in all studies, as explained above. Limitations
in the reporting of exercise interventions (according
to the CERT) are also explained above.
Primary and secondary outcome measures
The primary and secondary outcomes for all studies are
reported in Table 3. Only one study had “pain” as the primary
outcome [25]. The outcome reports were incomplete
for all studies.
Effect of intervention on pain
Goncalves et al. [28] reported that the degree of daily
pain was significantly lower in the intervention group
than the control group, although the difference in the
mean scores on a visual analogue scale (VAS) was not
provided (p < 0.001). Furthermore, the scores in painrelated
domains on Endometriosis Health Profile-30
(EHP-30) were significantly lower in the yoga group than
the control group at postintervention (32.39 ± 21.95 versus
55.05 ± 21.49, p < 0.001). Notably, the control group
also received physiotherapy following the intervention at
their institution.
Friggi Sebe Petrelluzzi et al. [25] did not find a significant
improvement in pain intensity (change in VAS score
from pre- to posttreatment: 4.00 ± 0.56 to 3.30 ± 0.65,
p > 0.05). Carpenter et al. [27] found that the pelvic pain
decreased in both the intervention and control groups,
with medical treatment using danazol providing no additional
effect relative to that obtained by PA and exercise.
However, the exact results and significance level were
not reported, leaving it uncertain about whether a type II
error was present due to the sample being too small.
Effects of intervention on mental health aspects
and well‑being
The study of Friggi Sebe Petrelluzzi et al. [25] measured
stress levels using the Perceived Stress Questionnaire
(PSQ), salivary cortisol levels, and the 36-item Short-
Form Health Survey (SF-36). The PSQ was developed
as an outcome measure in psychosomatic research and
was validated for use in Brazil [29]. Perceived stress was
significantly lower at pretreatment (0.62 ± 0.02) than
posttreatment (0.56 ± 0.02, p < 0.05). Significant improvements
in the vitality and physical functioning domains
of the SF-36 were also found (p < 0.05), but these effects
were no longer significant after performing a multivariate
analysis that included each variable in the SF-36. There
was an overall decrease in salivary cortisol levels from
pretreatment to posttreatment (p = 0.04), but this was not
correlated with perceived stress as measured with PSQ.
Goncalves et al. [28] found significant improvements in
certain EHP-30 items (control and powerlessness, emotional
well-being, and self-image) in the intervention
group compared with the control group (p < 0.001).
Effect of intervention on pelvic floor dysfunction
The study of Carpenter et al. [27] assessed how exercise
during danazol treatment could improve pelvic
floor symptoms such as dyspareunia and dysmenorrhea.
Those authors reported that the symptoms improved in
both groups, but the values and significance levels were
not provided. Goncalves et al. [28] found that the sexualintercourse
domain of EHP-30 was lower after 8 weeks of
Hatha yoga in both the intervention and control groups,
but the result did not reach between- or within-groups
significance.
Discussion
This systematic review has summarized the available evidence
for the effect of PA and exercise on endometriosis-
associated symptoms. We identified 4 interventional
studies involving 129 women. However, 1 of these studies
was excluded after the quality assessment revealed
fatal flaws in its design, leaving 109 women being finally
included. Each included study found some improvement
in pain intensity, stress levels, well-being, or self-image.
However, due to confounding factors, the effect of PA
and exercise alone could not be determined. Furthermore,
the heterogeneity of the outcome measures and
incomplete outcome reporting made it impossible to
conduct a quantitative meta-analysis.
The relationship of PA and exercise with endometriosis
has been widely studied in the past, and several reviews
have been published on this topic [12, 14, 15, 18, 19].
However, their results have been inconclusive, mainly
due to inclusion of observational studies of how PA and
exercise may lower the risk of developing endometriosis
[12, 14, 15]. Another possible reason for the inconclusive
findings is the diversity in the type of interventions
included in other systematic reviews [18, 19], where the
focus has spanned from acupuncture and yoga to electrotherapy
and exercise.
A multimodal approach that includes physiotherapy
has been suggested to alleviate endometriosis symptoms
[10, 30, 31]. Physiotherapy contains both active and passive
modalities, but the optimal physiotherapy approach
for endometriosis-associated symptoms is not clear
[16]. The theory supporting PA and exercise as a beneficial
approach involves viewing the skeletal muscles as
an endocrine organ, with contraction of these muscles
releasing myokines [32]. These myokines may exert direct
effects on the muscle itself or distal organs such as the
liver, pancreas, or adipose tissue [32]. Furthermore, exercise
increases the production of leucocytes, cortisol, and
adrenaline, all of which have potent acute anti‐inflammatory
effects [33].
The present review specifically focused on PA and exercise,
but it was not possible to summarize the effect due
to significant limitations of the included studies. However,
some trends could be identified. One study showed
improvements in daily pain scores [28], but no effect-size
measures were provided, and so the strength of this association
was uncertain. Furthermore, the effect of Hatha
yoga was questionable due to the additional time spent
on relaxation and meditation [28]. A recent systematic
review and meta-analysis produced evidence that meditation
itself is effective in improving the quality of life
and pain in women with CPP [34], which was an inclusion
criterion in the present study. However, the two
other studies in our review did not find an effect from
PA and exercise on pain [25, 27]. No sample-size calculations
were performed for those two studies, and so type
II errors might have been present.
There seems to be a dose–response relationship
between regular, high-intensity exercise and the effect on
the inflammatory profile in general [33]. Since none of
the studies in this review included descriptions of exercise
progression [25, 27, 28] (Additional file 3), we can
only speculate if the effect of PA and exercise would have
been stronger if progressive overload had been achieved
[24]. Other reported effects were reduced stress levels by
Friggi Sebe Petrelluzzi et al. [25], and improvements in
well-being and body image by Goncalves et al. [28]. Both
of these studies included women with CPP and applied a
cognitive approach in addition to PA and exercise, which
are both possible confounders for the effect of PA and
exercise on endometriosis-associated symptoms [34].
Previous research has found that the pelvic floor muscle
tension in higher in women suffering from endometriosis
pain [35] than in controls without endometriosis.
Since a large proportion of women with endometriosis
suffer from dyspareunia and CPP [1, 2], it is surprising
that only one of the present studies investigated the
pelvic floor muscles [25]; however, pain scores specifically
for the pelvic floor or measurements of the pelvic
floor muscles were not reported. Lastly, none of the studies
measured patient satisfaction. The high dropout rate
found by Goncalves et al. [28] indicates that it is pertinent
to design exercise interventions that meet the needs
of patients and fit their lifestyle.
In a recent initiative, healthcare professionals and
women suffering from endometriosis were able to recommend
a minimum set of outcomes to be measured
and reported in all interventional clinical trials of
endometriosis [36]. Those so-called core outcomes aim
to focus research on meaningful endpoints for the users
of health services [37]. Patient satisfaction with the treatment
was one of those outcomes. There are several ongoing
RCTs related to PA and exercise [38–40] that are
measuring the following core items: pain, improvement
in symptoms and quality of life, patient acceptability,
and patient satisfaction with the treatment. These trials
might yield evidence-based advice on PA and exercise for
women with endometriosis-associated symptoms in the
future.
Strength and limitations
The strengths of this systematic review include its originality,
rigorous search strategy, and methodological
robustness. Its main limitation is the low grade of evidence
that could be obtained from the previous studies.
The small samples, confounding factors, heterogeneity
of interventions, and poor reporting of details about the
exercise intervention and outcome measures restricts
our ability to draw overall conclusions about the effect
of PA and exercise in treating endometriosis-associated
symptoms.
Conclusion
PA and exercise might exert a range of beneficial effects
on endometriosis-associated symptoms, but unfortunately
these effects cannot be robustly determined
based on the existing literature. Nevertheless, the potentially
beneficial role of PA and exercise should be communicated
to women with endometriosis-associated
symptoms. Future research should be based on RCTs of
high methodological quality, measuring and reporting
relevant core outcomes such as pain, improvements in
symptoms and quality of life, and acceptability and satisfaction
from the perspectives of patients. Furthermore,
these outcomes need to be measured using reliable and
validated tools. A focus on the type and dose of PA and
exercise as well as patient selection is warranted, and
using appropriate checklists such as the CERT is recommended.
Since endometriosis patients can show complex
symptomatology, the cooperation of multiple disciplines
such as physiotherapists and gynecologists could improve
the quality of clinical research in this field.