Background
Studies on firearm laws and firearm-related violence
have focused on the association between the rates of
firearm-related violence within the state and the aggregate
number [1] or categories of state-level firearm laws
[2–6]. A recent systematic review found that stronger
state-level firearm laws are associated with reductions in
firearm-related homicide rates; however, it also found inconclusive
and conflicting results for many of the different
categories of laws [7].
The extent to which states can regulate firearm-related
violence with state-level firearm laws depends on their
ability to regulate the firearms within their borders.
However, firearms move across state borders [8, 9], and
this movement may be due in part to the firearm laws
themselves. For example, the implementation of a law
limiting handgun purchases in Virginia resulted in a
lower proportion of crime-related firearms recovered in
the entire Northeast region that were traced to Virginia
[10]. States with more stringent firearm laws in general
have a higher proportion of crime-related firearms originating
from outside the state [8, 11], of which a large
proportion are from states with weaker firearm laws
[12]. For pairs of states, increasing firearm law stringency
in the source state was associated with reduced
movement of firearms between two states, while increasing
stringency in the destination state lead to increased
movement [9, 13].
This study aims to build upon the literature on interstate
firearm movement by describing the analysis of the
network of crime-related firearm movement between
states over an eight-year period. Prior studies have relied
on measuring the proportions of firearms originating
from source states, or the relative differences in statelevel
firearm laws between two states and the movement
of firearms between them. However, these have a limited
ability to examine the dynamic interplay of what is happening
among all states at the same time. The network
approach allows us to examine the relationships among
all states simultaneously and study the movement of
firearms both into and out of each state. We hypothesize
that states with fewer firearm laws serve as source states
of crime-related firearms recovered in other states, and
that states with more firearm laws serve as destination
states of crime-related firearms from other states.
Methods
Study design and data source
This is an analysis of state-level data from 2010 to 2017.
The study was determined to be exempt from Institutional
Review Board regulation at the University of California,
Los Angeles because it uses de-identified,
publicly available, state-level data.
Network of firearm movement
We constructed the network of firearm movement between
50 states using publicly available firearm trace
data (2010–2017) from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) at the time this study
was conducted. The ATF maintains a database of firearms
used in crimes which are successfully traced to
their original point of purchase [14]. The ATF conducts
firearm tracing at the request of law enforcement agencies
engaged in a criminal investigation in which a firearm
has been used or is suspected to have been used,
with the intent to link a suspect to a firearm and identify
trends and pattens in the movement of illegal firearms.
Using these data, we defined a network tie between two
states when there was movement of 100 or more firearms
in a given year from the state where the firearm is
purchased (“source state”) to the state where the firearm
is recovered (“destination state”). A state could serve as
both a source state and a destination state for another
state if it was both a source and destination for 100 or
more firearms in a given year. A network of firearm
movement was constructed for each year, for a total of 8
networks. For each state, we calculated the number of
states for which it served as source state (outdegree) and
the number of states for which it served as destination
state (indegree). Sensitivity analyses were conducted by
constructing the network of firearm movement using
cut-offs of 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 or more firearms.
Dependent variables
The primary dependent variables were the number of
states for which the index state was the source of 100 or
more crime-related firearms in a given year (outdegree)
and the number of states for which the index state was
the destination of 100 or more crime-related firearms in
a given year (indegree), which were calculated based on
the networks described above.
Independent variables
Following other studies [1, 11, 15], the independent variable
was the firearm law strength score, an unweighted
count of state-level firearm laws. This variable was obtained
from the State Firearm Laws Database, which
compiles data on state-level laws in all 50 states since
1991 and codes them into fourteen categories of laws
that regulate and deregulate firearms [16]. Laws regulating
firearms include those regulating dealers and buyers,
those regulating possession of firearms, those regulating
purchase or possession of assault weapons, and those
preventing individuals with a history of crime, domestic
violence, and mental health conditions from possessing
firearms. Laws deregulating firearms include laws providing
blanket immunity to firearm manufacturers and
Stand-Your-Ground laws that allow individuals to use
firearms with immunity from the law when they can
claim a self-defined need to protect their property. A
higher firearm-law strength score denotes more laws
regulating firearms and fewer laws deregulating firearms.
This variable was scaled to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1.
We examined all state-level firearm laws rather than
limiting the focus to those that specifically prohibit firearm
trafficking by regulating the purchase of firearms.
Prior studies have found that numerous categories of
state-level firearm laws, ranging from those that regulate
purchase or registration of firearms, those that regulate
concealed carry permits, to those that allow municipalities
and cites to regulate firearms, were associated with
less interstate movement of crime-related firearms [9,
10, 17, 18]. Further, studies interviewing persons incarcerated
for firearm-related offenses showed that the
majority of firearms were acquired through their friends,
acquaintances, family members, and other members of
their social network [19, 20]. Such transactions in the
secondary firearm market were unreported and
remained unregulated by laws targeting firearm trafficking,
especially as many laws exempt the transfer or sale
of the firearm to relatives.
Covariates
We used the following state-level data to adjust for characteristics
previously associated with firearm-related violence:
poverty rate [21–23], a validated proxy measure
for state-level firearm ownership [24], and countyweighted
state density as a proxy for the average urbanicity
of the state (the sum across all counties in the state
of [county population / county land area] * [county
population / state population]) [21, 23, 25]. The proxy
measure of state-level firearm ownership developed by
Siegel and colleagues [24] uses the proportion of firearm
suicides in a state and per capita number of hunting
licenses [26], and is highly correlated with surveymeasured,
household firearm ownership at 0.95. We also
adjusted for state area and census division [23] to account
for differences in firearm movement by state size
and geographic location. These variables were scaled to
have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Data analysis
The distribution of the number of states for which the
index state serves as the source or destination of 100 or
more crime-related firearms is skewed to the right and
contains a large proportion of zeros (Additional file 1:
Figure S1). Therefore, we fitted zero-inflated negativebinomial
models, which is designed to address overdispersion
and excess zeros when analyzing count data. A
Poisson model assumes that the conditional mean is
equal to the conditional variance. Negative binomial
models are modified Poisson models that relax this assumption,
allowing the conditional mean and variance
to be estimated separately, and is used for modeling
over-dispersed count variables. Zero-inflated models assume
that there are two latent groups: observations that
necessarily have a high probability of a zero outcome
(excess zeros) because of some underlying attributes,
and observations that might have a zero, but might have
a positive count with nonzero probability [27, 28]. In the
context of this analysis, firearm movement, say, from Alaska
to Florida is likely to be an excess zero because of
the distance involved, while movement from Georgia to
Florida is likely to be driven by policy. Zero-inflated
models consist of two parts, a binary model and count
model (in our case, negative binomial model) to account
for excess zeros [28, 29]. We fitted a fixed-effects zeroinflated
negative-binomial model to estimate the
association between the number of firearm laws and the
number of states for which the index state serves as the
source of 100 or more crime-related firearms in a given
year, adjusting for the covariates listed above. We subsequently
fitted a zero-inflated negative-binomial model to
estimate the association between the number of states
for which the index state is the destination of 100 or
more crime-related firearms in a given year, adjusting
for covariates.
To test the sensitivity of our results against the choices
for our methodologic approaches, sensitivity analyses
were conducted. First, we fitted similar zero-inflated
negative binomial regression models using the cut-offs
of 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 or more firearms. Second, we
fitted similar negative binomial regression models without
the zero inflation. Finally, in order to account for the
serial autocorrelation between data, we fitted linear regression
models with a Prais-Winsten estimator to
model the association between the number of firearm
laws and the log-transformed non-zero counts of states
for which the index state serves as the source of 100 or
more crime-related firearms or as the destination of 100
or more crime-related firearms, adjusting for covariates
[30]. The networks were constructed and analyzed using
igraph version 1.2.4.1 and sna version 2.4 packages, and
linear regression with Prais-Winsten estimator was conducted
using prais version 1.1.1 package for R. Zeroinflated
negative-binomial regression with robust confidence
intervals and negative binomial regression analyses
were conducted using Stata version 16.
Results
Table 1 presents the results of descriptive characteristics.
States had an average of 26 (Standard Deviation [SD]
25.2) firearm laws, ranging from two laws (Idaho, Mississippi
and Missouri in 2017) to 106 laws (California in
2017) (Fig. 1). On average, a state was the source of 100
or more crime-related firearms for 2.2 (SD 2.7) states.
This ranged from Texas in 2017, which was the source
of 100 or more crime-related firearms to 15 states, to
142 observations over eight years (36%) in which a state
was the source of 100 or more crime-related firearms to
no other states that year. On average, a state was the
destination of 100 or more crime-related firearms for 2.2
(SD 3.4) states. This ranged from California in 2017,
which was the destination for 100 or more crime-related
firearms from 22 states, to 181 observations (45%) over
eight years in which a state was the destination of 100 or
more crime-related firearms from no states that year.
The network of interstate firearm movement is
depicted in Fig. 2, which shows the average movement
of firearms across states over 8 years, when the average
is 100 or more firearms. The width of the arrow between
two states is proportional to the average number of
firearm movement between those states. States that do
not have an average of 100 or more firearms move
across its borders are excluded from this figure, as are
New Hampshire and Massachusetts, which are connected
to each other but not to other states. The highest
volume of firearm movement occur between neighboring
states: Arizona to California (1332 firearms); Indiana to
Illinois (1173 firearms); Nevada to California (850 firearms);
Virginia to Maryland (581 firearms); Georgia to
Florida (499); South Carolina to North Carolina (474),
Pennsylvania to New York (382 firearms) and New
Jersey (356 firearms); Oregon to California (355 firearms).
The exceptions are the movement from Texas to
California (523 firearms), Virginia to New York (451
firearms), Georgia to New York (391 firearms), and Florida
to New York (360 firearms). In addition, there is
movement across long distances, going north from
Georgia to New Jersey (181 firearms) and Texas to New
York (106 firearms), and west from Louisiana to California
(123 firearms) and Ohio to California (120 firearms).
The general pattern evoked by Fig. 2 is of gun flows
from low-regulation states in the south and southwest to
high-regulation states.
Table 2 presents the results of the multivariable zeroinflated
negative binomial analysis estimating the relationship
between firearm laws in a state and the number
of states for which it serves as the source of 100 or more
crime-related firearms. Each additional standard deviation
in the number of firearm laws was associated with
42% fewer states to which a given state is the source of
100 or more crime-related firearms (Incidence Rate Ratio
[IRR] = 0.58; b = -0.55, 95% confidence interval [CI]
-0.71, -0.38, p < 0.001), adjusting for covariates. Each
additional standard deviation in the firearm ownership
was associated with 37% fewer states to which it is the
source of 100 or more crime-related firearms (IRR =
0.63; b = -0.46, 95% CI -0.58, -0.35, p < 0.001).
Multivariable zero-inflated negative-binomial analysis
estimating the relationship between firearm laws and the
number of states to which a state is the destination of
100 or more crime-related firearms is shown in Table 3.
Each additional standard deviation in the number of firearm
laws in a state is associated with 73% more states
for which it is the destination of 100 or more crimerelated
firearms (IRR = 1.73; b = 0.55, 95% CI 0.44, 0.65,
p < 0.001), adjusting for covariates. Each additional
standard deviation in firearm ownership was associated
with 70% fewer states to which it is the destination of
100 or more crime-related firearms (IRR = 0.30; b = -
1.20, 95% CI -1.48, -0.93, p < 0.001).
Sensitivity analyses with multivariable zero-inflated
negative-binomial models using the cut-offs of 50, 60,
70, 80, and 90 firearms showed similar results to models
using the cut off of 100 (Appendix Tables 4 and 5 for
cut off of 50, results of other models not shown). For
analyses estimating the relationship between firearm
laws and the number of states for which a state serves as
the source of crime-related firearms, the coefficient on
firearm laws lost significance when a cut-off of 50 or 60
firearms is used. Cut-off values of 70 and above produced
statistically significant results as in the main analysis.
For analyses estimating the relationship between
firearm laws and the number of states for which a state
is the destination of crime-related firearms, the association
remained robust across all cut offs. Sensitivity analyses
fitting negative binomial regression models without
zero inflation (Appendix Tables 6 and 7), and sensitivity
analyses fitting linear regression models with a Prais-
Winsten estimator to log-transformed non-zero counts
of states showed similar results to the zero-inflated negative
binomial models (Appendix Tables 8 and 9).
Discussion
Using longitudinal data on crime-related firearm tracing
and state-level firearm laws, we constructed a network
of firearm movement across US states from 2010 to
2017, demonstrating associations between state-level
firearm policy and movement of firearms into and out of
states. Consistent with our hypothesis, more firearm
laws in a state was associated with both it being the
source of crime-related firearms to fewer states, and the
destination of crime-related firearms from more states.
The estimated associations were statistically significant,
and robust to the inclusion of multiple covariates including
state-level poverty, density, and a firearm ownership
proxy.
Our findings corroborate earlier studies showing that a
passage of a single law in one state can impact the
movement of firearms into and out of the state. After
the implementation of a one handgun per month law in
Virginia in 1993, the crime-related firearms recovered in
a Northeast state was less likely to be traced to Virginia
compared to other Southeast states [10]. Similarly, after
the passage of Brady Bill, which instituted mandatory
background checks, there was a large reduction in firearms
recovered in Chicago originating from states that
were not conducting background checks prior to the
Brady Bill [31]. Studies among incarcerated people have
found that crime-related firearms are often obtained in
illegal secondary markets composed of social network
members [19, 20]. Our study suggests that increasing
firearm laws may decrease firearms that are available for
transfer in the illegal firearm market.
Further, we found that more firearm laws was associated
with a state being the destination of 100 or more crimerelated
firearms from more states. This is consistent with
studies examining pairs of states that showed the differential
in firearm laws between source and destination states
correlated with the movement of firearms between the
two states, such that firearms are more likely to move
from states with weaker laws to states with stricter laws
[9, 13]. Similarly, a study of 25 US cities found that cities
in states with mandatory registration and licensing systems
had a higher proportion of crime-related firearms
originating from other states [8], and that states with
higher number of firearm laws had a higher percentage of
crime-related firearms originating from other states [11].
Our findings may lead to the question of whether the protective
effect of strict firearm laws on fiream violence prevention
is negated by interstate firearm movement.
Although we are unable to answer this question comprehensively,
data on firearm-related homicide in the US
states suggest that this is not the case. From 2010 to 2017,
the states identified in our analysis as sources of 100 or
more crime-related firearms had an average, age-adjusted,
firearm-related homicide rate of 4.21 (SD 2.20) per
100,000 population, while states that were destinations of
100 or more crime-related firearms had an average, ageadjusted,
firearm-related homicide rate of 4.50 (SD 2.15)
per 100,000 population [32]. The above data provide a signal
that firearm laws have a protective effect on firearmrelated
violence despite interstate firearm movement, and
that laws that reduce interstate firearm movement would
reduce firearm-related violence even further. These relationships
should be explored in greater depth in future
research.
We also found that the firearm ownership in a given
state was associated with both having fewer states for
which it is a source of firearms and having higher odds
of not being a destination of firearms from other states,
after adjusting for the number of firearm laws and covariates.
Recent studies have begun to examine the independent
effects of state-level firearm laws and firearm
ownership on firearm-related outcomes. A study showed
an additive relationship between them, in which state-
level firearm permissiveness and firearm ownership were
both associated with a higher rate of mass shootings
[33], while another study showed a moderating relationship
in which state-level firearm policy strength was inversely
associated with suicide rates in states with higher
levels of firearm ownership [34].
Conclusion
Strengths and limitations
Interpretation of our findings are subject to limitations.
This is an associative study, and as such we are unable to
establish causality between firearm laws and movement of
crime-related firearms. Our gun ownership variable was a
proxy measure and we did not have detailed data on actual
gun ownership at the state level. As an ecological analysis,
the study cannot make any causal claims at the
individual level, but instead points to policy factors associated
with state-level firearm movement. The firearm trace
data used in our analysis only included firearms used in
crimes that were recovered by law enforcement, not all
firearms or all firearms used in crimes. Finally, this study
did not assess the impact of interstate firearm movement
on negating the effects of stricter firearm laws, nor how
such a relationship could affect overall state rates of
firearm-related violence. Strengths of the study include
using longitudinal data over an eight-year period and including
all 50 states to give a more complete picture of
how firearms are shared among states.
Taken together, these results suggest that the effectiveness
of firearm-restricting policies at the state level is
complicated by a network of firearm movement among
states. These results suggest that firearms travel in complicated
webs among states, and therefore, state-level
firearm policies may not sufficiently address firearm
availability within states. This may in part explain why
certain firearm laws have not been found to have the
intended effects on firearm-related violence: a recent
systematic review showed that state-level laws that aim
to curb firearm trafficking through regulating firearm
dealers and mandating theft reporting showed conflicting
and inconclusive results on the state’s firearmrelated
violence [7]. Our study suggests the need for federal
or regional firearm laws that may better regulate
crime-related firearms that move across states.