Introduction
Healthy practices established at early ages, such as
following a well-balanced diet with adequate amounts of
fruit and vegetables, have the potential to last a lifetime
[1, 2]. These eating habits reduce the prevalence of dietrelated
diseases such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular
disease later in life [3, 4]. One key setting to support
the well-being of children can be primary schools.
Therefore, the compulsory primary school years may
provide a useful starting point for the promotion of
healthy eating among children [5, 6]. Primary schools
provide opportunities to reach a large segment of children,
their families, and the wider community regardless
of their socioeconomic status and, therefore, help ensure
equitable health outcomes [7]. In addition, children
consume approximately one-third of their daily meals at
school [8–10]. Schools can impact children’s diet through
curriculum content, changes to the school physical and
policy environment and interaction with parents and the
local community [11].
Australian government regulatory departments and
health authorities also recognise primary schools as key
environments for addressing public health issues among
children [12]. To date, both Federal and States Governments
have made an effort to promote healthy eating
through primary schools. All states have a school food
policy. However, compliance is usually voluntary, and
procedures for monitoring and evaluation are absent
[13]. There have also been some small-scale school
healthy eating interventions conducted in partnership
with local governments such as the Tooty Fruity Vegie
project (ten primary schools, 1 year), Fresh Kids (four
primary schools, over 4 years), and Be Active Eat Well
(six primary schools, over 3 years) [14–16]. In addition,
some aspects of food and nutrition education (FNE) are
addressed in the Australian curriculum [17] as well as in
the curriculum of the State of Victoria [18]. However,
the extent to which the curriculum is translated into
classroom teaching is unclear.
A significant barrier for public policymakers implementing
interventions and programs in schools is the
likely acceptance of these by stakeholders [19]. This
emphasises the importance of obtaining stakeholders’
views on school nutrition interventions to better develop
and execute future interventions [19, 20]. The views of
parents and teachers are essential for both the successful
implementation of school FNE programs and policies
that involve the cooperation of these two major stakeholder
groups [20–22].
To date, there has been limited research on Australian
teachers and parents’ opinions about school food
practices and school food environments and how these
practices and environments can effectively influence the
dietary habits of children. Parents’ and teachers’ views
have been investigated in a limited number of studies,
for example, on school health interventions (Health4-
kids, DELISH) [23, 24], school canteens [25, 26], kitchen
and garden programs [27, 28] and on FNE in Victorian
curriculum [29]. However, this descriptive study provides
an integrated exploration of all aspects of school
food issues, including FNE, food environments and food
policy in primary schools. We, therefore, explored the
views of teachers and parents on Australian primary
schools’ strengths and weaknesses in promoting healthy
eating and developing food skills.
Methods
The authors conducted two separate qualitative studies,
one with parents and one with teachers concerning their
views of food and nutrition in primary schools. This
paper reports on parents’ and teachers’ responses to a
single question: What strengths and weaknesses do you
think primary schools possess in promoting healthy eating?
The methodology for both studies is outlined
below.
Social constructivism formed the foundation of this
study [30]. A qualitative descriptive approach [31] was
adopted. In qualitative descriptive studies, descriptions
from research participants’ viewpoints help present the
facts of the phenomenon in everyday language [32].
Specifically, the questions asked of participants in both
studies were broad to lessen the influence of the
researcher [33].
Participants and recruitment
Parents and teachers from all types of primary schools
(government, independent, and Catholic) were purposefully
[34] recruited from Melbourne suburbs and
regional areas of Victoria. The inclusion criterion for
parents was having a child attending a primary school
in Victoria. For teachers, it was having taught any
aspect of nutrition in a primary school in Victoria.
Advertisements for the study were circulated on
Facebook groups for parents and teachers, and notices
were posted on neighbourhood notice boards at libraries
and supermarkets. A snowball sampling strategy
[35], where participants assisted researchers to identify
other potential participants [school type and geolocation],
also facilitated the recruitment process. Thirtyseven
parents and 26 teachers responded to the advertisement
via emails. Parents and teachers were asked
the name and suburb of the school to ensure that no
more than one parent/teacher was included from any
particular school to achieve maximum variation of
school type. When selecting participants, the type of
school was recorded to ensure that parents and
teachers represented government, Catholic and independent
schools which included religious schools such
as Christian, Islamic and Jewish schools. After scheduling
the first ten interviews with parents and teachers
from government schools, priority was given to the
school types that were less represented in the sample
when planning further interviews.
All the selected parents and teachers were provided
with a plain language statement and consent form via
email before each interview. Parents and teachers who
were not selected were informed by email. The selected
participants gave their written consent to participate and
permission to audio-record the interviews. They were all
offered a $20 shopping voucher as compensation for
their time. There were no prior relationships between
the researchers and the participants. The recruitment
ceased when the ‘conceptual depth’ (data saturation)
point was reached, which is in the words of Nelson: ‘ a
sufficient depth of understanding that can allow the
researcher to theorise’ [36].
Interview procedure
Semi-structured qualitative interviews were conducted
to obtain a detailed understanding of Australian parents’
and teachers’ views on the Victorian primary schools’
strength and weaknesses in promoting healthy eating.
Individual interviews were conducted by the lead researcher
(GA) either face-to-face (n = 15) or via phone
(n = 21). Face-to-face interviews were conducted in public
locations such as libraries or participants’ residences.
The duration of the parental interviews ranged between
22 to 54 min, with an average of 37 min. For the
teachers, interviews ranged between 28 to 62 min, with
an average of 47 min. It should be noted that these reported
interview durations included participants’ responses
to four questions, only one of which is reported
in the present paper (see above).
The interview questions were original and based on a
review of the literature. Face validity assessment of
interview questions was made through two pre-test interviews
for each group of participants. The pre-tested
data was combined with information obtained from the
later interviews as only minor phrasing changes were
made in the questions after the pre-testing. Parents and
teachers were asked four broad, open-ended questions
using an interview guide. This paper presents the analysis
of responses from one of these broad questions, as
noted above.: General prompts from the interviewer included
“Could you tell me more about that?”, “Is there
anything else?”, “Why?”, “What do you mean by …”
,“How …? ” / “Where …? / “What for …? to let participants
explain more.
Data analysis
The interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed
by an external contractor (Rev.com) verbatim. All transcripts
were checked for accuracy by the lead author.
Parents and teachers were given the chance to review
the transcripts of their interviews. Only one teacher
opted to review her interview but did not request any
changes.
Interview transcripts were manually coded using the
qualitative data analysis software package NVivo (SR
International Pty Ltd. Version 12, 2015). The lead researcher
read the transcripts several times to familiarise
herself with the data. King’s template analysis method
[37] was used for data analysis which commenced immediately
after transcription of the first two interviews. An
initial template with a priori codes was created based on
the research question. This was used to expedite the initial
stage of interview coding [37]. New codes were then
inserted into the initial template during the remaining
data coding process. The codes identified by GA and
research context were discussed with other researchers
of the study for the accuracy of interpretation during
weekly meetings [38, 39]. The final template comprising
the themes was reviewed by all authors and is described
in the results section below.
To enhance the trustworthiness of the findings,
themes generated by the manual coding using Nvivo
were compared with those generated by Leximancer
[40, 41]. Leximancer (www.leximancer.com) is a machine
learning-based qualitative data analysis software
that enables fast visual generation of themes and related
concepts automatically derived from qualitative
data [42, 43].
Results
Nineteen parents of children attending a primary school
in Victoria from the suburbs of Melbourne and regional
areas of Victoria were interviewed. Despite their diverse
ethnic backgrounds, all parents had lived in Australia for
at least 6 years. They all had post-secondary education
and reported working at least part-time. They all had at
least one child (aged 5–12 years old) enrolled in a primary
school in Victoria. Seventeen teachers who worked
or have been working in a primary school in Victoria
with a range of teaching experience were interviewed.
Teachers were recruited from the suburbs of Melbourne
and regional areas of Victoria (Table 1). All interviews
were held from January 2020 to June 2020. Identified
themes were given in Table 2. The same themes were
identified in both parents’ and teachers’ interviews.
Perceived strengths of primary schools in the promotion
of healthy eating
Food and nutrition education programs
Teachers (n = 9) and parents (n = 5) discussed the impact
of school FNE programs and related curricula on
children’s eating habits and skills. They believed these
programs, especially ones with a practical component,
have a positive impact on children.
‘I think probably the Stephanie Alexander kitchen
[An independent kitchen and garden program
offered in some Australian primary schools] is a
huge thing. That’s really one of the reasons I enrolled
the children at that school because of this program.
So, they grow the fruit or food, vegetables, and then
they pick it and then they cook it and then they eat.
So, it’s right from the start really.’ Parent 18.
‘I think that for my school specifically, being able
to give them that cooking program and the
gardening that is something that is a massive
strength for them, because they learn all these
different things and it’s so good for them because
they get the chance to do things they might not
be able to do at home.’ Teacher 3.
Primary school children’s young age and the significant
amount of time spent at school were also cited as
advantages that contribute to the effectiveness of FNE
delivered at primary schools. Some parents (n = 2) and
teachers (n = 2) emphasized the importance of teaching
FNE from a young age, which can lead to behaviour
change amongst primary school children.
‘They are at their optimal learning. So, for kids to
learn something, that can be weaved across six years
of learning in primary school. So, we have time, and
we have the minds that are ready to learn those
things. If you tell this to a 50-year-old, I’m sure
they’re going to struggle to try and change their diet
and habits. Whereas, a kid, they’re very willing to
take on that advice from someone they trust.’
Teacher 13.
‘I think getting in while they’re young, it’s something
they can remember. Teach them early so they don’t
forget, or they don’t think of as an additional tool. It
becomes part of their routine.’ Parent 19.
‘I guess they have the kids for six hours a day,
five days a week. They have a captive audience.’
Parent 12.
Being community-based, reaching parents
Some teachers (n = 6) and parents (n = 4) believed that
primary schools were in a position to reach parents too
and provide them with information and support in feeding
their children healthily. Both groups claimed that as
parents play a key role in their children’s eating habits, it
is crucial to target parents as well as children in any initiative
to improve effectiveness.
Some participants suggested that schools might send
informative brochures to parents or provide opportunities
to join practical FNE activities running at schools,
such as cooking or gardening classes or cultural food
days.
‘When my little boy starts prep [first year of
primary/elementary school] this year, the parents
are provided with a brochure about healthy eating
and how to prepare lunchbox, a healthy lunch box
for the kids, and they give us a lot of ideas for the
lunchboxes, which is good. It’s quite scientific and
quite a lot of ideas’ Parent 18.
‘I think because primary schools are very community
based, I feel like that is one of their strengths. Just
that there’s so much buy-in from parents, and parents
will come and help out. I guess, communication with
parents too, in newsletters etc. Parents take on that
advice that’s sent out. And the fact that the parents
are more engaged in their students’, education at
the time. Not to say that they’re not in high
school (secondary school) but just that it’s more of
a community feel. So, what is being taught in the
classroom is then being replicated at home, or
being used at home, I guess.’ Teacher 16.
Teachers as role models and the authority of schools
Parents (n = 4) and teachers (n = 4) mentioned the
importance of role modelling, and they recognised the
importance of teacher role modelling of healthy eating
as a positive influence on children’s eating habits. They
believed that teachers have the potential to model
healthy eating during recess and lunchtime.
‘I think modelling it to students can be helpful. So,
when they get their snacks out, I’ll get my banana
out and start eating it, so they can see, “Oh, he’s
eating something healthy,” not overtly saying to
them, “Here’s your healthy option,” they’ll just pick
up that’ Teacher 1.
‘So, you try and model what is the best way of how I
would eat, and I’m hoping you all do that too. If you
don’t have any fruit in your lunchbox today, it
would be wonderful if you have some tomorrow. So,
then the child almost nags their mom. The next day
there’ll be a piece of fruit in the lunch box.’ Teacher 2.
The authority that schools possess over children was
also discussed, specifically by parents. For example, two
parents commented:
‘A parent can nag the children for 10 years, and they
won’t ever listen to anything we’re saying. The school says
it once, and they believe it straight away’ Parent 19.
‘I guess they’re in a position of authority, just as
much as parents are, and I think maybe more so, to
be able to impart that type of information on
students.’ Parent 12.
Healthy school food environments
Fruit breaks and providing free fruit Participants
mentioned fruit breaks that are also named as ‘crunchy
fruit time’ or ‘brain food’ when children are given 10
mins to eat either a fresh vegetable or a fruit brought
from home or available at the school. Some participants,
particularly teachers (n = 6), felt that having fruit breaks
and providing free fruit to children were among the primary
schools’ strengths in promoting healthy eating.
They recognised it as an effective strategy to increase
the fruit or vegetable consumption of children. Some
reported that fruit baskets were usually available for
children at fruit breaks (morning break before the lunchtime).
These fruit baskets were often donated by
charities or nearby supermarkets. One teacher reported
that he voluntarily paid for a bag of fruit few times when
no fruit was donated, as he noticed that some of his students
did not have any fruit in their lunch boxes. Some
teachers also added that they encourage children to have
fruit at lunchtime if they wanted to.
‘Last year we organized a partnership with
Woolworth’s [A major supermarket chain], and they
provided a box of bananas and apples each week so
then the kids that didn’t have brain food could then
have some. I’ve started bringing in like a bag of
apples each week, then for mostly one particular
student in my class that doesn’t have a very healthy,
balanced diet in his lunch box, and so I’ll just give
him an apple at recess. So, I think that would be
quite common amongst teachers to bring in some
food of their own to share for those kids not bringing
healthier.’ Teacher 1.
‘The idea of this crunchy fruit time where there’s a
special time where they bond, they have a little bit
of a laugh while eating their crunchy fruit, because
it has to be some kind of fruits or vegetables, I think
that’s a very good example of how it can be done,
how it can be promoted.’ Parent 3.
Rules over food breaks Some participants (n = 6) believed
that implementation of policies is one of the
facilitators of the promotion of healthy eating. The
interviews revealed that many schools have the ‘nude
food policy’ for lunch boxes (i.e. packed products are
forbidden), although the implementation frequency
differed among primary schools. Some schools asked
students to have a package-free lunch box once a
week, whereas others aimed to apply the policy more
often. Parents, in particular, regarded implementation
of this policy as a significant effort in promoting
healthy eating as well as teaching children to live
more environmentally friendly.
‘ With strengths, it’s nude food. The kids also say
that that’s better for the environment which gets
them thinking about buying things from the
supermarket …. I think they’re trying to make it all
the time, but they have it two days a week, where it’s
supposed to be only nude food. It makes you more
conscious of your choices, you have to be a bit more
creative.’ Parent 8.
Not allowing kids to have any fizzy drinks or sugarsweetened
beverages in their lunch boxes was also listed
as one of the positive practices of the schools.
‘I think if the kids were probably bringing cans of soft
drink or something like that to school, they would
probably pick up on things like that. They’re very
pro water’ Parent 16.
Healthy canteens and lunch orders In Australia, not
all primary schools have a school canteen or lunch order
option, and some have it for only a few days a week.
Most participants believed that having a canteen with a
healthy menu at school affects their children’s food
choices positively.
‘For his school compared to others, I think they’re
doing a great job. Generally having a canteen at
school, I think is a really good thing. So, I was
surprised when they introduced that once a week.
And from time to time, they do have another day
just to provide sushi or something. They are trying to
be as healthy as possible.’ Parent 10.
‘I know that their school canteen is amazing. It was
once featured in The Age [a daily newspaper in
Melbourne] because it’s such a healthy canteen. So,
they have a really lovely canteen there; tuck shop.
You can buy lunch there or snacks. It’s all
homemade. They make salads and homemade pizza,
but there’s nothing deep fried or anything like that.’
Parent 15.
Perceived weaknesses of primary schools in the
promotion of healthy eating
Limited time
A lack of time and other competing priorities of teachers
were regarded as a barrier to promoting healthy eating
among children, particularly by teachers (n = 10).
Teachers claimed that they could not find available time
to focus on formal or informal FNE teaching opportunities,
and the overcrowded curriculum was often
mentioned. Unlike teachers, parents did not mention
time as a limitation, except for three parents.
‘I would think that sometimes we had a very overcrowded
curriculum and maybe it gets watered down
and health and physical ed part of the curriculum is
not done as thoroughly as it could be done.’ Teacher 8.
‘They’ve got STEM [science, technology, engineering
and mathematics], library, arts; there are so many
other things they have to like fit in’ Parent 13.
Lack of knowledge, expertise and motivation
Almost half of the parents and teachers listed lack of
knowledge and/or motivation to teach FNE as a barrier
in primary schools. Two teachers also mentioned that
the lack of teaching resources negatively impacts
teachers’ confidence and knowledge.
‘Lack of knowledge within teachers, maybe them not
feeling confident. I think that’s all down to resources.
I know that whenever I’ve done a cooking activity at
school, it’s always I’ll go and buy it all out of my
money.’ Teacher 11.
‘I think the limitation is just the lack of knowledge. I
don’t know if they know about a healthy lifestyle,
healthy eating.’ Parent 3.
Moreover, some parents and teachers believed primary
schools need specialist teachers to teach FNE.
‘I don’t think the teachers though are trained as a
nutritionist, or a dietitian. They’d have to get a
specialist teacher as well in there. I think even the
basics, or whether they get somebody in live
meetings.’ Teacher 13.
In addition, many teachers and several parents thought
that they need supportive school authorities or a
dedicated teacher who takes the leadership role to
ensure relevant policies and rules were implemented and
actions taken were consistent.
‘You need your leadership to back you. The
leadership is a weakness ultimately because they
can turn around and go, “That’s not worth the
effort,” and they won’t support it as well as what
they could be. You might just be on your own.’
Teacher 14.
‘Unless the principal or the teacher is very on board,
it’d be very hard to push for a consistent routine.’
Parent 19.
Unhealthy school food environments
Many parents (n = 10) and some teachers (n = 4) believed
unhealthy school environments were among the barriers
to promoting healthy eating at schools. They felt that
these environments undermine health messages given in
the classes. They mentioned the impact of the availability
and accessibility of foods in the school environment
on children’s eating behaviours. Some parents (n = 4)
and teachers (n = 4) criticised school canteens for promoting
unhealthy eating among children. Some parents
even expressed their gratitude for not having a school
canteen. They believed canteens do not resonate with
the healthy eating messages given at school.
‘They ask us to bring just water to drink. That is
important, very good, but they sell some of these
milk, with flavour, that also has sugar. You can’t
bring the milk in your lunchbox, but you can buy
it from the canteen. And you can buy the other
things that are in plastic. They even encourage
only one day to not bring the things in plastic.’
Parent 3.
‘ It’s usually hot dogs and highly processed things and
lots of ice creams. So, I would say that would be a
weakness, that’s a frustration. We do all this focus in
class and in the kitchen and garden, and then it’s sort
of like, “Here’s your canteen list, take your pick of all
the foods we’re saying “sometimes food”. ’ Teacher 1.
It is important to note that a few parents (n = 4) believed
that canteen food could be offered infrequently as
a treat (e.g. once a week). They were not highly critical
of the menus and did not believe the inclusion of more
healthy options was a priority.
‘To me the lunch order is more of a treat, or a
Friday type thing. So my kids have hotdogs or
chicken nuggets. My kids are not going to have a
salad for lunch. they’ve been there a few years they
know what the canteen has, all of a sudden if
canteens bring in something, they might be a bit like,
“No, I just want my hotdog.”’ Parent 13.
Some parents (n = 4) believed birthdays in primary
schools cause their children to be exposed to high
amounts of sugar. However, two teachers reported they
sent the birthday lolly bag or cake brought by the birthday
child home to be eaten after school hours thus, they
did not list that as a barrier to healthy eating.
‘Letting kids bring lollies for their birthdays. There’s so
many birthdays in classes. And even if they have their
birthday on the school holidays, then they have to
bring cupcakes on the Friday before the school holiday.
You can’t escape any of this. Everyone can bring their
own children as much lollies as they want, but do we
really need them handed out at school? It’s hard for
the kid too, even if they don’t want it. There’s peer
pressure, so they will eat it.’ Parent 1.
School fundraising events were also widely criticised for
undermining health promotion at schools. In particular,
parents expressed their displeasure with chocolate drives
during fundraising efforts.
‘They’ re trying to raise funds by selling brownies. So, I
think in that regard, that does have a negative impact.
It would be good to be able to replace some of those
fundraising events with healthier options. For example,
because in a fundraising event, there were rum balls [a
sweet treat]. So, instead of rum balls like maybe it
could be like protein bars or protein slices.’ Parent 2.
‘We did one a couple of years ago with Krispy Kreme
[a doughnut company], and the parents didn’t like
it, they didn’t want their kids having that. So, we
actually didn’t raise a lot of money, because the
parents didn’t want them eating that food. So, that
was actually a really good indicator for us that the
parents would prefer something healthier.’ Teacher 3.
Parents also directed similar criticism to schools’
events for special days.
‘I think some of the weaknesses are when they have a
school activity, like if they do a sports day or
carnival, it’s always a barbecue, sausages and bread,
which I don’t like. I think there should be other
alternatives, and I know it’s easy to do, but I think,
having an activity where you could have something
a bit more nutritious, and the kids could participate,
would be great.’ Parent 8.
Cost of FNE and associated lack of funding
The cost of providing high quality or holistic FNE was
also regarded as a barrier to promoting healthy eating,
particularly by government school teachers (n = 5). They
claimed that they could not run cooking and gardening
activities or take children on farm or supermarket visits
because of financial restraints. One teacher also
mentioned that they could not invite an expert speaker
because their school could not afford the cost.
‘Government primary schools are always trying to find
ways to bring in more money and the funding to do the
things that the teachers would really like to do. There is
a very big difference between schools across Victoria
and across Australia depending on the category of
government or independent schools. But there’s also a
difference by postcode or suburb.’ Teacher 4.
‘I think it comes down to cost. A lot of independent
schools can have a stand-alone program where they
can give their students all these different things, but
government schools can’t do that.’ Teacher 3.
Identified themes derived from the NVivo analysis were
confirmed by a Leximancer analysis which enhances the
credibility of the findings. (Supplementary file).
Discussion
As far as we are aware, this is the first qualitative study
that has specifically examined parents’ and teachers’
views on the strengths and weaknesses of primary
schools in promoting healthy eating. In the study, parents
and teachers identified a variety of primary schools’
strengths and cited several areas that need improvement
or change.
Schools’ potential role in promoting healthy eating
Parents and teachers identified what they saw as the
main contributors to school’s promotion of healthy
eating. These included FNE programs, schools’ ability to
reach the wider community, particularly parents, and
teacher role modelling of healthy eating.
Most parents and teachers acknowledged the delivery of
FNE as crucial and beneficial for children, in particular programs
with a practical component such as kitchen and garden
programs. Previous studies have demonstrated similar
levels of support among parents [44] and teachers [29, 45,
46] for increasing the inclusion of FNE in primary schools.
In accordance with the findings of the current study, some
other Australian studies have reported parents’ and
teachers’ satisfaction with school kitchen and garden programs
when classes aimed to influence children’s willingness
to taste healthy food [27, 28]. There have also been
quantitative studies that have demonstrated minor but significant
effects of school gardens on children’s eating behaviours,
especially on vegetable preference and intake [10,
47]. A recent systematic review of 26 studies from various
countries identified the key factors for the effectiveness of
primary school FNE interventions in achieving stated objectives
[48]. These factors included parental engagement, targeting
specific behaviours; teacher training or recruitment
of trained experts; more time allocated to FNE and age-appropriate
activities [48]. Hence, primary schools need to
consider these factors to improve the efficiency of FNE.
The present interviewees mentioned the communitybased
nature of schools and believed parental engagement
is critical when promoting healthy eating practices
among children. Parents and teachers placed a high
value on an effective communication from schools similar
to those Australian parents interviewed after the implementation
of the HealthLit4Kids program in primary
schools [24]. Parents in Western Australia also reported
that their children’s diets improved more when information
was disseminated to them along with the healthy
eating initiatives in schools [49]. Australian teachers have
also emphasised the importance of disseminating F&N information
to parents to impact food brought from home
or lunch orders at school [29].
Some teachers and parents emphasised the importance
of teachers’ role modelling and authority they exercise
over children. These views support the evidence from
Laguna et al. [50], who recently showed that American
primary school students whose teachers drank water
instead of sugar-sweetened beverages (SSB) in front of
their classes were significantly more likely to drink water
at school. However, some Australian teachers previously
reported they could not model healthy eating practices
very well due to their own unhealthy eating habits [29].
Similar findings have been reported in the United States
(US) [51, 52]. In addition, the lack of FNE related knowledge
and limited available teaching time were reported
to be barriers to teachers becoming role models for
nutrition education programs [53]. Therefore, teachers
need to be equipped with teaching resources and
adequate training to become good role models at school
in terms of healthy eating.
Parents and teachers expressed positive views about some
aspects of school food environments, such as canteens that
provide healthy options, fruit provision during lesson
breaks and well-implemented school food policies. The
school food supply and policy can potentially reinforce nutrition
education components of the school curriculum
[54]. For example, the accessibility of fruit and vegetables is
one of the main factors in their increased consumption
among children [55]. Consistent with the literature, several
teachers stated that the provision of free fruit at fruit breaks
through the collaboration of some local organisations was a
particular strength. This practice enables all students to access
fresh fruits and vegetables at schools. These results
corroborate findings by Nathan et al. [56], who discovered
that schools in rural or less socioeconomically advantaged
areas in Australia have the highest fruit break programme
adoption rates. Parents in our study also frequently mentioned
rules regarding food breaks, including nude food
policy. They appreciated schools’ efforts to reinforce
unpackaged and unprocessed food in lunch breaks. These
reports are similar to concerns across the world on the
effects of food production on climate change [57, 58] and
growing interest in improving the sustainability of food
consumed at school [59].
Perceived barriers to the promotion of healthy eating in
primary schools
The teachers’ and parents’ reports suggest that they believe
that primary schools have significant potential as
an appropriate setting to promote healthy eating among
children. However, they felt that schools had some
constraints. Inadequate time for teaching FNE; lack of
leadership, expertise and motivation of teachers; and
limited resources and funding were among these
limitations mentioned by both teachers and parents. Some
international studies [60–62] have reported the same
barriers described by American, Canadian and Sri Lankan
teachers. Similarly, Australian scholars have found that
teachers cited inadequate leadership and coordination,
overloaded curriculum and limited availability of easily
accessible FNE resources as barriers to FNE [23, 29].
Leadership has been consistently reported internationally
as an important enabler of the success of the promotion
of health eating in schools [63, 64]. School principals need
to be involved in the promotion of healthy eating and particularly
to identify a specific person or group of people to
lead or coordinate efforts in the school [65]. Employment
of cross-curriculum approaches was suggested as a solution
in previous studies to overcome time barriers to the
delivery of FNE in schools [66, 67]. Furthermore, it has
been noted that teachers must receive appropriate content
training [68] as their own education affects how much
they value teaching healthy behaviours, their intentions,
and self-efficacy [69]. Australian schools should be supported
by external funding to maintain health-promoting
activities and practices [70]. As it was argued that public
schools were more disadvantaged than private schools in
terms of funding they receive [71], priority should be given
to public ones.
The present study also demonstrated the canteen
menus and lunch order options varied widely among
schools. These findings match those observed in previous
studies that reported inconsistent implementation of
canteen policies in Victoria and low adherence to canteen
policy [72] with many discretionary food items and
lack of healthy food items in the canteen menus [73].
Previous Australian studies have reported high cost of
healthier food, lack of support, resources and facilities as
some of the barriers to health promoting canteen policies
[26, 49, 74]. Australian primary schools’ inadequate
adherence to nutrition policy is not unique. Low adherence
to school nutrition policy in Canada [75] and in the
US [76] were also demonstrated. In addition, around
90% of countries in the European region were known to
have food policies in primary schools, but the level of
enforcement and the success of implementation is unknown
[77].
Moreover, some parents highly criticised the abundance
of unhealthy options in canteens and school
events similar to parents in a previous Australian study
[78] whereas some other parents regarded canteen food
as a treat once a week and did not request any reform.
Worsley [79] previously demonstrated these mixed views
of Australian parents where only half of the parents
believed that canteens should only sell healthy food. The
participants’ perspectives towards school canteen food
options might be affected by the operation frequency of
their children’s school canteens. This is in line with
Hardy et al.’s study [80], which reported that Australian
primary school students who purchase lunch orders ≥2
times a week were more likely to have unhealthy weight
status compared to ones purchasing ≤1 time/week.
Schools need to make more effort to increase the
availability of healthy options at canteens as well as at
fundraising events or school fairs. Findings also suggest
that canteens which operate 5 days a week, providing an
abundant number of unhealthy options, should receive
higher priority for any reform.
Strengths and limitations of the current study
The study identified rich themes to depict a picture of
contemporary Victorian primary schools’ role in the
promotion of healthy eating through the descriptions of
parents and teachers. The study did not focus on one
aspect of schools’ food-related practices, but rather focused
on a broad range of food issues, including school
food environments, curriculum and school food policies.
Some methodological limitations must be considered
when interpreting the findings of the study. First, like
most qualitative studies, our study was based on convenience
samples. However, it is important to note that
qualitative studies do not aim to represent populations
but identify themes or meanings that are likely to be
present in the general population without measuring
their extent. In addition, although efforts were made to
recruit participants from rural areas only two parents
and one teacher were actually recruited from rural areas.
Also, self-selection bias may be present; those who
participated in the study may have been more interested
in the study’s subject than other parents. Exploratory
studies often suffer from self-selection bias, so it should
be borne in mind that the views of the participants may
not reflect those of others who may have no opinions on
the study topic. Finally, further survey research is required
to examine the prevalence of these identified
themes in the general population as well as the interrelationships
between the themes within various demographic
groups in the general population.
Conclusion
Parents and teachers identified the primary school as a
well-positioned setting to support the development and
practice of healthy dietary behaviours and food skills.
They acknowledged schools’ strengths in promoting
healthy eating through FNE programs, reaching the
wider community, role modelling and creating healthy
food environments. However, several findings suggest
that schools need support and reform to overcome
existing barriers such as time restrictions, financial constraints
and limited educator knowledge. Some parents’
and teachers’ criticism of unhealthy school food environments
highlights inconsistencies among schools and
demonstrates the need for mandatory policies or school
health policy implementation audits. The findings have
implications for health policymakers as they develop
and adopt strategies to establish health-promoting
primary schools.