Background
In the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic, state
and local governments throughout the United States recommended
minimizing contact between people, leading
to the closure of schools and nonessential businesses,
and shelter-in-place orders to reduce the spread of the
disease. In some states, including California, these restrictions
continued, particularly school closures. These
social distancing measures have profoundly impacted
the social lives of adolescents and young adults.
Social distancing from friends and romantic partners
may be particularly challenging during adolescence,
which is a period marked by a greater need for social
connection and peer acceptance and increased risk taking
[1, 2]. Popular and news media have portrayed young
people as careless and unconcerned about becoming infected
with COVID-19 [3, 4]. However, a growing body
of research has found concern about COVID-19, support
for social distancing guidelines, and participation in social
distancing among adolescents and young adults [5–
7].
Very little is known about how the pandemic has
affected young people’s romantic and sexual relationships,
which can have potential implications for positive,
as well as negative, developmental outcomes [8,
9]. Researchers have posited that social distancing and
stay-at-home guidelines have resulted in less partnered
sex for most young people as they face increased
parental monitoring and reduced privacy [10].
Studies in adult populations have found evidence of
significant declines in sexual activity during the pandemic,
although adults did not completely stop engaging
in sexual activities [11–14], as well as evidence
of increased romantic relationship conflict [15, 16].
Comparatively few studies in this area have included
adolescent or young adult populations. In one study
of adolescent sexual minority males, participants reported
seeing their sexual partners less often during
the COVID-19 pandemic [17]. In another study with
college students aged 18–25, most students reported
a decrease in sexual activity [18]. Just as patterns of
relationship involvement and sexual activity vary between
adolescence and young adulthood [19, 20], additional
research is needed to compare the pandemic’s
impact on romantic and sexual relationships by age.
COVID-19 and social distancing guidelines may lead
to an increase in young people’s online romantic or sexual
interactions. Previous research has found that some
adolescents initiate new relationships online [21–23],
and young people often communicate with their partners
through phone or text, including sexting [24, 25].
During the pandemic, youth may have turned more to
forms of digital communication for romantic or sexual
interactions, including online dating, sexting, virtual sex
and other activities [10]. Research has found an increase
in pornography viewing in the pandemic [26], including
an increase in pornography use among adolescent sexual
minority males [17].
The purpose of this study is to assess the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on romantic relationships
and sexual activity among an understudied population
of predominantly Latino young people in Fresno
County, California. Specifically, we ask if the pandemic
resulted in: 1) physical distancing from romantic
partners, 2) less sexual activity, and 3) more
romantic or sexual interactions online. We also compared
the impact of the pandemic on romantic relationships
and sexual activity between adolescents and
young adults.
Methods
Setting
Fresno County, located in the Central Valley of California,
is the most productive agricultural county in the
state and nation [27]. Despite this, the county has significantly
higher percentages of total (61%) and youth (78%)
concentrated poverty compared to the state averages of
30 and 46%, respectively [28]. Over a quarter of Fresno
County’s population is aged 18 and younger (28%) and
54% of the population identifies as Hispanic or Latino
[29].
On March 19, 2020, California issued the first statewide
shelter-in-place order to mitigate the spread of
COVID-19, directing all residents to stay home except
to go to an essential job or seek basic necessities, such
as food, prescriptions, and health care [30]. At the end
of May 2020, California had approved Fresno County to
begin reopening some sectors, including curbside retail,
manufacturing, offices, childcare, and restaurants [31].
Businesses wishing to reopen were required to implement
safety precautions such as masking indoors, limiting
capacity, and screening employees daily for
respiratory illness. However, rising COVID-19 cases and
hospitalizations led to a statewide mandate for all Californians
to wear masks in public on June 18, 2020, and
to close most businesses again in mid-July, 2020 [32].
Virtually all of the schools in Fresno remained closed to
in-person instruction throughout the majority of the
2020–21 academic year, offering distance learning instead.
Compared to the rest of California, Fresno and
other Central Valley counties have been disproportionately
impacted by COVID-19. Throughout the summer
of 2020, Fresno County had significantly higher rates of
COVID-19 compared to California, and the test positivity
rate as of February 2021 remained higher than the
state average [33].
Participants and procedures
Participants were selected from a sample of youth enrolled
in a five-year, cluster randomized controlled trial
of a sexual health education intervention in Fresno
County, California [34]. Participants were initially recruited
from 49 different sites, including alternative
schools, foster homes, and afterschool programs. Youth
were initially eligible to participate in the larger study if
they lived in Fresno County, were aged 13–19, and
spoke English or Spanish. The original study procedures
included completing online surveys at baseline and at 3
and 9 months after baseline. Participants received a
$10–$20 gift certificate after completing each survey.
Passive parental or guardian consent, meaning parents
or guardians needed to sign and return the consent form
for refusal, was used per state guidelines for all sexual
health education offered to youth [35]. Participants
completed a consent/assent form at initial recruitment
and prior to each subsequent survey.
In June 2020, 797 participants (out of 1260 who enrolled
in the larger study) were invited to complete a
supplemental online survey. We did not send the supplemental
survey to 463 participants who were due to
complete the 3-month or 9-month follow-up survey for
the larger study. Non-respondents received reminder
emails and/or text messages, and study researchers
called a subset of participants (n = 30) who had started
the survey to encourage them to complete it. Before
starting the online survey, participants reviewed information
about the study and checked a box confirming
informed consent. The survey included questions on
how COVID-19 had changed participants’ living arrangements
and employment, use of technology, education,
relationships, sexual and reproductive health, and
health service use. The median time to complete the survey
was 13 min. All participants received a $10 electronic
gift card after completing the survey. This study
was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the
University of California, San Francisco.
Measures
All of the measures used in the analyses were collected
in the supplemental survey, except where noted below.
Physical distancing from intimate partners
Participants were asked if they had “dated or been in a
romantic or sexual relationship with anyone” in the last
3 months. If so, they were asked if they “spent time in
person with someone you dated or were in a romantic
or sexual relationship with” in the last 3 months and if
they began living with someone they were dating as a result
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Two items assessed how often they spent time in person
with an intimate partner; one item asked, “BEFORE
the coronavirus restrictions, how often (on
average) did you do the following: Spend time with a
date or romantic partner (in person)” and another item
asked, “In the last 3 MONTHS (during the coronavirus
restrictions), how often (on average) did you do the following:
Spend time with a date or romantic partner (in
person).” Response options ranged from 1 (never) to 5
(daily).
Reasons for physical distancing from intimate partners
If participants reported an intimate relationship in the
past 3 months, they were asked, “In the last 3
MONTHS, did you NOT spend time in person with
someone you were dating or in a romantic or sexual relationship
with for any of the following reasons? Check
ALL that apply.” The response options are shown in
Table 3. Participants also were asked to rate their
agreement with the statement: “If you’re only dating one
person, it’s okay to see each other during shelter-inplace.”
Response options ranged from 1 (strongly agree)
to 4 (strongly disagree).
Sexual activity
In the baseline and supplemental surveys, participants
reported if they had ever had oral, vaginal, or anal sex
and if they had had oral, vaginal, or anal sex in the past
3 months. Two items assessed how often participants
had sex before the COVID-19 restrictions and in the last
3 months. The response options ranged from 1 (never)
to 5 (daily).
Romantic or sexual interactions online
Participants were asked, “As a result of the coronavirus
and shelter-in-place restrictions, how has the amount of
time you spend doing the following changed,” followed
by a list of online activities. The activities included “sexting
(sending sexually explicit photos or messages),” “online
dating/hook up sites (such as Bumble, Tinder, Hot
or Not),” and “watching porn.” Response options were
more time, about the same, less time, and I do not do
this/does not apply.
Open-ended question
Participants were asked the open-ended question, “How
has COVID-19 affected your dating or romantic or sexual
relationships?”
Age group
We created a binary variable for developmental age
group at the time of the supplemental survey. Adolescents
were defined as ages 13–17 and young adults as
ages 18–21.
COVID-19 attitudes
Participants reported whether they personally knew
someone infected by the coronavirus, and they were
asked to rate their concern about becoming infected
with COVID-19 on a scale from 1 (very worried) to 3
(not worried at all).
Other participant characteristics
Participants reported their race/ethnicity, gender identity,
and sexual orientation in the baseline survey and
their school enrollment, employment status, and living
arrangement in the supplemental survey.
Analysis
We used the chi-square test of independence to compare
outcomes by age group, gender identity, sexual
orientation, knowing someone infected by COVID-19,
and concern about becoming infected. All analyses were
conducted using Stata (StataCorp, College Station, TX),
version 16.
To qualitatively analyze the open-ended question
about the impact of the pandemic on their romantic relationships,
we used a modified form of grounded theory
in which an initial set of potential themes were identified
based on the research’s key areas [36]. Two researchers
reviewed the responses, created new codes based on
emerging themes, and coded responses by theme. Researchers
met to review the process, clarify codes, and
make minor modifications to the coding to improve reliability.
Responses were also classified by age, gender
identity, and sexual orientation.
Results
Sample characteristics
Overall, 351 of 797 individuals responded to the supplemental
COVID-19 survey (44% response rate), with
205 providing responses to the open-ended question
about the effects of COVID-19 on their romantic relationships.
Respondents to the supplemental survey
were significantly younger, more likely to be female,
Hispanic, have Internet access at home and on their
phone, and less likely to be sexually experienced than
non-respondents.
The majority of participants were female (72%), Hispanic
(75%), and straight/heterosexual (83%), and the
average age was 16.8 years (Table 1). Most participants
(59%) were in middle or high school, 16% were
in college, and 25% were no longer in school. Adolescents
were significantly more likely to be in school
and less likely to have a job than young adults. Most
participants lived with their parents, including 95% of
adolescents and 83% of young adults (p < 0.001). One
quarter knew someone who had been infected by
COVID-19, and most were very worried (17%) or
somewhat worried (56%) about becoming infected
themselves.
Physical distancing from intimate partners during the
COVID-19 pandemic
More than a third (37%) were dating or in a romantic relationship
during the COVID-19 pandemic, including
33% of adolescents and 43% of young adults (p = 0.080)
(Table 2). More than a quarter (28%) of all youth and
75% of those in a relationship spent time in person with
their partner in the last 3 months. Young adults were
more likely to spend time with a partner than adolescents
(38% vs. 23%, p = 0.003). Eleven participants
moved in with their partner in the last 3 months as a result
of the pandemic, including eight young adults and
three adolescents (not shown).
Youth spent time with a partner in person less often
during the pandemic than before (Fig. 1). The percentage
who saw a partner weekly declined from 13 to 8%,
while those who saw a partner daily declined from 13 to
9%. A greater percentage of young adults than of adolescents
spent time with a partner daily before COVID-19
(22% vs. 8%, p = 0.004) and during the pandemic (18%
vs. 3%, p < 0.001).
In response to the open-ended question, several participants
mentioned they had not dated anyone since the
start of shelter-in-place restrictions. One youth stated, “I
was finally starting to get around to dating, but COVID-
19 really put a stop on that” (female, lesbian, gay,
bisexual, or queer [LGBQ], age 19). Among those who
were currently in a relationship, the majority said they
had reduced or stopped spending time together in person.
One responded, “I haven’t seen my boyfriend and
when I have I had to wear a mask” (female, straight, age
16).
Several participants also commented that being physically
apart from their partners negatively affected their relationships,
fueling more arguments. One explained, “It’s
made things more difficult; we’ve become more distant
and fought way more than usual” (female, straight, age
18). However, others mentioned that they increased the
amount of time communicating in other ways such as
via FaceTime, texts, and calls. One youth explained, “It
makes it hard for me and my boyfriend but we text every
day and try to make the most of it” (transgender, pansexual,
age 16). Another participant stated, “At first it
ruined it due to me being on a stay at home order and
couldn’t see them, but later on it helped the both of us a
lot in ways that we maybe needed that time apart and
even got to learn to communicate better” (female,
straight, age 19).
Reasons for physical distancing from partners
Among the participants who were dating or in a romantic
or sexual relationship, one third (34%) did not spend
time in person with their partner because their parents
would not let them go out due to COVID-19 (34%)
(Table 3). In addition, 17% said that their partner’s parents
would not let them go out because of the pandemic.
Twelve percent felt worried about becoming infected,
and 7% cited their partner’s concerns about becoming
infected. One-fifth (21%) had not seen their partner due
to lack of transportation.
Compared to young adults, adolescents were more
likely to physically distance from their partners due to
rules of their parents (44% vs. 20%, p = 0.098) or their
partner’s parents (23% vs. 8%, p = 0.032). As expected,
youth who were worried about getting the coronavirus
were more likely to physically distance from partners
due to concerns about infection. Among young adults,
the most common reason for physically distancing from
partners was lack of transportation (25%).
Most youth agreed (47%) or strongly agreed (12%) that
“it is okay for intimate partners to spend time together
in person during shelter-in-place if they are only dating
one person,” while 29% disagreed and 13% strongly disagreed
with this statement (not shown). Attitudes towards
physically distancing from partners were similar
across age groups.
Reasons for physical distancing in the open-ended responses
also included parents’ restrictions and concern
about becoming infected or infecting others. One youth
stated, “At first, we didn’t see each other for over a
month just for the fact to be safe because we both work
around a lot of people” (female, straight, age 20). Another
said, “I was afraid of seeing my partner because I
was still visiting my sibling” (female, straight, age 19). A
couple participants mentioned that school closures
meant they could not see their partners on campus. As
one explained, “School isn’t happening and I don’t get to
see my boyfriend every day” (female, straight, age 17).
Sexual activity during the COVID-19 pandemic
In the supplemental survey, a third of youth (32%) indicated
that they had ever had oral, vaginal, or anal sex,
and 22% had sex in the past 3 months during the
COVID-19 pandemic. When we compared reports of
sexual activity in the past 3 months from the baseline
and supplemental COVID-19 surveys, 69% were not
sexually active before or during the pandemic, 14% of
participants were sexually active in both periods, 9%
were sexually active before COVID-19 only, and 8%
were during the pandemic only.
Compared to adolescents, young adults were significantly
more likely to have ever had sex (44% vs. 26%,
p = 0.001) and sex in the past 3 months (31% vs. 17%,
p = 0.003). Compared to youth who identified as
straight/heterosexual, LGBQ youth were more likely to
ever have had sex (53% vs. 28%, p < 0.001) and sex in the
past 3 months (34% vs. 20%, p = 0.024). Participants had
sex slightly less often during the pandemic. The percentage
of participants who had sex monthly declined from
8 to 7%, weekly declined from 8 to 5%, and daily declined
from 4 to 3% (Fig. 2).
In the open-ended responses, few focused on sexual
activity, though one did mention that it affected her “relationship
by not allowing contact and intimacy” (female,
LGBQ, age 15). Another explained, “I haven’t had a extremely
sexual relationship because I have strict parents.
I seen my partner once ever[y] week so there wasn’t a
huge impact” (female, LGBQ, age 17). One respondent
noted, “some people want to wait until the coronavirus
is over before they hangout so it blocks the act from
happening” (female, straight, age 18).
Romantic or sexual interactions online
Overall, youth were not pursuing romantic or sexual relationships
online during the pandemic. Three-quarters
of youth (75%) indicated that they are not involved in
sexting (Table 4). Eight percent of participants reported
that they spend more time sexting, 6% spend less time,
and 11% spend the same amount of time sexting due to
COVID-19 and shelter-in-place restrictions. Compared
to young adults, adolescents were more likely to report
that they do not sext (81% vs. 62%, p = 0.002) and less
likely to report more time sexting due to COVID-19 and
shelter-in-place (11% vs. 6%, p = 0.002).
Most youth (87%) were not using online dating/hook
up sites before or during the COVID-19 pandemic. Five
percent said they spend more time online dating, 4%
about the same amount of time, and 4% less time online
dating due to the pandemic. Online dating was more
common among young adults than adolescents (25% vs.
7%, p < 0.001) and among male than female participants
(25% vs. 9%, p < 0.001).
The majority of youth (71%) indicated that they do not
watch porn. One in ten participants (11%) spent more
time watching porn due to COVID-19, 8% spent less
time, and 11% spent the same amount of time. There
were no significant age differences in time spent watching
porn due to COVID-19, although watching porn was
almost twice as common among males than females
(46% vs. 23%, p < 0.001) and among straight/heterosexual
than LGBQ participants (49% vs. 25%, p < 0.001).
Only two participants mentioned online dating and
none discussed porn in the open-ended responses. One
stated, “I feel like nobody has anything better to do at
home [so] guys have been more bold recently and I’ve
been getting way more messages on social media than I
usually would” (female, straight, age 16). Another explained,
“I wanted to try tinder or the other dating app
so that I could go on dates but the dates would have to
be online now” (female, LGBQ, age 19).
Discussion
This study examined how social distancing measures to
reduce the spread of COVID-19 early in the pandemic
affected youth’s involvement in romantic and sexual relationships.
We found that youth who were in romantic
relationships spent less time in person with their partners
during the COVID-19 pandemic than before, and
one quarter spent no time in person with their partner
during the first 3 months of social distancing. Romantic
relationships are central to adolescent development [8,
9] and prolonged separation may have lasting impacts
on youth. Studies have shown elevated levels of depression
and anxiety among youth during the pandemic
[37–39], suggesting that many will need ongoing mental
health support. At the same time, our qualitative findings
suggest that being apart led to improved communication
in some youth relationships.
We did not find evidence that social distancing measures
resulted in less partnered sex or increased online
dating among youth, as others have posited [10]. In fact,
most youth surveyed were not sexually active, participating
in online dating, or sexting, before or during the pandemic.
Previous studies in adult populations found
significant declines in sexual activity during the pandemic,
although adults did not completely stop engaging in sexual
activity [11–14]. Further research is needed to understand
the impact of the end of pandemic restrictions on
adolescents’ romantic relationships and sexual behaviors,
as researchers have posited there may be a “catch-up
period” in which sexual behavior increases [10].
Experiences in romantic and sexual relationships during
the COVID-19 pandemic varied between adolescents
and young adults, which suggests the importance of
studying the impact of the pandemic and other emergencies
through a developmental perspective. Young
adults were more likely to spend time with their partner
and to be sexually active before and during the pandemic
than adolescents. These results are consistent
with the increase in autonomy that typically occurs in
the transition to adulthood, along with other changes
such as moving away from family and entering the labor
market [40].
Study findings reinforce the importance of ensuring
that young people have continued access to sexual and
reproductive health care during the ongoing pandemic.
While some youth have continued to be sexually active,
due to shelter-in-place restrictions and limitations to inperson
clinical services, contraception and other services
have become more difficult to access [41–43]. Many
healthcare providers have quickly adapted to offer services
through telemedicine during the pandemic, although
more research is needed to improve the reach
and appropriateness of telemedicine among adolescents
and young adults [44, 45]. Researchers have posited that
sexually transmitted infections may have declined due to
increased isolation and less casual sex during the pandemic,
although others are concerned that the lack of
testing and treatment may lead to an increase in transmission
[46, 47]. Health providers need to heighten efforts
to provide testing to adolescents and consider
home-based or self-testing. The COVID-19 pandemic
has highlighted potential strategies to reduce barriers to
access including telemedicine visits, home-based testing,
and online prescriptions that could continue as clinics
resume in-person visits [48].
With fewer resources and the increased demands on
schools due to the pandemic and transition to remote
instruction, sexual health education may be of lower priority.
However, adolescents continue to need accurate
and age-appropriate sexual health information from a
trusted source. Schools and community-based organizations
may need support to proceed with sexual health
education in an online or digital format. These alternative
formats may be applicable in the future when other
health concerns or emergencies, such as wildfires, cause
school closures.
This study has limitations. First, the use of retrospective
and single-item measures increased the risk of measurement
error. Second, the study used a sample of youth
participating in an ongoing study in Fresno County,
California, and the sample is not representative of youth
in the county or California. Respondents to the supplemental
survey were significantly younger, more likely to
be female, Hispanic, have Internet access at home and
on their phone, and less likely to be sexually experienced
than non-respondents. The level of sexual activity during
the COVID-19 pandemic may be higher in the general
population of youth. Third, because of the limited sample
size, the results of comparisons by gender and sexual
orientation must be interpreted cautiously, and we were
unable to examine other important characteristics, such
as housing status. A higher response rate may have been
achieved with additional time and efforts at follow up
and/or a gift certificate of greater value. However, the results
highlight the experiences of a predominately Hispanic
population who are often underrepresented in
research and media depictions of COVID-19.
As the COVID-19 pandemic evolves over time, so will
its impact on youth and their relationships. It will be important
to continue to study the short and long-term
impacts of the pandemic on youth relationships and
their sexual health. Future research should assess if the
COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a lasting shift in relationship
development among adolescents and young
adults, including changes in their approach to casual sex,
communication styles, and use of online dating. In
addition, future research should examine not only the
negative impacts of the pandemic, but also young people’s
resiliency and post-pandemic growth in their relationships
and lives.
Conclusions
This is one of the first studies to examine the immediate
impacts of social distancing requirements on young people’s
romantic and sexual relationships, asking about
their experiences during the first 3 months of the
shelter-in-place restrictions. We found that adolescents
and young adults have continued to engage in sexual
and romantic relationships during the pandemic, although
many reported physical distancing from their
partners. Most youth were not sexually active before or
during the pandemic, yet nearly a quarter had sex during
this period. The results demonstrate that youth continue
to need access to sexual health education and services
during emergencies such as the COVID-19 pandemic.