Background
Beginning in December 2019, the respiratory disease
SARS-CoV-2 virus (COVID-19) began spreading around
the world. Since then, the World Health Organization
has reported over 200 million cases and over 4 million
deaths worldwide, with the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention reporting over 36.7 million cases and
around 620,000 deaths in the United States (US) as of
August 15, 2021 [1, 2]. To prevent COVID-19 transmission
in the US, public health measures such as
stay-at-home orders, closures of non-essential businesses,
in-person school, and many other public places
have been implemented to restrict in-person contact.
These restrictions are ongoing and have had a significant
impact on daily life and well-being [3–5]. Preliminary research
in the first few months of the COVID-19 pandemic
identified child mental well-being (MWB) as being particularly
vulnerable to the pandemic and associated public
health restrictions [6–11]. Children face social isolation,
educational delays from in-person school closures, and
stress from financial strains many families experience because
of parents and caregivers losing work due to
COVID-19 restrictions [7, 10, 12, 13]. Additionally, children
of elementary school age may have a hard time understanding
the health risks of COVID-19 and changes to
daily life from lockdown measures, further increasing fear
and anxiety [6]. COVID-19 restrictions are also associated
with increased sedentary behavior (SB) and decreased
physical activity (PA), which further increase the risk for
poor mental health and well-being in children [14–20].
The full impacts of COVID-19 on MWB, PA, and SB
are still unknown; however, evidence suggests poor
MWB, limited PA, and increased SB in childhood may
have potentially long-term and serious health consequences
[21–26]. Children who do not meet recommended
PA guidelines (i.e., 60 min of moderate-vigorous
PA per day) are at an increased risk of developing mental
health disorders, such as depression and anxiety, as
well as chronic diseases, including obesity, diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease later in life [22, 27]. Children not
only need regular PA to improve health and well-being,
but can be vulnerable to decreased cognitive functioning,
obesity, and cardiometabolic risk factors if they spend
significant amounts of time being sedentary (e.g. sitting,
watching TV, on the computer) [27–29].
The COVID-19 pandemic and associated restrictions
are ongoing with no clear timeframe for when restrictions
will be lifted, making the potential impacts on
child MWB, PA, and SB with the subsequent long-term
effects on health and well-being particularly concerning.
Given this, the aims of this study were 1) to explore how
COVID-19 restrictions are impacting child MWB, PA,
and SB using qualitative methods, and 2) to assess how
perceived changes in PA and SB due to COVID-19
restrictions are associated with perceived changes in
MWB using quantitative methods.
Methods
Study design
This was a convergent parallel mixed-methods study to
assess the impact of COVID-19 on child MWB and associations
with PA and SB. Convergent parallel designs
consist of conducting qualitative and quantitative
methods independently and concurrently, with results
from each of these methods being integrated during the
interpretation of findings [30]. The purpose of using this
design was to triangulate results from each method, and
to further understand the context of quantitative results
through qualitative findings. Online surveys were conducted
with parents and caregivers of children in kindergarten
through 5th grade to assess the association
among perceived changes in PA and SB, and perceived
MWB changes. Surveys were conducted concurrently
with the same population to explore the MWB impacts
of COVID-19 on children. Following analysis, results
from the online survey and interviews were integrated to
inform study interpretations.
Recruitment and participants
Participants for the online survey were recruited using
convenience sampling. The survey link was posted on
Twitter and Facebook and distributed on Facebook to
St. Louis-based neighborhood groups for parents with
elementary school children. Sampling methods focused
on parents and caregivers in the St. Louis region with
children enrolled in kindergarten through 5th grade.
The survey was available from late May to early July
2020 for approximately 8 weeks. Participants had the option
of providing email addresses. Interviews were conducted
independently during this time period within the
same population, using a combination of convenience
and snowball sampling. Participants were contacted via
phone and email. The Institution Review Board of
Washington University in St. Louis approved this study
with an exempt status.
Procedures
Participants completed the online survey via Qualtrics.
All surveys were anonymous and consisted of a consent
page and information regarding the purpose of the
study. The online survey was developed for this study
(see Supplement 1). The survey consisted of 63 questions
and took between 15 and 20 minutes to complete.
Topics in the survey included parent, child, and household
demographics, child MWB, child PA and SB, as
well as parental influence and rules regarding these behaviors.
Qualitative interviews (n = 16) were administered
via telephone or Zoom and lasted between 20 and
30 min. Parents were provided the consent form and
reason for this study prior to the interview. Participants
completed the interviews from their homes in privacy.
No repeat interviews were conducted. Interviews were
conducted until saturation was reached. Interviews were
audio recorded for accuracy, de-identified, and then professionally
transcribed verbatim. If participants had more
than one child, participants were asked to choose one
child to answer questions for. Questions asked during
the interviews were informed by early COVID-19 research
and developed with expertise of the research
team. Questions covered similar topics to the online survey,
along with more open-ended explorations around
how the COVID-19 pandemic impacted their families
and children.
Measures
Perceived changes in child MWB
Quantitative An adapted version of the parent-report
on child Mood and Feelings Questionnaire was used to
measure child MWB [31]. Items in the measure were
chosen based on face value relevance for measuring
COVID-19 impact and stems were modified to focus on
the time period prior to and during COVID-19 restrictions.
Parents were asked to answer whether statements
were true, sometimes true, or not true about their child.
The questionnaire consisted of 9 statements regarding
whether the child was miserable or unhappy, not enjoying
anything at all, tired, very restless, finding it hard to
think properly and concentrate, lonely, irritable or angry,
worried a lot, and having trouble sleeping. Parents filled
out this questionnaire based on perceptions of how their
child felt prior to and during COVID-19 restrictions.
Scores were given to each answer (true = 2, sometimes
true = 1, not true = 0), and added up to create MWB
scores for before and during COVID-19 restrictions.
Higher scores indicated worse MWB. To get changes in
MWB, the total MWB score for each child during
COVID-19 restrictions was subtracted from the total
MWB score prior to COVID-19 restrictions and then dichotomized
into same or better MWB and worse MWB.
Qualitative Interviews assessed child MWB by asking
parents about their child’s general mood and how their
child’s mood had been impacted by COVID-19 restrictions.
Questions were meant to elicit qualitative responses
on how parents perceived their child’s MWB
and to explore context around why or how MWB might
be impacted by COVID-19 restrictions. Follow up questions
were often asked about the impact of school closures,
and what parents found to be helpful for
improving MWB during COVID-19 restrictions. If parents
noted worsening MWB, follow up questions were
asked to elicit more information about why these
changes to MWB occurred.
COVID-19 concerns
Quantitative The online survey assessed COVID-19
concerns by asking parents to report on whether statements
such as, my child has not been content with stayat-
home orders, was afraid of self/family/friends getting
sick, was concerned about COVID-19, and talked/asked
questions about COVID-19, were true, sometimes true,
or not true.
Qualitative In interviews with parents, COVID-19 concerns
were explored by asking parents about their child’s
level of concern regarding COVID-19, their understanding,
and what questions and concerns their child voiced
about COVID-19.
Perceived changes in PA and SB
Quantitative To measure parent perceptions of changes
in child PA and SB, questions from an existing scale, the
HomeSTEAD’s physical activity and screen media practices
and beliefs survey were used [32]. Parents were
asked in the online survey whether their child’s PA increased,
stayed the same, or decreased due to COVID-
19 restrictions. Specific PA behaviors and SB were measured
by asking parents to report on the daily number of
minutes for activities during COVID-19 restrictions and
whether that amount of time was less, more, or about
the same as it was prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. PA
behaviors included playing inside, playing outside, participating
in sports and organized activities, and playing
outdoors as a family. SB included using screens (e.g. TV,
tablet, computer, smartphone, video games) for entertainment,
using screens for educational purposes, and
time spent sitting.
Qualitative During interviews parents were asked to describe
their child’s current level of PA, and if their child’s
PA level had changed due to COVID-19 restrictions. If
parents perceived changes to child PA, follow up questions
were asked about how COVID-19 restrictions impacted
PA levels. Parents were also asked to describe the
types of activities their child engaged in during COVID-
19 restrictions and how these activities differed from before
COVID-19 restrictions. Parents were also asked
about SB and how much their child spent time using
screens for school and entertainment during COVID-19
restrictions. Follow up questions assessed whether this
was different prior to COVID-19 and if so, what the
changes had been. Similar questions were asked about
non-screen time sedentary activities (e.g. reading, coloring,
building blocks).
Analysis
Quantitative data analysis was conducted using SPSS
(version 26). The dependent variable was perceived
change in MWB. Independent variables included in the
analysis were PA behaviors (perceived change in PA,
perceived change in organized sports, perceived change
in outside play, perceived change in inside play, and perceived
change in family PA), SB (perceived change in
time sitting, perceived change in screen time for entertainment,
and perceived change in screen time for education),
and COVID-19 concerns (discontent with stayat-
home orders, concern about COVID-19, and fear of
family/self/friends getting sick). PA and SB were dichotomized
into binary variables of ‘same or increased’ and
‘decreased’. COVID-19 concerns were also dichotomized
into ‘sometimes true or true’ and ‘not true’. Descriptive
statistics, frequency tables, and chi-square analyses were
conducted. The McNemar test was run to determine if
there were statistically significant differences between
each MWB item of the Mood and Feelings questionnaire
reported for prior to COVID-19 restrictions compared
to during COVID-19 restrictions. For statistically significant
correlations, logistic regressions were conducted to
determine the association between PA, SB, and COVID-
19 concerns with perceived change in MWB. Adjusted
models were also run controlling for age and gender.
Qualitative analysis of the transcripts began with three
rounds of preliminary analysis to develop the qualitative
code book. In the first round, we used an open coding
method, were a priori codes were developed based on
categories of interview questions from the interview
guide. In the second round, two research team members
reviewed all transcripts and collaborated to add more
detailed codes to existing categories. Additional categories
for codes were added as needed. In the third round,
two research team members used this initial codebook
to double-code three transcripts. The two team members
then reviewed the coding to identify any gaps in the
codebook or differences in coding. Once consensus on
coding was established, the codebook was finalized, and
a third research team member was trained to use the
final codebook. Using the final codebook, each transcript
was double-coded by the three members of the research
team and reviewed to eliminate discrepancies between
reviewers. Coded text was separated out by code to be
reviewed for common themes by research team members.
Common themes were discussed and agreed upon
through consensus. These themes were then compared
to the quantitative findings and integrated by identifying
convergence and places where qualitative rich text could
be used to provide context for quantitative results.
Results
The total number of parents surveyed was 245. The final
sample consists of the 144 respondents who completed
the child Mood and Feelings Questionnaire. The final
analytic sample was not significantly different than the
total sample of parents surveyed for demographic variables
of child age, race, gender, and ethnicity. Table 1
lists the descriptive statistics for the demographic variables
of the sample. The ages of children in the quantitative
sample ranged from five to twelve years old, with an
average age of 8 (SD = 1.75). A majority of children
(96%) were white, 44% were female, and most (74%)
lived in a household with two to three children. Most of
the parents/caregivers surveyed were female (88%), ranging
in age from 30 to 51 years old with an average parental
age of 40 (SD = 4.17). The majority were white
(96%), married or living with a partner (93%), and
employed (83%).
Sixteen qualitative interviews were conducted with
parents who had children ranging in age from four to
11 years old, with an average age of 7 (SD = 0.71). Parents
reported on a total of 23 elementary school aged
children, 13 of which were female. Overall, 87% of
households had more than one child. Parents interviewed
were mostly female (94%) and married (81%).
Parents reported a wide range of jobs from social worker
and teacher, to IT consultant, attorney, and business
owner. Most reported working from home and a few
noted being laid off or furloughed due to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Quantitative results
Overall, 74% of parents reported their children had
worse MWB during COVID-19 restrictions (see Table 2).
The majority of parents (75%) reported their child was
discontent with stay-at-home orders. Most parents
(76%) reported their child was concerned about COVID-
19 and 63% were afraid for themselves or a family member
getting sick. Each MWB item in the adapted Mood
and Feelings questionnaire was reported to be worse
during COVID-19 restrictions. Among aspects of child
MWB, perceived loneliness increased the most, from less
than 1% prior to COVID-19 restrictions to 33% during
COVID-19 restrictions. Other aspects of child MWB
perceived to worsen the most were anger, difficulty concentrating,
restlessness, difficulty sleeping, and
unhappiness.
Results from chi-squared and logistic regression analyses
are presented in Table 3. Discontentment (x2 (2)=
8.06, p = 0.005) and concern (x2 (2)=7.20, p = 0.007)
about COVID-19 were significantly associated with perceived
changes in MWB. Among PA behaviors surveyed,
perceived changes in PA (x2 (2)=4.10, p = 0.043), perceived
changes in organized sports (x2 (2)=5.61, p =
0.018), and perceived changes in outside play (x2 (2)=
6.35, p = 0.012), were significantly associated with perceived
changes in MWB. Among SB, only a perceived
change in time spent sitting (x2 (2)=4.65, p = 0.031) was
statistically significant.
Logistic regressions were conducted for all statistically
significant correlations. Models were adjusted for age
and gender to control for potential confounding of these
demographic factors. Overall, outcomes did not change
significantly after adjusting for age and gender. However,
there was evidence of confounding by age for change in
sitting. Therefore, results are presented for both unadjusted
and age-adjusted models (Table 3). We found
children whose parents reported them to be discontent
with stay-at-home orders were 68% less likely to have
the same or better MWB during COVID-19 restrictions
compared to children who were content with stay-athome
orders (OR = 0.32, 95CI 0.14–0.72). Similarly, if a
child was concerned about COVID-19, they were 67%
less likely to have the same or better MWB during
COVID-19 restrictions compared to a child who was not
concerned about COVID-19 (OR = 0.33, 95CI 0.15–
0.75). In terms of PA behaviors, if a child’s perceived PA
decreased following COVID-19 restrictions, they were
53% less likely to have the same or better MWB than a
child whose perceived PA stayed the same or increased
(OR = 0.47, 95CI 0.22–0.99). Similarly, if a parent perceived
a child’s participation in organized sports decreased,
they were 66% less likely to have the same or
better MWB during COVID-19 restrictions than a child
whose perceived participation in organized sports stayed
the same or increased (OR = 0.34, 95CI 0.14–0.84). A
child whose parents perceived a decrease in playing outside
during COVID-19 restrictions were 72% less likely
to have the same of better MWB during COVID-19 restrictions
than a child whose perceived time playing outside
stayed the same or increased (OR = 0.28, 95CI 0.10–
0.80). Regarding SB, time spent sitting was no longer significant
after adjusting for age (OR = 0.30, 95CI 0.08–
1.06).
Qualitative results
Themes from qualitative interviews provided context to
how COVID-19 restrictions impacted children’s MWB
and elucidated protective factors which minimized the
impact of COVID-19 (Table 4). A prominent theme revolved
around the adjustment to stay-at-home orders
and COVID-19 restrictions. Many parents reported their
children feeling frustrated by COVID-19 restrictions and
having difficulty adjusting to online school and a lack of
peer interactions. Parents reported it was difficult for
children to adapt to this new routine and often complained
of missing friends and school. Some parents reported
children being emotionally up and down or
regressing due to a lack of social interaction they would
have had at school. When discussing the upcoming
school year, many parents reported their children were
disappointed about the prospect of not returning to in-
person school. Another prominent theme developed
around child understanding and concern about COVID-
19. Parents’ discussions about COVID-19 varied with a
child’s age. Most parents reported their child had some
level of understanding and acknowledgement that
COVID-19 causes people to be sick and can be passed
through contact with other people. Children seemed to
take precautions seriously. Many children, especially at
the beginning of the outbreak expressed worry and fear
around their family getting sick. A final theme emerged
around ways of protecting against the MWB effects of
COVID-19 restrictions. Parents felt children benefited
from being outside and staying active. While some parents
indicated limitations in PA due to closure of parks
and organized sports such as dance and soccer, many
noted playing outside in a yard, riding bikes, and taking
walks improved child MWB. Additionally, many parents
reported the use of technology for socializing to be helpful
in minimizing some of the loneliness due to COVID-
19 restrictions. Many children used video calls, multiplayer
games, and online chats to interact with friends
remotely.
Discussion
The findings of this study suggest COVID-19 restrictions
in the spring and early summer of 2020 may have impacted
child MWB, PA, and SB. Through a mixedmethods
approach, we were able to identify potential
mechanisms through which these restrictions could impact
children and potential ways of mitigating these impacts.
While our results are based on parent perceptions
around their child’s behavior and well-being during
COVID-19 restrictions, this research presents novel
findings during an unprecedented time, and provides
foundations for further understanding about the role of
COVID-19 restrictions on child MWB, PA, and SB.
Parents perceived MWB to decrease for all MWB
items in the adapted child Mood and Feelings Questionnaire
and 74% of parents reported worse child MWB
with COVID-19 restrictions. These findings support previous
research highlighting the vulnerability of child
MWB to the COVID-19 pandemic [33–35]. Qualitative
analysis conducted in this study suggest in-person school
closures and changes to daily life (e.g. limited contact
with friends and family) due to COVID-19 restrictions,
contributed to worsening child MWB. Transitions to remote
learning not only posed educational challenges,
but according to our findings increased feelings of loneliness
and unhappiness for children who missed school
activities, such as school sports and socializing with
friends. Participants also reported increased worry for
children, noting they felt the restrictions of not seeing
grandparents, attending in-person school, or being able
to use the local playground, and either drew scary conclusions
about COVID-19 or were unsure what to think
about the COVID-19 pandemic. These findings are particularly
important given many schools are continuing to
be remote throughout the fall of 2020 and spring of
2021, and daily life remains altered from life prior to the
COVID-19 pandemic [8–10, 12].
Another important finding of our study was the association
between COVID-19 restrictions and reduced PA.
This finding adds to previous research which has found
a similar association among adults and children alike
[36–40]. Reduced PA is problematic not only because of
the importance of PA in preventing obesity and chronic
disease later in life, but also because of the associations
we found between PA with perceived changes in MWB
[22]. In particular, the amount of time playing outside
was perceived by parents to have the greatest impact on
changes in MWB during COVID-19 restrictions. During
interviews parents reported their child missed activities
like playing on the local playground and spending time
outside with friends. Parents in our study overwhelmingly
felt their child’s mood and behavior improved after
spending time outside playing in the yard, riding bikes,
or taking walks with family. This finding supports previous
research suggesting outside play and connection
with nature have benefits for mental health and concentration
[41–44].
We did not find associations between time spent sitting
and changes in MWB after adjusting for age. However,
many parents we interviewed, noted that not
having the structure of in-person school, along with the
added screen time of remote learning, increased SB and
in particular time spent sitting, which was often reported
to be difficult for children. Parents felt their child’s
mood and behavior were negatively impacted, citing
how their child often complained of boredom and difficulty
concentrating in the remote learning environment.
The differences between our quantitative and qualitative
findings regarding SB and child MWB, highlight the
need for more research into the potential impact of age
on child experiences during COVID-19.
With ongoing restrictions, efforts should be directed
toward increasing socialization remotely, improving
communication with children about COVID-19, and
finding ways to increase PA and reduce SB during the
COVID-19 pandemic. One way many parents identified
as an opportunity to increase socialization was through
the use of technology. Many parents felt using technology
to socialize through multi-player games, video calls,
and social media alleviated some of the loneliness their
children were feeling due to COVID-19 restrictions.
These findings align with research highlighting how
technology can be used to maintain social connection
during the COVID-19 pandemic [45, 46]. While technology
may help improve social connection remotely, it can
also lead to increased SB and adverse health outcomes
such as increased risk of obesity and poor mental health
[47–49]. As such, it is important to consider the balance
between the need for socializing to protect against loneliness
and the imperative to reduce time spent sitting in
front of a screen. Some potential alternatives may be
more active socializing through technology [50–53]. Examples
of technology use for being active and social
could include a dance class over video call or remote
yoga with friends. As COVID-19 restrictions continue,
schools may find it beneficial to use technology to create
virtual physical education classes, where students can be
active while interacting. School interventions and policies
should focus on incorporating technology into the
remote learning space that promotes PA and supports
social connection amongst students.
In discussing child worry and concern about COVID-
19, many parents in this sample reported children often
worried less after having conversations about restrictions
being in place to prevent the transmission of COVID-19
and ways family and friends were protecting themselves
from becoming sick. Having these conversations in ageappropriate
ways may help alleviate worry and fear some
children might experience due to the COVID-19 pandemic
and associated restrictions. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) have disseminated
guidelines on the importance of communicating with
children about COVID-19 and how to speak with children
of different ages [54]. Other organizations have also
supported age appropriate discussion with children, being
open to a child’s questions, and keeping lines of
communication open [55, 56]. Further, schools can act
as important sources of information for parents on how
to have age appropriate conversations. Collaboration between
schools and parents of elementary school aged
children should be ongoing to facilitate communication
about COVID-19 and how to talk with children about
the ongoing pandemic.
Our findings on PA and SB suggest a need for interventions
and policies to promote PA and reduce SB during
the COVID-19 pandemic and associated restrictions.
Outside play was perceived to have the greatest impact
on changes in child MWB, which may provide opportunities
to promote PA in warmer months but suggests
PA may decrease in winter months. While weather is
conducive to outdoor activity, family walks or bike rides
outside and making time each day for playing in the yard
may be options. Additionally, outdoor activity can provide
safer conditions for socializing aligning with recommendations
for preventing the spread of COVID-19
[57]. If weather is not conducive to outdoor play, children
should be encouraged to spend 10–15 minutes being
active indoors through activities such as stretching,
sit-ups or jumping jacks for every hour spent sitting in
front of a screen [58]. Activity breaks will aid in maintaining
levels of PA when being active outside due to
weather is not an option. Schools should incorporate
these short exercises into the remote learning setting.
Class time PA breaks have been shown to be effective
for increasing PA and preventing obesity in the elementary
school population [59, 60]. Adapting PA breaks to
remote learning may help children maintain PA levels
during COVID-19 restrictions and through colder weather
when outside play is not as feasible.
There are a few limitations of this study. First, the
convenience sample is small and homogeneous, limiting
some opportunities for analysis and generalizability of
findings to other populations. While the survey overall
had 245 respondents, we were only able to conduct analysis
on the 144 respondents who completed the adapted
child Mood and Feelings questionnaire. Second, this
study was cross-sectional in nature. As such, we can only
assess associations between child MWB, PA, and SB
during COVID-19 restrictions and cannot make causal
inferences. Third, since we only collected data during
the months of May through July, our study cannot assess
how a longer time spent at home, or how time of year
and weather might impact child MWB, PA, and SB. Finally,
measures of change in MWB, PA, and SB relied
on parent-report and were subject to recall bias. We also
did not collect data on weekly minutes of moderate and
vigorous PA, limiting our ability to use U.S. physical activity
guidelines to assess perceived changes in child PA.
Although limited by sample size and parent-report, this
study used a mixed methods approach, which provided
context and corroboration for quantitative findings from
the online survey. Findings of this study also help contribute
to new research in the area of COVID-19 and
specifically for how COVID-19 restrictions impact
children.
Conclusion
This study captured perceived changes in MWB, PA and
SB at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic through a
mixed-methods approach. Based on our findings,
COVID-19 had a significant impact on child MWB, with
children experiencing worse MWB due to COVID-19 restrictions.
According to parents in this study, child PA
behaviors decreased, SB increased with COVID-19 restrictions
and maintaining or increasing child PA levels
and activities acted as a protective factor for child
MWB. Our results indicate monitoring child MWB, PA
and SB during this ongoing pandemic is critical to identify
ways to intervene and prevent potential long-term
consequences of poor MWB, decreased PA, and increased
SB. Schools and parents should look towards
communicating with children about the COVID-19 pandemic
to reduce fear and worry, increasing outdoor PA
as weather permits, and incorporating short activities to
break up SB and maintain PA levels.
As the COVID-19 pandemic and associated restrictions
continue, ongoing research will be needed to determine
effective interventions for child MWB and ways of
keeping children active and healthy during these unprecedented
times. More information is needed on how
COVID-19 restrictions may differentially impact
children by race and ethnicity, socioeconomic status,
and urbanicity. Additionally, with COVID-19 restrictions
ongoing, it will be critical to determine the role of seasonality
and duration of COVID-19 restrictions on child
MWB, PA, and SB. While this study contributes to an
initial understanding of how COVID-19 restrictions may
impact child MWB, PA, and SB, more research will be
needed to more fully understand both immediate and
long-term outcomes for children.