Introduction
Multimorbidity (the presence of two or more medical
conditions simultaneously [1–3]) is an increasingly important
topic as there is growing evidence that multimorbidity
is now the norm rather than the exception in
ageing populations [1, 4–6]. Multimorbidity is strongly
associated with physical and functional decline, mortality
[4, 5, 7] decreased quality of life [8, 9] and increased
health care usage and costs [4, 7, 10]. The Academy of
Medical Sciences identified the investigation of disease
clusters and their corresponding risk factors as a critical
gap in our understanding of multimorbidity [3].
Our aim is to provide a cross-country comparison of
disease prevalence as well as the unique patterns of multimorbidity
as disease clusters and associated risk factors
to uncover how differences in demographics, socioeconomic
status and health behaviors affect the combinations
of diseases within and across four countries:
United States, Canada, England and Ireland. Selection of
these four countries (all ranked globally in the top 14 according
to the 2018 United Nations human development
index) allows for comparison across the range of public
healthcare delivery systems of North America and
Europe.
An abundant body of literature compares health outcomes
between the U.S. and other developed countries;
with several publications reporting health disadvantage
and higher disease prevalence for the U.S. [11–16]. In
particular, Banks et al. showed that the U.S. population
when compared to England’s population had worse
health and higher prevalence for seven common diseases
regardless of level of socio-economic status, demographics
and behavioral risk factors [12]. Although the U.S.,
Canada, England and Ireland all have some form of publicly
funded health care for those aged over 65, the level
of public care offered varies over countries. England and
Canada have universal healthcare for all ages; Ireland
has a mixed public and private healthcare system, with
public health care for those below an identified income
level, and a range of community and hospital services
free of charge for all, despite income levels. In contrast,
the United States has a mostly privatized system.
The United States, despite having a per capita expenditure
on health care that is 1.9–2.8 times higher than
Canada, Ireland or England, has the lowest life expectancy,
highest mortality rate and highest number of
disability-adjusted life years lost due to noncommunicable
and largely preventable diseases of these
four countries (Additional file 1: Table 1).
Evidence required to address these health policy issues
requires an understanding of the complexities of multimorbidity
and related health factors. Here we have the
opportunity to do so across multiple countries, yielding
findings of the common trends of health and the specific
patterns of multimorbidity unique to the U. S, Canada,
Ireland and England.
Methods
Analysis was based on cross-sectional data from a total
of 62,111 respondents aged 52–85, participating in the
2012 (wave 11) U.S. Health and Retirement Survey
(HRS) (n = 10,858) [17]; 2012–2013 (wave 6) English
Longitudinal Study on Ageing (ELSA) (n = 7938) [18];
2012 (wave 2) The Irish Longitudinal Study in Ageing
(TILDA) (n = 6668) [19] and 2010–2015 baseline of the
Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging (CLSA) (n =
36,647) [20]. The design of these studies has been comprehensively
described elsewhere [17–21] but for completeness
is explained in Additional file 2 Section 1.
To eliminate differences in disease prevalence and patterns
due to the disparate racial structures, analysis was
limited to the non-Hispanic white subpopulation. A
breakdown of the cohort characteristics for all four
countries can be seen in Additional file 3: Tables 1–4.
Self-reported diagnoses and risk factors
Nine self-reported medical conditions were identified as
common across all four studies: hypertension, diabetes,
stroke (including transient ischemic attack), angina,
myocardial infarction (MI), arthritis, cancer (not including
minor skin cancers), lung disease (at least one of:
emphysema, chronic bronchitis or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease) and osteoporosis. A tenth condition
included psychological disorders of anxiety/mood (Psych
1) (CLSA, HRS) and/or psychiatric problems (Psych 2)
(TILDA, HRS, ELSA).
Covariates
Covariates included age, sex and socioeconomic status
(SES), characterized by education level and household
income tertiles. Employment status was also included to
ensure differences in household income were more reflective
of permanent features of SES and not confounded
by a lack of income due to temporary
unemployment or retirement. Health factors controlled
for were body mass index, smoking history and alcohol
consumption. For detailed information on the covariates
and harmonization of medical conditions across studies,
see Additional file 2 Section 2.
Statistical analysis
Cross-sectional survey weights were used to report
population representative disease prevalence using
STATA 15. Crude population prevalence of disease was
calculated using the tab command in STATA 15. Odds
ratios for disease presence and risk factors were calculated
using a survey-weighted logistic regression for each
disease. This was implemented with the svy:logit
command in STATA15. When making comparisons directly
to the U.S., we pooled data across countries, ensuring
cluster and strata variables across countries were
accounted for; country-level weights were scaled to have
a common mean and standard deviation 1 to prevent
countries with weights on a larger scale dominating the
analysis. Fully adjusted income, education and BMI gradients
for each disease were identified and calculated
with the addition of an interaction term by country. The
marginal effect of each respective variable was then extracted
assuming all other confounding variables were
equal. This was performed using the margins command
in STATA15.
Disease patterns were identified using Latent Class
Analyses (LCA) which were population weighted in all
cases and took into account the stratification and clustering
inherent in the cohort sampling designs. LCA is a
model-based clustering method for multivariate categorical
data and has previously been applied in the analysis
of multimorbidity [22, 23]. In the case of multimorbidity,
clustering using LCA is more appropriate than standard
distance-based methods, such as k-means or hierarchical
clustering, since the appropriate probability distribution
for the data is readily available. Furthermore, LCA allows
extra flexibility for diseases to have partial membership
across multiple clusters unlike other more limiting
distance-based clustering methods.
Two sets of parameters underlie the model: the group
probability τ and item probability θ. The group probability
parameter represents the a priori probability that an
observation belongs to a particular group, so that
P(Group g) = τg. The item response probability represents
the probability of a success for a given item, conditional
on group membership, so that P(Item m=
1 | Group g) = θgm.
More formally, let X = X1, …, Xn denote Mdimensional
vector-valued binary random variables,
composed of G groups. The observed-data likelihood
distribution for the data X can then be written: pðXj θ; τ
Þ ¼ Qni
¼1PGg
¼1τgQMm
¼1θxim
gmð1−θgmÞ1−Xim .
The naïve Bayes assumption that observations are conditionally
independent based on group membership has
been made for this model. Direct inference using the
observed-data likelihood is typically difficult and is facilitated
by the introduction of latent variables Z = Z1, …,
Zn. Each Zi=Zi1, …ZiG is a G-dimensional vector, representing
the true cluster membership of Xi as a multinomial
random variable. That is, suppose that the true group
membership is known for each Xi and is denoted by Zig= 1
if observation i belongs to Group g, otherwise Zig= 0. The
complete-data density for an observation (Xi, Zi) is then pð
X; Zjθ; τÞ ¼ Qni
¼1QGg
¼1fτgQMm
¼1θxim
gmð1−θgmÞ1−Ximg
Zig : LCA
thus allows the data to be summarised at a global and local
level. The parameters θ and τ summarise the overall behaviour
of the clusters in the data, while each variable Zi informs
us of the cluster membership, and thus behaviour, of
an individual observation i.
Inference for our LCA models was performed using an
expectation-maximisation (EM) algorithm. This works in
two steps: the E-step, where Z is estimated, based on the
current values of θ and τ, and the M-step, where the
complete data likelihood is maximised with respect to θ
and τ based on the current value of Z. The algorithm
proceeds iteratively until it has deemed to converge; that
is, once parameter estimates remain more or less unchanged
after successive iterations.
As the true number of groups G is not known in advance,
each LCA model was run over a range of 1–10
groups. The number of clusters was then chosen using
the Bayesian information criterion (BIC), where BIC ¼ −
2 logpðX jθ; τÞ þ ðGM þ G−1Þ logðP
n
i¼1
wiÞ; wi is the survey
weight attached to observation i and logp(X |θ, τ) is
the survey weighted pseudo-loglikelihood. Here a lower
value of BIC indicates a more suitable choice of model.
In many practical examples as was performed in this
current work a balance has to be found between model
parsimony and model fit and so an “elbow” is usually
identified whereby the addition of clusters has diminishing
returns to model fit improvement. We applied LCA
using the software package lcca in R [24]. Code to implement
this analysis and BIC values for all models
assessed are provided in Additional file 4.
Results
Individual disease prevalence
Figure 1 shows the crude population weighted prevalence
of the 10 medical conditions by sex and age categories.
Table 1 shows the odds ratio of each condition
compared to the U.S. after adjusting for confounding
variables. Here, it can be seen, that the U.S. had significantly
higher prevalence than England for all 10 medical
conditions and for all, except diabetes, when compared
to Canada, even in adjusted models. The U.S. had significantly
higher prevalence for all, except osteoporosis,
when compared to Ireland.The U.S. and Canada had
very similar prevalence of diabetes, regardless of age and
sex (Fig. 1). The odds of having diabetes in the U.S. was
approximately double that of Ireland or England (Table
1) even in adjusted models. The U.S. had a pronounced
higher prevalence of hypertension, arthritis, and psychological
conditions across all age and sex categories. In
particular, 56.8% of the U.S. population had arthritis; significantly,
higher than the other countries whose
prevalence was 32.3–38.2%. Ireland had the highest
prevalence of osteoporosis (13.85%) followed closely by
the U.S. (13.0%) then Canada (9.8%) and England (7.5%).
Additional files 5, 6 and 7 show the fully adjusted
disease prevalence across countries with respect to
income, education and BMI. Here it can be seen
that income and education gradients are more
pronounced for the U.S., especially for lung disease,
stroke (with respect to income), myocardial infarction,
psychological illnesses (with respect to income),
and high blood pressure. The prevalence of
psychological illnesses in all cases was inversely related
to income, however the opposite was true of
education level. Hence those with lower income but
who are higher educated are more likely to be diagnosed
with a psychological illnesses. In the U.S.,
60.7% of adults, aged 52–85, had two or more medical
conditions. This is considerably higher than the
other countries: Canada 45.3%, England 42.1% and
Ireland 38.6%.
Disease cluster compositions
Five latent classes (disease clusters) were identified
for all four cohorts. The item response probabilities
for the clusters of each country can be seen in Fig. 2.
Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6 show the odds ratios and 95%
confidence intervals for risk factors associated with
consistent across countries (Fig. 3, 4, 5 and 6). However,
the composition of clusters across countries varies.
For example, the “high probability of disease”
group across all countries was associated with higher
odds of being older, lower educated, lower income
having a smoking history and being obese (Fig. 3, 4, 5
and 6). Regarding the composition of this “high probability
of disease” group however, Canada and England
had higher probability of myocardial infarction
(47.9% England, 37.2% Canada, 6.32% Ireland 19.2%
U.S.) and angina (67.6% England, 37.5% Canada,
15.3% Ireland, 29.9% U.S.) (see Group 1 Fig. 2a, b, c,
d). For Ireland and the U.S., cardiovascular diseases
were separated into a distinct cluster along with high
blood pressure, diabetes and arthritis (see Fig. 2
Group 2 a, d).
BMI
Having an elevated BMI (> 25) was strongly associated
with the “high probability of disease” groups across all
four countries (see Group 1 Figs. 3, 4, 5 and 6). It was
also associated with the two groups which were predominantly
cardiometabolic and metabolic in nature across
countries: Group 2 and Group 4 (see Fig. 2 (cluster patterns),
Figs. 3, 4, 5 and 6 (odds ratios and 95% CI), see
also Additional files 8, 9, 10 and 11). Although, older age
increased the odds of all disease groups, the “high probability
of disease” group for the U.S. had a high proportion
of 52–64 year olds of 37.4%. The disease cluster
with the highest disease burden for the other countries
(Group 1) had a lower proportion of younger participants
(31.6% Canada, 14.2% England, 11.4% Ireland).
Education
The gradient and significance of socioeconomic indicators
varied across countries for their respective disease
patterns. In general, groups which consisted of high
blood pressure, diabetes and arthritis and/or cardiovascular
diseases were negatively associated with education.
High education was associated with decreased odds of
three disease groups for the U.S. and Canada (see
Groups 1, 2, 4 Fig. 3 U.S. and Groups 1,2,4 Fig. 4
Canada). High education was also associated with two
groups for England (Groups 1, 4 Fig. 5) and Ireland
(Groups 1,2 Fig. 6). Across all four countries the disease
cluster which predominantly consisted of high blood
pressure, arthritis, osteoporosis and in some cases mental
illnesses was not associated with education (Group 3
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, 4, 5 and 6).
Income
Canada and the U.S. had more pronounced income gradients
with regards to disease patterns. For Canada,
medium and high income were negatively associated
with three clusters (Groups 1,3,4 Fig. 2b and Fig. 4 see
also Additional file 9). For the U.S. high income significantly
decreased the odds of all four clusters (Figs. 2, 3
and Additional file 8). High income was associated with
decreased odds of three groups for England (Groups
1,2,3 Fig. 2c and Fig. 5 see also Additional file 10).
Ireland had the least pronounced income gradient and
high income was negatively associated with only two
groups, both of which had high probability of high blood
pressure, diabetes and arthritis and cardiovascular diseases
(Groups 2 and 4 Fig. 2d and Fig. 6, see also
Additional file 11).
Smoking
With regards to lifestyle factors, in general having a history
of smoking increased the odds of disease for the
majority of disease groups. Canada and the U.S. had the
most pronounced effect for smoking history where being
a current smoker was positively associated with all four
disease patterns for the U.S. (Fig. 2a and 3) and all but
Group 2 for Canada which was predominantly metabolic,
arthritis and cancer (see Group 2 Fig. 2b and Fig.
4). A similar trend was found for being a past smoker.
Ireland had the least pronounced effect where being a
past smoker was only associated with Group 1 “high
probability of disease” and Group 2 which had high
prevalence of metabolic and cardiovascular conditions
(Groups 1 and 2 Fig. 2d and Fig. 6; see also
Additional file 11).
Alcohol
Alcohol consumption was negatively associated with all
disease clusters for the U.S. (Fig. 3) and for two clusters
for Canada and England (Canada Group 1: High probability
of disease and Group 4: Metabolic, Arthritis, Psychological
groups Fig. 2b and Fig. 4; England Group 1:
High probability of disease and Group 4: Metabolic,
High Probability of Arthritis see Fig. 2c and Fig. 5).
Ireland displayed the opposite trend, with alcohol consumption
being positively associated with Group 3:
Osteoporosis,Arthritis, Hypertension (Female) (population
weighted prevalence 18.19%, n = 1387) and Group
4: Metabolic, Arthritis see Fig. 2d and Fig. 6.
Discussion
Overall, the U.S. had significantly higher prevalence of
nearly all medical conditions compared to Canada, England
and Ireland. This trend persisted even after controlling
for age, sex, SES, and health behaviors. This study
focused solely on the non-Hispanic white subpopulations
of each country to control for the disparities
of health outcomes in racial structures of the U.S. and
other countries
Differences in disease prevalence
The U.S. and Ireland had marked higher prevalence of
osteoporosis when compared to England. Differences in
genetic susceptibility or vitamin D levels are unlikely to
account for such a difference as Ireland and England
have similar latitude and a very homogenous genetic
structure [25]. A possible explanation lies in increased
detection in the U.S. and Ireland as both countries have
more of a culture of privatized healthcare and offer affordable
scans to diagnose osteoporosis privately in both
countries ($85–305 U.S., €80–100 Ireland). In the case of
Ireland this theory is further supported by the fact that
those with high income and high education (i.e. those
who are more likely to have private health insurance and
or more disposable income to afford doctor’s fees) had
the highest probability of being diagnosed with
osteoporosis.
The prevalence of diabetes and cancer were considerably
higher in the U.S. and Canada. All four countries
offer public screening programs for cervical, breast and
bowel cancer so increased detection is unlikely to explain
such discrepancies. Ireland and England have a
higher cancer mortality rate [26–29] which may partially
explain this difference. There were also pronounced geographical
similarities in the prevalence of psychological
conditions. The U.S. and Canada had much higher
prevalence of psychological conditions than Ireland or
England. This is likely at least partially due to differences
in how psychological conditions are defined and diagnosed
across countries. Practitioners in the U.S. and
Canada use the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders to inform diagnoses whereas England
and Ireland use the International Classification of Diseases
and Related Health Problems. Previous literature
has noted discrepancies in disease classification between
these criteria [30–32]. The U.K. and Ireland also have a
higher number of psychiatrists working in the mental
health sector per 100,000 population (18.9 England, 17.4
Ireland, 14.7 U.S., 10.5 Canada) [33, 34] a higher number
of mental health hospitals per 100,000 population
(Ireland 0.62, U.S. 0.19, Canada 0.06) and higher number
of mental health outpatient facilities per 100,000 population
(Ireland 3.83, U.S. 0.37, Canada 0.33) [31–34]. The
level of funding for mental health services has a nearly
exact inverse relationship to the prevalence of psychological
conditions. Although speculative, it may also be
that more availability and early access to mental health
services in England and Ireland is partially offsetting the
onset of chronic mental health conditions in these countries
[32, 35].
Disease patterns
Regarding the analysis of disease clusters and their associated
risk factors, all four countries uncovered five
similar groups. Knowing disease combinations for a
given country can bring about a better understanding of
the complex nature of multimorbidity. For example, in
all four countries hypertension and arthritis were highly
prevalent in three disease clusters. Non-steroidal antiinflammatory
drugs, used to treat pain in inflammatory
conditions such as arthritis, can affect renal function and
therefore the effectiveness of antihypertensive medications
[36, 37]. This highlights the importance of treating
the complex combination of diseases present in individuals
and not just individual diseases [38]. A comprehensive
assessment of older persons rather than specialty
specific assessments is most appropriate (i.e. comprehensive
geriatric assessment [39]).
In all four countries there is socioeconomic disparity
across disease patterns and also with respect to individual
disease prevalences. The U.S. in particular have a
much more pronounced socio-economic gradient than
the other three countries for conditions such as lung disease,
stroke, myocardial infarction, psychological illnesses
and high blood pressure in adjusted models.
Socioeconomic indicators for such as education and,
particularly income, are also more pronounced for the
U.S., Canada and England than for Ireland with respect
to disease clusters. One possible reason may be that Ireland’s
distribution of wealth is more equal than the other
countries with the U.S. having the least equal distribution
of the four countries. OECD estimates for the Gini
coefficient: a measure of income equality shows that Ireland’s
index was lower (more equal) than the U.S.,
Canada and England (0.308, 0.396, 0.320, 0.358 respectively
for 2013). The work of Marmot [40] and Pickett
and Wilkinson [41] for example, suggests that high levels
of country-level inequality is harmful for population
health, and some recent studies have documented interesting
links between country-level inequality and inflammatory
markers such as CRP [42]. The work of
Zaninotto et al. [17] also noted that healthy life expectancy
was significantly related to socioeconomic inequality
and showed similar levels of disability-free life
expectancy in the U.S. and England. Nevertheless, income
inequality does not wholly explain the differences
in disease prevalence and patterns, as the U.S. had consistently
higher prevalence of most diseases at each level
of the socioeconomic gradient when compared to other
countries even after adjusting for confounding
covariates.
The link between alcohol consumption and disease
clusters across countries at first seems counterintuitive.
For the U.S., Canada and England drinking alcohol was
associated with reduced odds for at least two clusters
whereas the opposite trend was found for Ireland. For
the U.S., Canada and England the disease clusters negatively
associated with alcohol consumption were those
with the highest average number of medical conditions.
Conversely, the two disease clusters positively associated
with alcohol consumption for Ireland had the lowest
mean number of morbidities. Therefore, the negative association
for the U.S., Canada and England may be due
to changes in behavior after disease diagnosis.
Excess weight represents a de-facto state of increased
inflammatory signalling [43] which in turn increases risk
for many chronic diseases [44]. Obesity is also a known
risk factor for many of the conditions included in this
study such as diabetes, hypertension, heart disease,
osteoarthritis and certain types of cancer [45]. Having an
elevated BMI increased the odds of being in three disease
clusters across countries and had a pronounced effect
on the individual prevalence of all conditions except
osteoporosis and cancer. Self-reported obesity was highest
for the U.S. (33.3%), similar for England and Canada
(26.7, 26.2% respectively) and lowest for Ireland (24.2%).
Although BMI was based on self-reported weight and
height, our estimations are in line with WHO and other
estimates for 2012 [46–49].
Two main limitations of this work are that, our analysis
was limited to 10 chronic conditions and these conditions
were self-reported doctor’s diagnoses. As such,
prevalence of diseases may be underestimated in cases
where a participant has not yet engaged with the healthcare
system to get a diagnosis, or a participant may not
report a chronic disease as the condition has been managed.
To counteract the latter issue we included the lifetime
prevalence of all conditions and so included
participants as having a condition if they had ever reported
disease incidence at any previous wave and had
not later disputed it. Another limitation is that although
risk factors such as BMI, smoking history, and alcohol
consumption, were controlled for, the length of time being
overweight/obese; alcohol/smoking intensity and
duration and physical activity over the life course were
not. The obesity epidemic started earlier in the U.S.
across all age ranges. Childhood obesity in the U.S. in
1975 (relevant to the youngest participants) was more
than double that of England, Canada and Ireland (5.5%
U.S., 2.7% Canada, 2.7% UK, 1% Ireland) [50]. Adult
obesity rates have increased dramatically in the last 45
years in all countries but have been persistently higher
in the U.S.. Between 1975 and 2016, the obesity rate in
the U.S. increased to 36.2% (from 11.6%) while in
Canada it increased to 29.4% (from 9.8%), in the U.K. to
27.8% (from 9.4%) and in Ireland to 25.3% (from 6.4%)
[51]. For eight of the 10 conditions studied, the U.S. had
the highest overall prevalence and for six conditions
Ireland has the lowest prevalence with respect to BMI.
These trends align with the childhood and adult obesity
rates from 1975 onwards. There is a large body of evidence
to suggest that childhood habits and health factors
are strong determinants of disease onset in adulthood
[12, 52, 53] and although anecdotal it is possible that
many of the adverse health patterns and disease patterns
found may be due to the fact that the U.S. were the first
to experience the obesity epidemic followed by Canada,
England then Ireland.
Conclusions
We have shown that the U.S. had significantly higher
prevalence of multimorbidity and nearly all medical conditions
studied compared to Canada, England and
Ireland. This trend persisted even after controlling for
age, sex, socio-economic and lifestyle factors.
The effect of socioeconomic status on disease patterns
and individual disease prevalence was more pronounced
in the U.S., Canada, and England, than for Ireland. This
information can be used to better understand the complex
nature of multimorbidity and identify appropriate
prevention and management strategies for treating the
unique disease patterns of multimorbidity in these respective
countries.
The trends and patterns of disease prevalence across
the four countries aligned closely with obesity trends
since 1975, although anecdotal this may suggest that lifestyle
habits and health behaviors over the life course
may be likely drivers for the differences in later disease
onset, multimorbidity and disease patterns.
