Background
Childhood obesity has increased three-fold across all
races and ethnicities during the past 30 years [1, 2].
Obesity is most prevalent among Hispanic and Alaska
Native/American Indian (AN/AI) peoples, with increases
in early childhood obesity particularly evident among
AN/AI children [3, 4]. Unpublished data collected for
reporting purposes by one organization managing Head
Start programs in Alaska’s rural Yukon-Kuskokwim (YK)
region, showed 68% of 3- to 5-year old AN children
met criteria for being overweight according to the Centers
of Disease Control and Prevention’s growth charts,
while 43% met criteria for being obese. Substantial evidence
suggests that obesity in early childhood, from
birth to age 5 years, is a strong predictor of adolescent
and adult obesity [2, 5–8]. In two cohort studies conducted
within Alaska’s Y-K region during 2004–2010,
approximately 40% of Alaska Native (AN) adults were
obese [9]. These data collectively emphasize the importance
of establishing healthy eating and physical activity
practices at an early age as the primary prevention
method for obesity in adulthood.
Research suggests that obesity prevention efforts are
most effective in Indigenous communities when they are
aligned with the cultural values, norms, and strengths of
the local nutrition environment [10–12]. Because local
understandings of food and health in Indigenous communities
arise from integrated, holistic, place-based
worldviews that are connected to local value systems, it
is important for prevention efforts to reflect these traditional
values [13, 14]. Specifically, nutrition interventions
in Indigenous communities need to address the
way local perceptions and understandings of how food
affects “the physical, psychological, social, and spiritual
dimensions of all age and gender groups in community
life” [15]. In Alaska, rural remote communities are isolated,
located off the road system, and predominantly
populated by AN people indigenous to the region. To
date, the only known successful, small-scale, nutrition
intervention conducted and published in the Y-K region,
home to AN Yup’ik and Cup’ik people, intentionally integrated
cultural values, norms, and strengths of the
local nutrition environment [15].
AN Yup’ik communities have great respect for their
Elders as knowledge bearers [16]. Elders pass traditional
values, norms, beliefs, and practices down
through the generations via storytelling and practical
application and are therefore well positioned to pass
on knowledge about the local nutrition environment
in rural Alaska [17, 18]. However, in just the past few decades,
massive social, political, and economic movements
have disrupted the intergenerational transmission of traditional
ways of life that have sustained Alaska’s isolated
communities for centuries. Exposure to external cultures
through colonization, westernization, mechanization, and
globalization has contributed to an immense loss of Indigenous
knowledge [17–19]. In addition, many of these
same factors have caused a shift in the traditional food environment
and contributed to a nutrition transition [20].
While many Elders living in these communities still possess
traditional wisdom about healthy diet and lifestyle
practices, this wisdom may not be known or followed by
young families [21, 22].
With the elevated risk of obesity in AN children, prevention
efforts are underway to help curtail the trend toward
obesity, including two studies that are led by the
authors of this paper and funded by the National Institutes
of Health (R01NR015417) and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture (2018–69,001-27,544). Elders can aid in
the development of these efforts by sharing their personal
journey through the traditional norms of the past
to the present norms today. To enhance the local and
regional relevance to design, implement, and evaluate an
obesity prevention effort, the objective of this study was
to listen to Yup’ik and Cup’ik Elders to better understand
their views on maintaining a healthy diet, physical
activities, and traditional values to inform obesity prevention
efforts. These objectives fit into the goals of the
broader intervention plan to 1) increase the consumption
of nutrient dense traditional foods, and fruits and
vegetables from the tundra and the store, while decreasing
high-calorie low-nutrient prepared foods; 2) decrease
the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, while increasing
water intake; and 3) decrease screen time while
increasing physical activity.
Methods
The study was reviewed and approved by the Alaska
Area Institutional Review Board, and Tribal approval
bodies at the Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium
and the Yukon-Kuskokwim Health Corporation. Investigators
carried out the exploratory qualitative study in
May through December 2018, in preparation for a large
scale, randomized community intervention designed to
promote healthy eating and physical activity.
Setting
The research team conducted 12 Elder focus groups in
12 rural, remote Alaska Native communities in the
Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region in southwest Alaska.
These communities, with populations that range between
300 and 1200 people, are located off the road system,
which means that they are accessible only by small
aircraft year-round and by boat in the summer and snow
machine in the winter. Permanent residents in the communities
are primarily Yup’ik/Cup’ik ethnicity, whose
lifestyles are based on mixed economies of subsistence
practices (e.g., hunting, fishing, and gathering) blended
with some cash income, which can be supplemented by
federal assistance programs [23, 24]. This region has one
of the lowest population densities in the US and has limited
infrastructure [25].
Participants
Respecting requests made by community members and
Tribal Councils, two community liaisons were hired to
invite Yup’ik/Cup’ik Elders to participate in a focus
group. An Elder is considered a community member
who could provide cultural insight on the traditional lifestyle.
Elders’ command of English varies by individual. In
general, most children and young adults speak fluent
English, attending schools where instruction is in English.
While Elders may speak English, it is a second
language for them and many are more comfortable conversing
in their first language. Thus, two AN Yup’ik/
Cup’ik-speaking interpreters were available to travel with
the research team, assisting with translation and interpretation
during the focus group discussions. Focus
groups were facilitated by non-Native researchers with
focus group experience, well-versed in AN cultural
values, and deep respect for Elders. Facilitators relied on
cues from interpreters signaling an appropriate time to
move to the next discussion point. The team did not
collect any identifying information from participants. All
participants received a gift card at the end of the session.
Data collection
Focus group questions sought perspectives on the importance
of traditional foods and physical activities, as
well as barriers to traditional ways. Facilitators asked Elders
to provide their opinions to the following questions:
“In what ways are traditional foods important?”, “What
is the best way to teach about traditional foods?” “Tell
me about mealtimes as a child”, “What kinds of activities
did children do before television?” and “What concerns
do you have about how children are raised today in
terms of the foods they eat and the activities they do?” A
Yup’ik translator was present at some of the focus
groups, when available. All focus group discussions were
audio-recorded, translated to English when necessary by
the Yup’ik/Cup’ik-speaking interpreters, and transcribed.
Data analysis
Two researchers listened to each recording and read
each transcript. They independently created a summary
and a subsequent reflective memo that captured the
most salient themes that emerged from the data, using
open coding [26]. The memos were then compared and
contrasted until consensus was reached by the researchers
on the most salient themes. After reaching
consensus, the researchers created summative documents
by question and themes for each community. Finally,
the researchers applied selective coding to the
transcripts using the major themes that emerged during
the first round of open coding [26]. The themes included
the nutritional and cultural benefits of traditional foods,
concerns about changing dietary patterns, and suggestions
to maintain subsistence practices.
Results
Focus group sizes varied from three to twelve participants
in each focus group. In total, 66 Elders (36
women, 30 men) participated across the 12 sites. Discussions
ranged between 90 and 120 min in length. Elders
attending the focus groups provided a clear and consistent
recollection of what their life looked like when they
were young. They also discussed the nutritional and
cultural benefits of traditional foods, concerns around
changing dietary patterns, and suggestions for maintaining
subsistence practices.
Nutritional benefits of traditional foods
Elders believe strongly in the importance of eating traditional
foods, such as seal oil, a variety of fish, berries,
moose, and tundra greens. They also cited the importance
of consuming fermented foods. These foods were
consumed when they were young and the Elders believe
they should continue to be consumed today because of
their health benefits since, “We know how to take care
of ourselves already nutritiously. We’ve done it for many,
many, many, many, many, many years” (Alaska Native
Village (ANV) 2). To Elders, traditional foods are synonymous
with healthy foods and what people should be
eating. As one commented, “And the doctors will say to
the person who has illness, ‘Eat right food’. Native
people, we know what to eat, right food, our own food”
(ANV9). This understanding - that traditional foods are
the “right food” or the “healthful foods” - was passed
down by their ancestors.
Our ancestors used to say that our Native foods are
really good to eat. They are the healthful foods. And
also the berries. And also the plants that grow
around this land. They’re really good. And some are
medicines, like the plants. And then as I was growing
up I came upon two people who became sick and
they said that they blamed the preservatives that are
in canned food (ANV9).
Elders also recognize the short and long-term benefits
of traditional foods. For example, one Elder, recognizing
the immediate impact of traditional foods, shared that
“He [dad] used to say, ‘My body feels like it’s sluggish
somehow’ and then he has the chum dry fish and he said
it revives him because of the nutrients from that fish”
(ANV10). Another Elder acknowledged the long-term
benefits and said “Their [ancestors’] longevity was a result
of eating their own traditional food that kept them
healthy” (ANV7).
To further illustrate the superiority of traditional
foods, Elders compared the value of traditional foods to
those bought at the store. One Elder stated that “All this
food, wild food, is organic, better than store bought
food” (ANV4). Another Elder said, “The most important
Yup’ik food that we eat today, they have a lot of good
stuff in them, vitamins, healthier food. They’re more
healthier than the ones we eat like when we go into
Bethel [a larger community with restaurants and stores],
like junk food,” (ANV10).
Given the benefits of traditional foods, the Elders also
expressed the importance of introducing traditional
foods such as meat broth, fish, berries, and greens to
young children, starting during pregnancy. As one
shared, “The mom, when they are pregnant, they need
to start right there in eating traditional foods and stay
away from processed foods or junk food when they are
pregnant. I think that’s where it starts, when they smell
that food” (ANV2). This is important because they believe,
“Native food is healthy, it’s good for a child”
(ANV5) and that, “When you start, when you have our
foods right from the beginning, it affects your brain,
your growth, your whole body, the way you act”
(ANV4). Many connected these early experiences with
preferences later on. “He’ll eat all kinds of Native food
because we started him young” (ANV1).
Like I said, in the beginning, what we eat from when
you are little, like even infants, if you want to train
them to eat blackfish or Native foods and stuff, they
take the food and put it into their mouth. As they
are growing, that is what they are going to eat. They
will be able to eat it because they recognize the taste.
That is what they want (ANV4).
A number of Elders shared how they instilled a preference
for traditional foods, which also helped them identify
potential allergies early on. Some commented about
wiping food on the baby’s mouth to help them, “start to
eat Eskimo food” (ANV5) or help them smell what they
are cooking so they know what it is “before they even
start growing” (ANV2). One further explained,
Even when they’re newborns, we kind of let them
taste from the mouth. Like my oldest daughter, when
she was a newborn, I let her taste some, it was very
bloody, my fingers were very bloody from seal liver.
As she was growing, I was surprised she loved seal
liver. She liked to eat it with seal oil, raw liver. We
eat it because I put it on her lips. To me, it’s up to
the parent to teach that five-year old about our Native
food (ANV5).
Cultural benefits of traditional foods
Elders also expressed the importance of eating traditional
foods to retain and promote a cultural identity.
For example, families celebrated “first catch parties”,
where a child’s first collection of berries or their first fish
or animal caught (moose, bird, duck), were given to Elders
(ANV6) or was celebrated in a large community
feast (ANV9). One expressed that, “You are proud, and
happy, and nice because you know that you are going to
do something for your family when you are gathering
food” (ANV4). As a result, as one Elder remarked, “Eat
your Yup’ik food, don’t lose it” (ANV7).
The connection between traditional foods and culture
was shared through stories of learning how to harvest
those foods themselves, learning what is safe to eat, and
how to not overharvest. It was common to hear an Elder
share statements like, “As I was growing up I used to
watch my mom prepare food. I learned from watching
and touching” (ANV9). This sharing of traditional knowledge
is connected to preserving one’s culture, as one
Elder stated,
I think it’s very important that you teach the young
people our traditional way of life. That way, they
will use it when they get older and pass it onto their
children. My father passed on his tradition to me
and I’m slowly passing that tradition onto my children.
It’s very important (ANV1).
Traditional knowledge was also tied to pragmatic and
essential information needed for sustainability. During a
discussion around some of the specific practices that
needed to be taught regarding the importance of not
over-harvesting, one Elder shared,
You cannot take all of them (mouse food). They always
tell us, you have to save some for them (the
mice) because they already provide you with it. You
go to another one [den] and then take some more. So
there is a tradition too, they have to know that traditional
knowledge at the same time to gather those
foods (ANV4).
Additionally, Elders expressed an interest in sharing
their knowledge around subsistence practices like how
to find, prepare, store, and cook traditional foods, which
includes showing specialized ways of taking care of fish,
harvesting berries and greens, braiding grass, preparing
nets, and setting traps for, “If you don’t teach them how
to catch their food, they won’t know it” (ANV7).
Concerns about changing dietary patterns
The tenor of the conversations amongst the Elders often
turned when the focus changed from what was done in
the past to present time, as many expressed concerns
about the current generation of parents and children. In
particular, they shared angst over their lack of knowledge
and consumption of traditional foods, their approaches
to parenting, the perceived lack of physical
activity, and their inability to pass on the traditional
ways of knowing. Following are the sub-themes that
emerged in the conversations.
Traditional Foods
Elders’ enthusiastic recollections of how they collected
and shared traditional foods as children turned solemn
as they openly expressed concern that the current generation
of parents may lack the knowledge to keep their
children healthy. “Nowadays, the younger generation
eats nothing but junk foods” (ANV5) and as a result,
“These young ones that don’t know, hardly eat any Native
food. They just want store-bought meals from the
store” (ANV1). This assertion was based on what many
seemed to witness, as one mentioned, “When I see the
children, I always see them eating chips and candy bars
and pop and juice, even though we tell them not to have
them all the time, to have Yup’ik food, but they don’t
like to eat it” (ANV6). Another reiterated that experience
by saying, “My concern is when I observe the store,
they stock up a lot of soft drinks like pop, sugary stuff,
and they disappear in no time … So that kind of tells us
they’re eating a lot of that stuff” (ANV10).
Elders expressed concern that the shift in dietary patterns
will negatively affect the health of their families.
“The results of eating so much sweet/sugary food are
not good. It is common to see people with pop in their
hand and drinking it. The results are detrimental...-
Drinking that soda does not have a good end” (ANV7).
And, this issue was one they saw as being an imminent
concern.
I think today a lot of our kids are consuming too
much sugar. That’s really bad for them and causes a
lot of problems for your health. And then I’ve never
seen so much disease, white man disease compared
to 50 years ago. Today cancer is probably the number
one killer. I’m kind of afraid that diabetes is
probably going to come up because a lot of these kids
are consuming too much sugar, a lot of potato chips,
and other stuff. (ANV9).
This stood in stark contrast to the ways the Elders
grew up.
Growing up in spring camps, summer camps, and
here, we depended on fish just like they said, moose
and everything that is provided for us here. And I
think that is why there was hardly any deaths here.
People were very healthy and strong and lack of dental
problems in the future and lack of, no diabetes
problems because of the health foods. I think the
changes with the federal government coming and
starting to feed us processed foods and others really
changed our life. And then the food stamps came
and then people started buying processed foods or
getting the processed foods and that in a very short
period of time, it went from very healthy people into
you know, getting dependent on somebody else’s rules
of nutrition. When BIAs [Bureau of Indian Affairs
Schools] came over and started the USDA [United
States Department of Agriculture] and we just
started to eat food in the schools and it was different
from our diet at our home. It really changed
(ANV2).
But, many also seemed to believe that part of the issue
was the current generation’s lack of understanding of
why traditional foods were different from those they got
at the store.
I think one of them [child] was 3 years old, they
asked me how come I never buy them chips. ‘That’s
not real food, it’s just junk food’ is what I answered.
And I told them, ‘The food I cook that Daddy
catches from the land and ocean and that I pick
with you kids has a lot of vitamins and iron
(ANV5).
Elders also acknowledged that many new parents did
not know how to harvest and gather these traditional
foods but instead, got most of their food from the store
(ANV6) or relied on food stamps (ANV11). “Many of
our young people don’t know how to go out there and
catch something, fish. They don’t know the land, too”
(ANV1). They worried about this turning into a longterm
problem because, “Eating Yup’ik food, it’s up to the
parents really. They need to encourage their kids to eat
healthier foods” (ANV10).
Drivers of changing dietary patterns
Some of Elders’ reflections seemed to be related to
forces beyond their control. For example, several Elders
worried that traditional early schooling does not
reinforce Native ways. “These kids are going to have
Head Start too early. They should have been home longer
and they should start school at a later date and
should be taught at home” (ANV1). They found it problematic
that the schools and USDA have different standards
of acceptability when it comes to donated foods
than families use for themselves, which is compounded
by the fact that there are limited commercial facilities
for traditional food processing. Elders also stated that
the negative impacts from missionaries and teachers
were still present and felt in their traditional foods and
ways. As one elaborated,
But one of the sad things that occurred was especially
before the ‘50s, the 1950s, the old people were
still, the teachers were young people at home and in
the community. But at some time, we were told, the
young people were told to quit speaking Yup’ik. And
our Elders didn’t speak English, only Yup’ik. So as a
result, they more or less started quieting down and
not teaching what they know. So again, people didn’t
get the same teachings about living, about values,
about gathering that the Elders received. And maybe
that’s why many of our young people don’t know
how to live in the right way (ANV1).
Elders also believed that western schools, like Head
Start, which uses a family-style approach that allows
children to serve themselves, teaches poor habits that
contribute to food waste.
I think one of the things that is not too good for our
young people is the way the schools serve food. They
waste a lot of food. Kids are too … They eat a little
bit of this and throw the rest away. But not like he
said, we eat what we’re given and we eat it respectfully
(ANV1).
Elders spoke of influences that today’s generations
have to contend with that the Elders did not, such as
sugar sweetened beverages, which are more convenient,
and less expensive than healthier alternatives. Many children
are introduced to sugar sweetened beverages including
powdered drinks (e.g. Tang) and soda at an early
age through bottles and sippy cups. Elders indicated they
[parents] used the sugar sweetened beverages as a reward,
as a babysitter, or to keep children quiet. “Like
they start crying and they stick a lollipop in their mouth
and sit them in front of the TV and that’s it. They’re
quiet. And leave them and go Bingo” (ANV11).
Another outside, western influence they identified was
the use of screens, like televisions, smart phones, iPads,
and video games. “One thing I learned is the parents
who have the television babysit their kids, they’re English
speakers. They grow up as English speakers from watching
TV so much, probably from when they were in their
walker” (ANV12). While this Elder connected outside,
western influence to the use of English over Yup’ik language,
it was also connected to concerns around physical
activity, “We had a lot of activities when we were younger
in those days because without technologies [of]
today, we have fast pace” (ANV1). Another Elder also
suggested it seemed to replace more traditional forms of
activity, to the detriment of children’s health.
From all the way to eighth grade, we had all these
lap games, outdoors, indoor games, all these different
activities that these guys had to grow up with. We
didn’t understand that those games were to keep us
physically fit and healthy. I see the change. My generation,
none of our kids, my own kids, I had to
teach them how to play these games and teaching
these kids the games and explaining that the younger
they are, the healthier they will be in high school.
But looking at kids nowadays, my age group, we
were healthy, fit, not obese. We had muscles. We
were working out. We breathed okay. We were physically
fit all the way through high school. This generation
you see obesity. Kids are very sickly. It’s just
totally the opposite. They’re not physically fit. They
go up the stairs and they’re huffing and puffing. Me
and some parents are like, ‘Gee, when I was their
age, I was able to do these things, and my own child
doesn’t do these things’” (ANV5).
This stood in stark contrast to how they were raised,
as the Elders didn’t worry about not being active because
when they were children, they spent much of their time
doing chores and playing games.
Suggestions to maintain subsistence practices
Elders articulated a desire to help new parents learn how
to live better, raise healthier children, and find balance
in life.
I’d sure like to see these kids being taught from
Elders about how they used to live, the Native
[way], especially the language and all the stuff
they did about hunting or helping people that
cannot do things, like Elders or people with disabilities
(ANV9).
Elders mentioned a number of sources of knowledge
that could be utilized to promote traditional foods, including
a university that has documented the nutritional
value of their traditional food, schools and churches that
provide cultural camps, and organizations like Head
Start that can be used to talk about, serve, and reinforce
traditional foods. As one stated, “I think if you start talking
to the Head Start students at a very young age in
how to respect another person’s property, then another
person, I think the village in the long run would be a lot
better” (ANV1). In sum, the Elders wanted to work with
the new generation of young parents to ensure their Native
ways of knowing survived, even if that knowledge
did not come straight from them.
Discussion
Elders expressed perspectives related to maintaining a
healthy and traditional lifestyle. They consistently espoused
the importance of eating traditional foods, such
as seal oil, fish, berries, and tundra greens, connecting
these foods with both good nutrition and the practices
and values of subsistence cultures. They expressed a
number of concerns about changing values and practices
around subsistence and whether the current generation
possessed the ability to harvest and eat traditional foods.
Elders voiced concern about young people who appear
to rely on processed, western foods and their ability to
raise their children with values consistent with their ancestors.
They described a number of external influences
that may precipitate changing dietary patterns and negatively
impact of the health of children, including government
assistance programs; ready access to sugar
sweetened beverages and junk food; and an abundant
use of screen technologies (e.g., televisions, iPads, and
phones). Despite these concerns, Elders recognized opportunities
for sharing their historical knowledge and
traditional wisdom, and a desire to be a positive force
during this time of great change.
During the past 60 to 70 years, AN people have experienced
cultural transition characterized by the integration
of western values and culture into their traditional lifestyle
[27–29]. Historical events experienced by AN
people include loss of land and land-based resources;
decimation of the population through epidemics of influenza
and tuberculosis; and disruption of families when
children were sent to boarding schools for formal education.
These events have led to losses in transmission of
language and culture [10, 17, 30]. In particular, Elders
expressed concern that customs and practices surrounding
diet that previously formed the backbone of AN culture,
such as hunting, fishing, harvesting, gathering,
preserving and sharing food, are disappearing.
Elders insisted children needed to be exposed to traditional
AN foods at a very young age so they develop a
taste for them. Nutrition science enforces these Elders’
observations, reporting that young children are especially
vulnerable to parental food choices, becoming accustomed
to foods they are introduced to early in life [31].
Food preferences are established prior to age 6 years and
eating habits developed by this age affect lifelong eating
behaviors. Currently, few AN children, youth, or young
adults consume traditional foods as the basis of their
diet and, as a result, have experienced a decrease in diet
quality as compared to Elders [32–36].
Elders also espoused their belief that traditional foods
coming directly from the local surroundings are healthier
than store bought foods. Again, research supports
this belief. A growing body of evidence has shown that
consuming traditional foods have higher nutrient levels
than store bought foods [23, 27–29, 32, 37–40]. In a
study by Bersamin et al. of Yup’ik AN people living in
the Y-K region, traditional foods accounted for 22% of
total energy intake, and participants consuming the most
traditional foods had higher nutrient levels [23]. A similar
study by Sharma et al. [39] investigated the dietary
quality the meals of Yup’ik women living in western Alaska
and found that while store bought foods were the
most frequently reported food items consumed and
sugar-sweetened beverages were the main contributors
to energy, traditional foods contributed substantially to
protein, iron and vitamin A intakes.
Elders identified a major shift in the foods they received
as children and the foods and beverages parents
and caregivers provide children today, which the literature
supports as well. The modern AN diet is now primarily
comprised of store bought, highly processed
foods containing large percentages of carbohydrates and
saturated fats, highly palatable and manufactured for
maximum taste preferences [38]. As AN Elders report,
AN children and families consuming these nontraditional
foods are experiencing adaptations in taste
preferences away from traditional foods. The introduction
of manufactured western foods has resulted in
different food preferences across generations; Elders
consume more traditional foods and fewer processed
foods and SSBs than younger adults, youth, and children
[28, 36]. Through their own personal eating habits,
young AN parents perpetuate the diverging taste preferences
of the next generation by introducing processed
foods during infancy, which is rightfully a concern, as it
is an important driver of increased weight in early childhood
[41].
Limitations
Results of this study should be discussed in light of the
following potential limitations. First, while the analysis
of the data followed a rigorous process to ensure the results
were reliable, member-checking was not carried
out with the participants because no identifying or contact
information was collected. Ideally, the Elders would
have reviewed all findings to ensure their contributions
were interpreted correctly; however, the regional review
board, comprised of Alaska Native peoples from the region,
did review and approve this manuscript per Tribal
policy. Finally, while it cannot be assumed that the perspectives
shared represent the views of all Yup’ik, Indigenous,
or Alaska Native peoples, these perspectives do
reflect the views of Elders in the communities in which
this project is being developed and implemented.
Conclusions
The risk of obesity in Alaska Native children is high and
prevention efforts should be grounded in local knowledge
and values. Yup’ik and Cup’ik Elders in the Y-K
Delta area of Alaska place a strong value on practicing a
subsistence lifestyle as a source of good nutrition and a
critical link to cultural identify. The Elders also voiced
concern about external influences that negatively impact
the health of children, including government assistance
programs; ready access to sugar sweetened beverages
and junk food; and an abundant use of screen technologies.
Although they do not represent all Alaska Native
peoples, their views provide a better understanding on
local views of the importance of maintaining a traditional
lifestyle.