Background
Globally, high body mass index (BMI) accounted for 4.0
million (2.7–5.3) deaths and 120 million (84–158)
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) among adults [1].
In sub-Saharan Africa, it is predicted that prevalence of
overweight and obesity will increase over the next few
decades at a faster pace than elsewhere in the world [2].
The latest published cross-sectional household survey in
Kenya indicates that 27% of the adult population is overweight
or obese (38.5% women and 17.5% men) [3]. Notably,
the global burden of disease study ranks high body
mass among the top 10 risk factors that contributed to
total DALYs in Kenya. As a leading risk factor for disease
in Kenya, high body mass registered the highest
percentage increase of 67.3% between 1997 and 2017,
from 486 DALYs per 100,000 to 812 DALYs per 100,000
[4]. Combined with the persisting burden of infectious
diseases such as tuberculosis, malaria, and HIV/AIDS,
the increasing prevalence of high body mass and related
non-communicable diseases (NCDs) has created a
double burden of disease within a strained health
system.
Strategies that target the modifiable components of
energy intake (diet) and energy expenditure (physical activity)
result in favorable BMI trends [5, 6]. In Kenya,
current prevention and control strategies for overweight
and obesity focus on both the individual and environmental
factors that predispose one to high body mass
[7]. Since there are multiple potentially effective strategies
it is important to ensure that resource allocation
choices lead to optimal health for the available budget.
Policymakers in Kenya are keen to make rational, transparent,
evidence-based health choices for the control
and prevention of high body mass. In the past, choices
have often been driven by political, historical, or commercial
imperatives, but the importance of ‘evidencebased
policy’ is increasingly being recognized [8]. In
addition, various global strategies have been proposed to
guide action on the prevention and control of overweight
and obesity [9]. However, there is a need for the
context-specific evaluation of the effectiveness, feasibility
of widespread implementation, and sustainability of
these strategies [1, 6].
Against this background, we designed a study that applies
modelling techniques to evaluate a selected number
of strategies to generate research-based evidence on the
most impactful and cost-effective strategies for the prevention
and control of overweight and obesity in Kenya.
We applied the assessing cost-effectiveness (ACE) approach
to priority setting, which defines areas of action
where the greatest health gains can be achieved for available
resources [10, 11]. Stakeholder engagement is part
of the due process in the ACE approach. The engagement
process allows for the incorporation of multiple
perspectives in the planning and execution of studies
[12]. Input from other people beyond the traditional research
team often improves the quality of research. Also,
it brings in transparency throughout a research project
and assists in the promulgation of the findings, accelerating
their adoption into practice [10, 13]. Concannon
and colleagues [13] refer to this as the process of moving
research evidence off bookshelves and into practice. The
stakeholder workshop reported in this paper was part of
this larger ACE stakeholder- engaged study. Specifically,
for this stage of engagement, we aimed to involve stakeholders
in the identification of strategies for the prevention
of overweight and obesity in Kenya that would be
modelled in our ACE study. In this context, a stakeholder
was described as “an individual or group that is
responsible for or affected by health- and healthcarerelated
decisions that can be informed by research evidence”
[13].
Our paper also seeks to contribute to the evidence surrounding
stakeholder-engaged research in Public Health.
Methods
Study design
This was a qualitative study that followed a workshop
approach. We conducted a one-day stakeholder workshop
that followed a deliberative dialogue process [14].
We considered this the most appropriate approach because
our investigation was exploratory [15].
Conceptual framework
Though the standards for reporting qualitative research
(SRQR) reporting guideline guided the writing of this
paper [16], we used the Ray and Miller framework [12]
for reporting our stakeholder engagement process. This
framework provides great rigor, transparency, and
consistency in the reporting of stakeholder-engaged research.
The Ray and Miller’s framework covers three
main topics: contexts, processes and outcomes. Under
outcomes, the immediate, intermediate, and long-term
outcomes are reported. Since the study is still ongoing,
we only report the intermediate outcomes that we have
achieved so far. We report on planned and actual
processes.
Context
This study was planned in the context of an overall research
agenda to identify the most impactful and costeffective
strategies for the prevention and control of
overweight and obesity in Kenya. In this engagement, we
solicited the stakeholders’ interests, views, values, knowledge,
and experiences. This desired input from stakeholders
was informed by best practices of stakeholder
engagement [13]. Specifically, we asked the stakeholders
to 1) in groups, identify existing or new strategies that
they would propose for the prevention and control of
high body mass in Kenya; and 2) as individuals, identify
the top three strategies that they would propose for inclusion
in our ACE modelling study and rank them from
number 1 to 3, with 1 being the strategy with the highest
priority. We considered the engagement as a bidirectional
relationship between ourselves (researchers)
and stakeholders. The results of this phase would inform
the selection of strategies that would be included in our
ACE study.
Processes
Stakeholder recruitment and composition
Since the larger ACE study seeks to inform the
prioritization of strategies for the prevention and control
of overweight and obesity in Kenya, we opted to have
our stakeholders as individuals who are known to participate
in policymaking at the national level. This is
consistent with the established description of stakeholders
[13]. In our recruitment, we applied purposive
and snowball sampling techniques. To capture a variety
of perspectives we targeted a multisectoral representation
of decision-makers. We considered that the public
would be effectively represented by stakeholders from
civil society organizations. Table 1 gives a description of
potential stakeholders that guided the recruitment
process.
We shared the description of stakeholders with two
identified stakeholders, one from the MoH, and another
from the University of Nairobi, Kenya. With the assistance
of these two stakeholders, potential participants
that fit the descriptions given were identified by name,
and their official contact details supplied to us. The
MoH stakeholder supplied us with a list of main policymakers,
development assistance partners, and other key
individuals involved in NCD control in Kenya. We also
conducted online searches for information on persons in
roles that fit our stakeholder description and acquired
their email addresses through official ministry and
organization websites. For some stakeholders, we contacted
their colleagues in the various institutions to help
us get in touch with them. Email communication was
sent out to all identified individuals explaining to them
what the purpose of the study was, requesting their participation,
giving details of their role in the study, and
emphasizing the voluntary and confidential nature of
participation. The components of the email communication
material were part of the ethics review and approval
for this study. For the identified stakeholders who did
not respond to the initial email communication, follow
up was done through phone calls and emails. We were
able to reach every identified stakeholder. A snowball
method ensued with assistance from stakeholders from
two leading civil society organizations involved in
decisions for health in Kenya. In total, thirty-six initial
invite emails were sent out. Thirty-five stakeholders confirmed
their willingness to participate in the study. One
stakeholder gave a tentative confirmation citing a busy
schedule as the main hindrance for participation. A follow
up email communication and an e-flier were sent to
the thirty-six stakeholders inviting them to the stakeholder
engagement process set to take place through a
one-day workshop. The stakeholders were invited without
prior knowledge of their specific views on the study
topic. A total of twenty-three of the invited stakeholders
confirmed their attendance. This surpassed our target of
a minimum number of 13 stakeholders. We had aimed
to have at least 13 stakeholders attending the workshop.
This target was largely guided by the description of
stakeholders (see Table 1).
Frequency and duration of engagement
A total of five planning meetings were held in Kenya before
the workshop date. These were in-depth briefing
sessions held to discuss the engagement process, workshop
moderation, planning, and logistics. The meetings
were held between the field researcher (MNW) and five
stakeholders who represented the university sector,
ministry of health, humanitarian aid sector, and the civil
society. The university and ministry of health stakeholders
were purposively selected as they were considered
resourceful in the workshop moderation and
planning process. The other three stakeholders were the
first responders who had confirmed their willingness to
participate in the study as stakeholders. The duration of
the meetings varied guided by the purpose of each session
that was held. On average, each meeting lasted for
one and a half hours. No joint meetings were held before
the workshop due to time and financial constraints.
MNW took notes and kept a record of the deliberations
and actions agreed upon. For purposes of planning and
coordination, there were multiple telephone and email
communications between the field researcher (MNW)
and senior researcher (JLV), and between the field researcher
(MNW) and the selected five stakeholders.
Two meetings were held after the workshop. One was
a one-hour joint review meeting that the field researcher
(MNW) held with four stakeholders immediately after
the workshop. The same stakeholders engaged in the
planning meetings before the workshop attended the
first meeting after the workshop except for one stakeholder
from the MoH, who had given an apology on the
day and was not present at the workshop. The objectives
of this meeting were: 1) to provide an opportunity to receive
immediate feedback on the workshop that had
taken place, 2) to discuss the feedback and document
recommendations for areas that required improvement.
The second was a three-hour post-workshop meeting
which was held between the field researcher and one
stakeholder from the university sector. This was held
several days after the workshop. The objective of the
2nd meeting held after the workshop was to develop a
plan for the workshop report writing and subsequent
publication of the workshop deliberations. Of the four
stakeholders above, two stakeholders were invited to this
meeting representing the university sector and the humanitarian
aid sector. The stakeholder from the humanitarian
aid sector passed an apology on the day. The
stakeholder present from the university sector was considered
adequate to achieve the meeting’s objective. In
both meetings, guided by the meeting objectives, the
stakeholders and field researcher held open discussions
and reached consensus on the various matters discussed.
We present the outcomes of these meetings under our
immediate outcomes section.
The engagement of stakeholders took place during a
one-day workshop in October 2019. The workshop was
conducted in English. On arrival, the participants filled
out a registration form, read through the informed consent
form and each signed a copy. For this session, the
stakeholders were divided into two sub-groups with an
average of seven members per sub-group. Each subgroup
seated at one round table. The group sitting was
informed by arrival time. As stakeholders arrived, they
were guided to occupy the tables proximal to the podium.
Initially a total of 3 tables were occupied. To
achieve a balance in number of stakeholders per group,
members in the 3rd table were distributed to the first
and second tables. In sub-groups, the participants were
asked to identify existing and new strategies for the prevention
and control of overweight and obesity in Kenya.
From each sub-group, the stakeholders appointed
someone to moderate the discussion, and another person
was appointed to record the sub-groups discussion
points on a flip chart. Each sub-group then presented
their discussions to the broader group eliciting more
ideas and views emerging. For quality purposes, this larger
discussion session was facilitated by the field researcher.
A stakeholder had been assigned this role and
been taken through an in-depth briefing before the
workshop day. However, on the day, he sent an apology
due to an urgent work commitment. In the presentations
and deliberations, the participants were given the
right to withdraw or add any identified strategies. Once
the two subgroups had presented their discussions, we
considered this our level of saturation for that workshop
activity. We then carried out the final workshop activity
that involved the ranking of the selected strategies. All
the identified strategies were listed and displayed at the
front of the room. We present the displayed lists as supplementary
file 1 to this publication. Each stakeholder
present was asked to identify the top three strategies that
they propose for inclusion in our ACE modelling study
and rank them from number 1 to 3, with 1 being the
strategy with the highest priority. Each participant was
given 3 colored stickers; gold, green, and blue. Each was
asked to stick the golden sticker against the strategy that
one ranked as number 1 (highest ranking). The green
stickers against the strategy that one considered as number
2 and the blue sticker for the strategy that one
ranked as number 3 strategy. The entire session lasted
for about 3 h. To complement the flip chart recording,
the workshop assistant and the field researcher took
down notes. Additionally, with consent from the participants,
the presentations to the larger group were audiorecorded.
Data management
The workshop discussions were transcribed verbatim.
The initial transcription was done by a 3rd party. Two
authors (MNW, LKB) verified the validity of the transcription
by listening to the audio recordings and comparing
them with the transcripts. One author (MNW)
did the necessary updates and corrections to the transcripts.
This was checked by another author (LKB). The
trustworthiness of our findings was enhanced by reading
the transcriptions, flip chart recordings, and workshop
notes multiple times. We generated a list of the strategies
that were identified by stakeholders and noted any
accompanying remarks made by stakeholders in the discussions
that took place during the presentations to the
larger group. As a research team, we applied reverse
coding to put a weighting on the ranking done. We
assigned a weighted score of 3 to any strategy that was
ranked one (gold sticker) and strategies ranked second
(green sticker) was assigned a weighted score of 2 and
those ranked third (blue sticker) were assigned a
weighted score of 1. A tally was done, and the total score
put against each strategy. We then ranked the strategies
from highest to lowest.
This stakeholder engagement process was approved by
the Griffith University Human Research Ethics Committee
(GU Ref No: 2019/707). All methods were performed
in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations
in the Griffith University Research Ethics Manual.
The stakeholders completed a consent form before the
workshop began.
Results
Processes
Stakeholder recruitment and composition
Out of the twenty-three stakeholders who confirmed attendance
of the one-day workshop, fifteen (65%) participants
were present. Table 2 presents the names of the
organizations represented by the thirty-five stakeholders
who confirmed their willingness to participate in the
study. We indicate those who were present at the workshop
and those who were absent with an apology.
Immediate outcomes
Outcomes from the planning meetings held before the
workshop
In the meetings that took place before the workshop,
several recommendations were made and incorporated
in planning for the workshop. We present a list of these
recommendations and actions taken in Table 3.
Outcomes from the stakeholder workshop
In this section, we present the various prevention and
control strategies that the stakeholders identified as relevant
and appropriate for the prevention and control of
overweight and obesity in Kenya. Where stakeholders
gave additional comments and remarks regarding the
identified strategies, we also report those remarks. Remarks
captured included their thoughts on the effectiveness
of current strategies, comments regarding their
appropriateness, relevance, and feasibility. While the
stakeholders expressed confidence in the effectiveness of
some existing strategies, there was a fair amount of uncertainty
expressed for many of the existing strategies.
Guided by the Swinburn, Gill, & Kumanyika [17] framework
that categorizes obesity determinants and solutions,
the stakeholders discussed the level of
intervention for the strategies proposed for the Kenyan
setting. From the final list agreed upon by all stakeholders,
each stakeholder present identified the top three
strategies that they proposed for inclusion in our ACE
modelling study. The total weighted scores guided the
ranking process where strategies with higher weighting
ranking top and those with lesser weighting appearing
lower in the ranking. Table 4 presents a summary of the
results.Outcomes from meetings held after the workshop
At the joint review meeting held right after the workshop,
the four stakeholders present noted that participants
had remained fully engaged in the discussions. We
reflected on the feedback comments given at the workshop
where the participants had expressed their willingness
to remain engaged in the rest of the research. The
participants had remarked that it was great to have been
involved at the very early stage of research. Many reported
that in other studies, they would often be engaged
in the late stages during the dissemination of
research findings. It was however recommended that
more stakeholders be involved in the facilitation roles in
future workshops. It was noted that holding the workshop
on a Friday may have limited attendance for the
targeted population. In the future, the engagement sessions
would be held in the middle of the week, with a
very early morning start time. The field researcher was
tasked to set up the joint communication platform that
the stakeholders had proposed during the workshop.
During this meeting, the field researcher and one stakeholder
dispensed transport tokens to the workshop participants
through the mobile money platform (M-PESA).
Each stakeholder received a token of Kshs. 2000. The
award of token was decided upon during the field research
and was not part of the original research plan.
In the 2nd meeting held after the workshop, a plan for
the report writing was prepared. Tentative publications
of the workshop deliberations were discussed in detail.
A plan for the data transcription process was prepared.
Intermediate and long-term outcomes
We are still in the early phase of our research and engagement
process. We are therefore not able to assess
and report intermediate and long-term outcomes.
As a follow up communication to the stakeholders, a
thank you email and electronic thank you card was sent
to all who had accepted to support the research, including
those absent from the workshop. A second email
was sent a few weeks later to share all the slide presentations
used in the workshop and photos taken during the
workshop. Finally, all participants who attended the
workshop were awarded a certificate of participation by
Griffith University. These were dispatched on email with
hard copies stored for delivery later.
Discussion
The findings of this study provide us with a context specific,
empirical foundation for identification and selection
of potential strategies for the prevention and
control of overweight and obesity in Kenya, as proposed
by stakeholders. The stakeholders proposed high level,
broad strategies, and scenarios that they would like the
research team to investigate. In the next stage of this
study, our research will help define what the proposed
broad scenarios look like in practical terms, investigate
the effects of the specific actions on health and assess
cost-effectiveness.
The strategies proposed by the stakeholders align with
the current prevention and control strategies for overweight
and obesity in Kenya [19, 28, 29]. The highestranked
strategies were: a research-based strategy for the
identification of the nutritional value of indigenous
foods, health promotion strategies that focus on not only
education but also creation of healthy environments,
physical activity behavior such as gym attendance, jogging,
walking, running at the individual level, implementation
of school curricula on nutrition and health
promotion and integration of physical education into the
new Competency-Based Education policy in Kenya, and,
control of public transportation as a policy-based strategy
that would increase the use of public transport in
Kenya. The stakeholders’ propositions align well with
some of the WHO ‘best buys’ and recommended interventions
for NCD control. These include: the implementation
of nutrition education and counselling in school
settings to increase the intake of fruits and vegetables,
the whole of school programs that support physical activity,
mass promotion of intake of fruits and vegetables,
implementation of community-wide public education
and awareness on uptake of physical activity, and
inclusion of health promotion as part of the routine primary
health care services [9, 30].
Compared against the categories of obesity determinants
and solutions as outlined by Swinburn, Gilland
Kumanyika [8] most of the strategies proposed by the
stakeholders were seen to focus on the environments
and behaviors implementation levels. These are strategies
that focus on change at the environmental level by
targeting various systemic and environmental drivers of
the obesity burden such as policy and economic systems
that enable and promote high growth and consumption,
and food supply and marketing environments that promote
high energy intake. The strategies that focus on
change at the behavior level target high food and energy
consumption patterns with associated low physical activity
levels [8]. Notably, the stakeholders did not propose
any strategy for intervention at the physiological level
such as drugs and surgery. This may be because the
stakeholders may not have perceived the obesity burden
in the country to be at a stage where surgery and drugs
were required. Alternatively, the stakeholders may have
considered these interventions as expensive and not
feasible in Kenya, or they may have considered surgery
and drugs as ineffective strategies for the control and
prevention of overweight and obesity. On the other
hand, with an understanding of the potentially huge
gains associated with preventive health strategies, the
stakeholders may have opted to focus on prevention as
opposed to control strategies at the treatment level.
In Kenya, stakeholder engagement for health is identified
as part of the principles and approaches that guide
the current national strategy for the prevention and control
of NCDs [29]. Worth noting is that published literature
on stakeholder engaged research in health is limited
and what is available is largely focused on high income
countries. Ward, Vaughn and, Story [31] conducted a
stakeholder meeting in the United States to select top
priorities for obesity prevention research in early care
and education settings. The researchers used a
conference format where experts first spoke to the stakeholders
and thereafter roundtable discussions were held
to identify research gaps. A list of priorities was compiled
and emailed to all stakeholders along with an anonymous
online survey for them to choose the three to
five recommendations that they felt were the “highest
priority” and to rank each one selected on importance
(high to low). The research team created a weighted
score and identified 24 priority research areas. The
group of 43 stakeholders in this study was made up of
research experts, leaders from national health agencies
and early care and education professionals. The choice
of which groups of stakeholders to include in a study is
usually informed by the research question under investigation
[13].
Another study was the 2017 stakeholder engagement
project that was conducted by Lindson, Richards-Doran,
Heath and, Hartmann-Boyce, on behalf of the Cochrane
Tobaco Addiction Group (TAG) [32]. The aim of the
project was to identify areas where further reasearch was
needed in the areas of tobacco control and smoking cessation,
by involving Cochrane TAG’s stakeholders. As a
whole, the project included two surveys and one stakeholder
workshop. The included stakeholders were
deemed to have an interest in tobacco smoking. The
team used purposive sampling to ensure that partcipants
represented a range of stakeholder groups and organisations.
At the workshop, the participating 43 stakeholders
held roundtable discussions to identify top priority research
categories from the top 10 identified in the survey.
At the end of the workshop, each individual was
asked to vote their top three research categories that
they thought should be prioritised in future research.
They used coloured dots on cards for this exercise to derive
a score for each research category. A final axample
is the Aidem [33] qualitative study that described the
views of 27 stakeholders on criteria and processes for
(health) priority setting in Norway. The purposively selected
sample of stakeholders expressed their views
through semi-structured interviews and focus groups.
This too was conducted in a high-income country. The
stakeholders included extended beyond the policy
makers to include hospital administrators, practitioners,
university students and seniors. These studies provide
evidence regarding similar stakeholder engagements in
priority setting within various areas of health. This supports
the argument that the involvement of stakeholders
is considered key to successful priority setting for NCD
prevention and control [29, 34].
Limitations and strengths of the study
Purposive sampling has inherent selection bias hence
generalizability of the results is limited. Despite this limitation,
the findings may be relevant in other low- and
middle-income countries with similar setting as Kenya.
The selection of participants was limited to stakeholders
involved in making decisions for health in Kenya
at the national policy level. However, by incorporating
stakeholders from several civil society organizations, we
considered that the public would be effectively represented.
Due to time and funding constraints on the project,
the stakeholder recruitment was done within a
limited timeframe of 1 month. Further, due to the nature
of work for the recruited stakeholders, work commitments
made it difficult for some of them to attend our
workshop. Nevertheless, we did meet our target number
of attendees and we achieved great representation from
multiple sectors involved in priority setting for NCD
control in health.
The audio recording done in the workshop was captured
at a low volume and had background room noise.
This presented a challenge in the transcription process.
To ensure that all conversations were transcribed, the
transcription was reviewed by 3 people, two of whom
are authors of this paper (MNW and LKB). Though the
discussions within the smaller groups were not audiorecorded,
we do not consider this to have interfered with
the accurate recording of the discussions that took place.
We utilized workshop notes from the sub-group scribes.
These were on flipchart recordings for one sub-group and
in a PowerPoint presentation for another sub-group. A report
of the workshop has been shared with all stakeholders
before the publication of this manuscript. A key
strength of our study was the engagement of a wide range
of stakeholders at a very early stage of our research. This
has improved the quality and scope of our research and
will assist in the promulgation of the findings, accelerating
the adoption of our findings into practice.
Conclusion
The stakeholders identified and ranked strategies for the
prevention and control of overweight and obesity in
Kenya.
The broad strategies identified here could inform policymakers
and other stakeholders who may be seeking
to identify context-specific strategies for prevention and
control of overweight and obesity. The findings inform
future overweight and obesity prevention research and
policy in Kenya and similar settings.