Background
Child marriage is defined as any official, customary,
or unofficial marriage (registered or not registered), in
which one or both of the spouses or sexual partners are
under the age of 18-year-old [1], and conducted before
the girl is physically, physiologically, and psychologically
ready to carry out the responsibilities of marriage and
childbearing [2]. Child marriage is a violation of human
rights and children’s rights and exposes them to domestic
violence, sexual abuse, rape, and deprives them of access
to education [3].
Even though the age of marriage has gradually
increased in many countries, however, this increase
is specific to higher-income families [4]. Child marriage,
especially in less developed countries is considered
a global concern, recent statistics show that more
than 700 million women married before the age of 18,
and more than one-third of them were under the age of
15 when they got married. There is gender inequality in
child marriage and it is seen more in girls [5]. Approximately
half of the child marriage occurs in Asia (except
for China) and the majority of child marriage is carried
out in southern Asia [6]. Western and Central Africa has
the second prevalence of child marriage with 41% [7]. In
accordance with the results of the Population and Housing
Census in 2016, approximately 14% of the population
of Iran are between the ages of 10–19 years old [3].
According to the latest census of Iran in 2016, the
highest number of marriages for women was in the age
group of 20–24 years (28.5%), followed by the age group
of 15–19 years with 28.1% and 39,645 marriage events
(5.6%) for the age group under 15 is registered for both
genders. In this census, 98,927 cases of marriage between
women aged 15–19 were registered with men aged
20–24, which is the highest number of registered marriages
among all age groups and is equivalent to about
14% of all marriages [8]. On the basis of the studies in this
regard, 7.7% of the girls in Tehran and more than 40% of
girls in Sistan and Baluchestan undergo forced marriage
before the age of 18 years old [9, 10].
The consequences of child marriage are more expansive
and it does not merely affect the child. Early marriage is
accompanied by lifelong effects on social, emotional, and
physical health that can continue up to their adulthood
and lead to undesired consequences such as losing educational
and occupational opportunities and suffering
from psychological disorders including depression, anxiety,
social isolation, and an increase of domestic violence
[11–14]. Besides, child marriage has negative effects on
families and society as well. This can result in an increase
in poverty and has negative effects on the health and education
sectors of a country [14].
Early marriage also known as the child marriage phenomenon
is conducted around the world due to a variety
of reasons such as poverty and financial incapacity, development
of social network and protecting girls against
sexual assault and violence[15], gender inequality, cultural
and traditional approaches of human communities,
illiteracy, and insecurity [16]. Increasing the awareness
and knowledge of the society, especially women, and creating
societies with gender equality through the empowerment
of girls can change people’s attitudes about the
issue of child marriage and this can reduce child marriage
in these societies [2]. In accordance with the research by
Matlabi et al. [17], in Iran, one of the reasons for adolescent
girls’ inclination to marriage at this age is the lack of
knowledge and awareness of the consequences and damages
of the marriage at the young ages. The results of a
study in India in 2017 revealed that 59.6% of girl students
have little knowledge regarding early marriage and early
pregnancy and more than half of student girls (52.5%)
had a relatively good attitude and 47.5% of girls had a
good attitude to early marriage and pregnancy [2].
In Iran, the most significant reasons for marrying girls
at a young age can be considered in three general categories
of social, cultural, economic, and legal reasons. The
most important economic factor of being a child marriage
is poverty. In the field of social and cultural causes,
we can mention the issues of tradition, custom, norms,
and family and kinship relations in Iran. In most traditional
societies such as Iran, women are considered as
honor and dignity. Consequently, in these societies, to
preserve honor and dignity, they consent to marry girls at
an early age and try to protect them through marriage at
an early age [18].
Adolescence is the most dynamic period of growth that
approximately includes the second decade of a person’s
life and involves completely different conditions than the
prior period. The destiny and future of a person directly
depend on the proper confrontation with changes and
developments in this period [19]. Thus, putting an end to
child marriage is important for the rights, health, welfare,
and capabilities of these girls in the future [20].
Taking into account that child marriage is a violation of
human rights and makes them susceptible to social isolation
and psychological damages. These negative effects
are not limited to the children and expand to the families
and society as well. They can cause an increase in poverty
and have negative effects on the health and education
sectors in a country [11–14, 21]. Therefore, based
on the review of the literature, few studies investigated
the knowledge and viewpoint of adolescent girls regarding
child marriage. Thus, conducting such studies in
the cultural platform of Iran in adolescent girls who are
affected by this social phenomenon is crucial. The present
research aimed at determining the knowledge and
viewpoint of adolescent girls about child marriage and
its causes and consequences in the city of Tabriz-Iran in
2020–2021.
Methods
Type of study and participants
The present research is a analytical-descriptive crosssectional
study and it was carried out from September
2020 through March 2021 on adolescent girls in the city
of Tabriz-Iran between the ages of 14–18 years old. The
research setting in the present study was the health centers
in the city of Tabriz. There is a lot of ethnic, cultural,
and religious diversity in different parts of Iran, including
the city of Tabriz, the capital of East Azerbaijan province.
The metropolis of Tabriz is the third-largest city in
Iran after Tehran and Mashhad. This city is known as a
religious city and adheres to traditional customs. Despite
the nature and traditional cultural and social values of
this society, due to the location of this city in the border
region and neighboring countries of Turkey and the
Republic of Azerbaijan, new attitudes have been created
among the youth of Tabriz. The development of global
communications, the modernization, and the influence of
Turkish-language satellite networks have been effective
in creating such an attitude [22]. So, from this point of
view, Tabriz society, which is a combination of tradition
and modernity, can be a suitable platform for research on
girls’ health.
The inclusion criteria of this study were: People who
were interested in participating in the study. Consent of
one of the parents for their daughter’s participation in
the research, Iranian nationality, resident of Tabriz, and
girls with the age of 14–18. The exclusion criteria of this
research were: Failure to fill in the questionnaire completely
and the unwillingness of the girls or their parents
to continue the research. It must be noted that child
marriage in the present research, includes any official,
customary, or unofficial marriage (registered or not registered),
in which one or both sexual partners are under
the age of 18 [23].
In order to estimate the sample size in the present
research, the formula for the estimation of a ratio was
employed. In the present research, the value of Z, with
the confidence level of 95%, equaled 1.96, and the value of
p on the basis of research by Vandana et al. [2], amounted
to 52.5, and by considering d (percission) as equal to the
15% around p (attitude regarding early marriage), the
sample size was calculated to be n = 155. According to
cluster sampling method and considering design effect
equal with 1.5 and 20% attrition in the final sample size,
278 people were calculated. In the present study, 300 girls
were assessed.
Sampling
After obtaining the code of ethics from the Ethics Committee
of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences (code:
IR.TBZMED.REC.1399.482) and providing an introduction
letter from the health center of Tabriz, the respective
permit for sampling was obtained. The research
environment in the present study was the health centers
in the city of Tabriz. Sampling was carried out through
cluster random sampling method since the city of Tabriz
is a metropolis with diverse cultures. Thus, the present
research aimed at providing a proper chance for all adolescent
girls to participate in this study. For sampling,
first, a list of 83 health centers of the city of Tabriz was
created and 18 centers were selected randomly among
them. Then, the determined sample size was proportionally
divided among the selected health centers.
Families with girls between the ages of 14–18 who met
the inclusion criteria were selected via the SIB system
(an Integrated Health System) in the aforementioned
centers. These families were selected randomly and the
researchers introduced themselves via a phone call and
explained the objectives of the research and in case of the
children’s and their parent’s consent asked them to participate
in the research and be present in the respective
health center on a specific date to receive and complete
the questionnaire. Or in case of their consent, they were
asked to provide an email or a phone number without
their name and the link of the questionnaire was sent
to them to fill in the house without any stress and confidentially.
The SIB system covers more than 90–92% of
the population of the city of Tabriz. Before commencement
of the study, the participants were provided with
explanations regarding the objectives and methods of
research, volunteer participation, preserving privacy, and
their right to withdraw during any of the stages of data
collection. They were ensured that they are not required
to write their name or surname and the confidentiality of
their information will be maintained. They were asked to
hand over a written informed letter of consent.
Data collection tools
In the present research, the questionnaire created by the
researcher team regarding the sociodemographic characteristics,
knowledge, and viewpoint of adolescent girls
to child marriage and its causes and consequences were
used for the collection of the data.
The sociodemographic information questionnaire
included questions about age, marital status, number of
siblings, parents’ occupation and education, economic
status, the marriage of their parents, siblings, or close
relative under the age of 18, appropriate age of marriage
for girls, the final person to make the decision regarding
a girl’s marriage, disagreement with parents if they decide
to girls’ marriage under the age of 18 years old.
The questionnaire of the knowledge of adolescent girls
regarding child marriage included 11 items and their
answers were “correct, incorrect, I don’t know”. The
viewpoint of adolescent girls about child marriage was
measured through one item “I like to get married before
I am 18 years old” based on a 5-point Likert scale (totally
agree, agree, no opinion, disagree, totally disagree). This
questionnaire is available as Additional file 1: Appendix.
The questionnaire of the viewpoint of adolescent girls
regarding the causes of child marriage included 22 questions
and was measured on the basis of the 5-point Likert
scale (totally agree, agree, no opinion, disagree, totally
disagree). The questionnaire of the viewpoint of adolescent
girls regarding the consequences of child marriage
included 12 questions and was measured on the basis of
the 5-point Likert scale (totally agree, agree, no opinion,
disagree, totally disagree).
The validity and reliability of these questionnaires were
measured before the commencement of sampling. Two
qualitative and quantitative methods were used to assess
the content validity of questionnaires. In the qualitative
method, the content validity of the questionnaire
was assessed by 10 specialists in this field. These people
included faculty members of midwifery and reproductive
health of Tabriz and Tehran Universities of Medical Sciences.
After receiving their opinions, the required modifications
were made. In the quantitative method, content
validity was assessed using content validity ratio (CVR)
and content validity index (CVI). The results indicated
that the values of CVR and CVI amounted to 0.88 and
0.84, respectively. The reliability of the present questionnaire
was obtained using the internal consistency of
Cronbach’s alpha test, which amounted to 0.77 for the
knowledge questionnaire, and 0.88 for the questionnaire
of the viewpoint of adolescent girls regarding the causes
of child marriage, and 0.89 for the questionnaire of the
viewpoint of adolescent girls regarding the consequences
of child marriage.
Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed using SPSS, 21. The normality of
the data was determined by Kurtosis and Skeweness, all
of which had a normal distribution. To report the status
of knowledge and viewpoint of adolescent girls, and the
causes and consequences of child marriage, the descriptive
statistics including frequency (percentage), mean,
and standard deviation (SD) were used. To study the relationship
between the knowledge and viewpoint of adolescent
girls regarding child marriage the One-way ANOVA
in the bivariate analysis was used.
In multivariate analysis, a multivariate logistic regression
model was used with adjustment of sociodemographic
characteristics. For this purpose, the variable of
viewpoint of adolescent girls regarding child marriage
was transformed into a two-state qualitative variable,
and the options “I completely agree” and “I agree” were
merged and the options “I have no opinion “, “I disagree”,
and “I completely disagree” were merged. The chi-square
test was used to determine the relationship between sociodemographic
characteristics and viewpoint in bivariate
analysis. Then the variables that were related to the
viewpoint with p < 0.2 were included in the multivariate
logistic regression model along with the knowledge variable.
The results of multivariate logistic regression were
reported as a adjusted odds ratio (aOR) with a 95% confidence
interval (95% CI). P < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
Results
The mean (SD) of girls’ age was 16.63 (1.16) years old.
More than two-thirds of the participants (63.3%) were
students of public schools. Among them merely parents
of 10 participants (3.3%) were divorced. The sociodemographic
characteristics of the participants and the questions
about child marriage are shown in Table 1.
More than half of the girls (57.7%) considered the
proper age of marriage to be from 21 to 25 years old and
approximately 44 participants (14.7%) considered it to
be 16–20 years old. Approximately two-thirds of girls
(63.7%) stated that they take the final decision regarding
their marriage and more than three-fourths of girls
(77.0%) stated that they would disagree in case their parents
decided that they should get married before the age
of 18 years old.
The mean (SD) knowledge of the adolescent girls
regarding child marriage amounted to 6.70 (3.09) from
the acceptable score ranging from 0 to 11. Among them,
had moderate knowledge, and 53 students (17.7%) had
poor knowledge about child marriage. Investigating
the viewpoint of adolescent girls about child marriage
showed that merely 16 participants (5.1%) agreed with
marriage before the age of 18 years old, 28 participants
(9.3%) had no opinion in this regard, and the majority of
the girls, 256 participants (85.4%), disagreed with marriage
before the age of 18 years old. Besides, 19 participants
(6.4%) stated that their families want them to get
married before the age of 18 years old, 39 participants
(13%) had no opinion in this regard, and 242 (80.6%) participants
stated that their parents were against their marriage
before the age of 18 years old (Table 2).
Investigating the viewpoint of adolescent girls regarding
the causes of child marriage revealed that the important
issue leading to reduction of child marriage can be
“intellectual, emotional, social, and economic maturity of
girls plus their physical puberty (92.4% agree), increase
in the girls’ education (79% agree) and increasing girls’
awareness regarding the consequences of early marriage
in schools and media (69.6% agree). Illiteracy or lack of
education of parents (64% agree), meeting the emotional
needs (59.3% agree), family problems and conflicts (59.6%
agree), and lack of exhilaration in daily life, especially in
the rural regions and suburbs (58.3% agree) were among
the reasons of increase of child marriage (Table 3).
The important consequences of child marriage in the
viewpoint of girls included deprivation of the chance of
education of girls (82.7% agree), causing identity crisis
and psychological problems due to improper course of
childhood and adolescence (81.3% agree), the increase of
the probability of families interference in the marital life
and decision-making (76.7% agree), an obstacle to have a
social status and appropriate job for girls (74.0% agree),
and increase of divorce (73.3% agree) (Table 4).
The results of the chi-square test revealed that there
was a statistical relationship between girls’ adolescents’
viewpoint on the child marriage and the variables
of mother’s education (p = 0.024), father’s education
(p = 0.192), number of brothers (p = 0.044), marital status
(p = 0.008), parental marriage under the age of 18
(p = 0.001), traditional parental marriage (p = 0.046), the
marriage of distant or close relatives under the age of
18 (p = 0.155), appropriate age for marriage (p = 0.001),
being the final decision maker about girls’ marriage
(p = 0.014), and disagreement with parents if they decide
to girls’ marriage under the age of 18 years old (p = 0.004)
with p < 0.2. These variables, with the knowledge variable,
entered the multivariate logistic regression model,
and the results, by controlling sociodemographic characteristics
as possible confounding variables, showed
that girls who believed the appropriate age for marriage
is under 20 were almost 13 times more likely to agree
with child marriage than girls who believed the appropriate
age for marriage is over 20 years (aOR = 13.82; 95%
Cl 2.61–71.16 p = 0.002) and girls who opposed their
parents’ decision to marry under the age of 18 were less
likely to agree with the child marriage than girls who did
not oppose their decision (aOR = 0.09; 95% Cl 0.01–0.63
p = 0.016) (Table 5).
Discussion
The results showed that 45.6% of girls had good knowledge
about child marriage.majority of the girls (85.4%)
disagreed with marriage before the age of 18 years old.
The girls stated that the main reasons for the decrease
of child marriage include the intellectual, emotional,
social, and economic maturity of girls plus their physical
puberty. They also stated that illiteracy or lack of education
of parents are the main causes of the increase of
child marriage. The most important consequence of child
marriage from the viewpoint of the girls is deprivation
from the chance of education.
The results revealed that the mean knowledge of
the adolescent student girls regarding child marriage
amounted to 6.70 (ranging from 0 to 11). About half of
them (45.6%) had good knowledge about child marriage.
Babiker et al. conducted a study in Al Jazeera. They found
that the majority of the participants (77.4%) had perfect
knowledge about the negative consequences of child
marriage [24]. Vandana et al., in their research in India,
manifested that knowledge of school girls regarding early
marriage was 14.3 (ranging from 10 to 21) [2]. It did not
match the results of the present research. These differences
might be due to regional and cultural differences.
The results of the present research demonstrated that
the majority of girls (85.4%) disagreed with marriage
before the age of 18 years old. The results of a study in
India revealed that more than half of school girls (52.5%)
had a good attitude and 47.5% had a relatively good attitude
regarding early marriage [2]. Sumalatha et al. conducted
a study in which 73.3% of participants disagreed
with early marriage [25]. The results of the present
research did not match the results of this study, which
can be due to regional and cultural differences.
More than half of the girls (57.7%), considered the
proper age of marriage to be 21–25 years old and approximately
44 participants (14.7%) considered it to be 16–20
years old. In accordance with the latest survey regarding
the values and attitudes of Iranians, 47% of the participants
stated that the proper age of marriage for girls
is between 16 and 20 years old and 39% stated that age
to be 21–25 years old [26]. The reason for such differences
can be due to the fact that all participants were
from the urban regions and this city is considered to be
a metropolis in comparison to other cities of this country.
However, the results of the survey regarding the values
and attitudes of Iranians included all provinces of the
country, together with rural regions, nomadic tribes, and
outskirts. Thus, the factor of development and the living
region has a crucial role in the phenomenon of child
marriage.
Investigating the viewpoint of adolescent girls regarding
the causes of child marriage revealed that the important
issue leading to reduction of child marriage can be
intellectual, emotional, social, and economic maturity of
girls plus their physical puberty, increase in the girls’ level
of education and increasing girls’ awareness regarding
the consequences of early marriage in schools and media.
Illiteracy or lack of education of parents, to meet the
emotional needs, family problems and conflicts, and lack
of exhilaration in daily life, especially in the rural regions
and suburbs were among the reasons for the increase of
child marriage. In accordance with the research by Matlabi
et al., in Iran, one of the reasons for adolescent girls’
inclination to marriage at this age is the lack of knowledge
and awareness of the consequences and damages of
the marriage in the young ages [17]. In a study by Babiker
et al., the majority of girls (67.4%) stated that the main
reason for child marriage was the traditions [24]. Ahmed
et al. carried out a study in Egypt. In their study, they
argued that the main causes for early marriage were to
prevent promiscuity prior to marriage (35%) and difficulty
after marriage (28%). The reasons for the lack of
support of child marriage were hurting mothers (26%),
difficulty in caring for children (18%), and deprivation of
education (18%) [27].
The main consequences of child marriage from the
viewpoint of girls in the present research included girls’
deprivation of the chance of education, causing identity
crisis and psychological problems due to improper
course of childhood and adolescence, the increase of
the probability of families interference in the marital life
and decision-making, an obstacle to have a social status
and appropriate job for girls, and increase of divorce. In
accordance with the report by the Islamic Parliament
Research Center of The Islamic Republic of Iran, deprivation
of education, death caused by pregnancy, lack of
sexual consent, domestic violence, lack of observation
of children’s rights, forced marriage, lack of intellectual
and social maturity are not seen in child marriage more
than other types of marriage and it stated that there has
been exaggeration in this regard and it is not a critical
issue. Thus, in accordance with this report, the legal age
of marriage for girls in Iran is considered to be 15 years
old [28]. In accordance with the rules and regulations of
the international communities including UNICEF, child
marriage includes any official, customary, or unofficial
mirage, in which one or both of the spouses or sexual
partners are under the age of 18-year-old [1]. Thus, the
legal age of marriage in Iran is different from other societies
and the consequences caused by child marriage in
Iran are reported less than its actual measures.
Finally, it is recommended to provide proper education
in the different levels of society to increase the knowledge
of girls, parents, and social and educational programs to
empower girls in order to prevent child marriage.
One of the limitations of the present research is being
cross-sectional, due to which the relationship of knowledge
and viewpoint in this research cannot be demonstrated
as cause and effect relationship. The responses
could be biased due to the nature of the questions of the
research and the researcher tried to eliminate this limitation
by ensuring the participant of confidentiality of their
information and completing the questionnaires without
mentioning their name and surname. Besides, the present
research was conducted in the city of Tabriz, with Azari
ethnicity, therefore, its results cannot be generalized to
other cities and ethnicities. Also, the lack of coverage of
8–10% of the population of Tabriz by the SIB system who
have not referred to health centers in the city and have
not registered is considered as a limitation of this study.
Conclusions
The results of the present research indicated a good level
of knowledge and negative attitude to child marriage
among the girls. It demonstrated that the girls who disagree
with child marriage were significantly more knowledgeable
than the girls who agreed with child marriage.
Thus, by increasing the level of knowledge of girls and
their families regarding the consequences of early marriage
and developing the culture for correcting the wrong
cultural and social beliefs to prevent child marriage, this
damage can be decreased to a great extent.