Background
Te use of chest computed tomography (CT) has shown a
greater diagnostic sensitivity and specifcity compared to
chest-X ray in patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia [1].
Tree main phenotypes on chest CT have been described
with potential implications for clinical management:
multiple bilateral ground glass opacities (phenotype one), 
unhomogeneously distributed atelectasis with peribronchial infltrates (phenotype two) and development of an
ARDS-like pattern (phenotype three)  [2]. Some studies
[3] suggest that in the phenotype one, the compliance
of the respiratory system is higher despite the patient’s
hypoxemia, thus lower to moderate levels of PEEP may
redistribute pulmonary fow and reduce shunt. In the
phenotype two and three, a progressive predominance
of atelectasis occurs, which might beneft to moderate to higher levels of PEEP as well as prone position to
recruit non-ventilated lung regions although other studies reported conficting results [4, 5]. On the other hand,
some of these studies have denied the existence of atelectasis in the SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia patient, expressing
that they are exceptional (less than 5%), and clinically
postulated that recruitment maneuvers are contraindicated [6]. We hypothesized that patients with SARSCoV-2 pneumonia had higher prevalence of atelectasis
and that larger compared to smaller amount of atelectasis
were associated with worse oxygenation and poor clinical
outcome.
Te present study aims to estimate the prevalence of
atelectasis in patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia
and determine whether the amount of these atelectasis may be associated with the clinical outcome in terms
of oxygen therapy need, Intensive Care Unit admission
rate, length of in-hospital stay and secondly, in-hospital
mortality.
Patients and methods
Study population
Tis retrospective study was approved by the Ethical
Committee for Medical Research of Puerta de Hierro
Majadahonda Universitary Hospital (Madrid, Spain)
on 29 June 2020. Te electronic medical records were
reviewed and analyzed. All methods have been carried in
accordance with current regulations and guidelines. All
patients were aged>18 years and informed consent was
obtained before performing the chest CT. We analyzed
237 patients who underwent a contrast-enhanced chestCT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) between April 1 and
April 30, 2020. From this group of patients, we selected
those patients who were admitted to the hospital with
SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia diagnosed by clinical, radiology and molecular tests in the nasopharyngeal swab
who underwent a chest computed tomography (Fig.  1).
CTPA examinations were performed in multi-detector
CT scanners (Aquilion Prime SP, Canon Medical Systems
and Somatom Sensation, Siemens Healthineers) using a
standard CTPA protocol. Te whole chest was scanned
from lowest hemidiaphragm to lung apex, in the supine
position. All patients were instructed to hold breath, and
CTPA images were acquired during a single breath-hold.
Scan parameters were as follows: tube voltage of 120 kV,
tube current of 100–300  mA·s, collimation of 64×0.6–
0.625  mm, pitch of 0.937–1.0, gantry rotation time of
0.5  s. Nonionic iodinated contrast media, (50–70  mL,
iomeprol 400  mg/mL) was injected via an antecubital
vein at a fow rate of 4 mL/s followed by a 25 mL saline
fush using a mechanical power injector. Automatic
bolus-tracking technique with the region of interest positioned at the level of the main pulmonary artery and a
trigger threshold of 120 HU, and a fxed delay of 5 s was
employed. Images were reconstructed at 3 mm thickness
in axial and coronal planes. Source images were transmitted to workstations for multiplanar reconstructions and
to picture archiving and communication systems (PACS).
After the analysis of the CT study, the patients were
classifed into three groups (Figs. 1, 2): (a) those who did
not present atelectasis, (b) those who presented small
atelectasis (laminar, subsegmentary or segmentary atelectasis with estimated size of less than 5% of the forecasted lung volume) (small atelectasis hereinafter) and
(c) those with signifcant atelectasis (atelectasis with
estimated size of more than 5% of the forecasted lung
volume) or a complete lobe collapse (large atelectasis
hereinafter). In this sense, one radiologist specialized in
SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia performed a visual assessment
based on the single slice in the CT with the largest atelectasis size and compared it to the estimated lung volume, classifying the patients into these three groups. We
choose the 5% of lung surface as a cut-of point according to our capacity to detect and quantitate the % of lung
with atelectasis. Table 1 shows basal characteristics of the
patients that accomplished the inclusion criteria (including time from the beginning of symptoms).
Clinical and radiological severity
In order to assess the clinical severity of pneumonia, the
patient’s score on the CURB 65 scale was collected upon
hospital admission [7] [see Additional fle  1]. One radiologist (the same for all patients) specialized in SARSCoV-2 pneumonia thoracic imaging studies used a
semi-quantitative scoring system with a visual assesment
[8] to estimate the pulmonary involvement of all these
abnormalities on the basis of the area involved, based on
the chest CT fndings described by Wong et al. in 2003
and 2004 [9, 10]. Each of the fve lung lobes was visually scored on a scale of 0 to 5: 0: no involvement; 1: less
than 5% involvement; 2: 5–25% involvement; 3: 26–49%
involvement; 4: 50–75% involvement; 5: more than 75%
involvement. Te total CT score was the sum of the individual lobar scores and ranged from 0 (no involvement)
to 25 (maximum involvement). Te patients underwent
the chest CT study because of a respiratory worsening
(decrease Pa/Fi O2, increase in oxygen therapy support)
and in no circumstance for scientifc purposes.
Oxygenation and oxygen therapy need
Sat O2/FiO2 ratio from each patient was collected as an
indirect estimate of lung oxygenation capacity [11] at
two moments: at the time of the chest CT and the worse 
ratio during the hospitalization. Te number of days that
each patient needed to maintain the most intensive oxygen therapy (the one with the greatest fow and FiO2)
received during admission was also collected.
Other variables with prognostic interest
In addition, outcome variables that have value when it
comes to the analysis of the prognosis, such as in-hospital
mortality, days of admission to the ICU (if required) or
total days of hospitalization were collected. We adjusted
in-hospital mortality based on the presence of pulmonary embolism (PE) by comparing the mortality between
the groups with PE versus no PE (since the reason for
inclusion in the study was the performance of a chest
CT due to a respiratory worsening, including suspect of
PE associated with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, Additional
fle 1).
Data storage
After obtaining the consent of the ethics committee
to record the data from the informatic patient’s clinical
reports, a database using the software FileMaker Pro version 18.0.3.317 in a MacOS operating system was organized. In this database, the personal data of the patients
were adequately encoded to guarantee data protection.
Statistical processing
Data from the prevalence of atelectasis, ICU admission
rate and mortality are shown as percentage of the group.
Lung oxygenation capacity, length of in-hospital stay and
days with higher oxygen therapy are shown as median
(p25, p75). For the analysis of quantitative variables, a
normality test was carried out and then an ANOVA test
was performed to test if there were diferences between
the three groups (or a Kruskal Wallis test if the data set
did not ft the normal distribution). If this analysis was
signifcant, two-by-two post hoc comparisons (Bonferroni test or Dunn’s test) were carried out between the
groups in order to correct for multiple comparisons.
For the analysis of qualitative variables, after checking if
the collected variable met the minimum characteristics
required, a χ2
 test was done. If this analysis was signifcant, two-by-two post hoc comparisons (χ2
 or Fisher test)
were carried out between the groups. Statistical analysis
was carried out using Prism Graphpad version 8.0 software. Statistical signifcance was assumed for two-tailed
p<0.05. Sensitive data of the patients (name, surname,
medical record number, etc.) transferred to this software,
were duly encoded.
Results
From the 237 patients analyzed, 155 patients (111 males
and 44 females; mean age 68.8±13.9  years) met the
inclusion criteria. Basal characteristics of the patients are
shown in Table 1. Indeed, up to 38 patients (24%) showed
some degree of atelectasis at chest CT: 30 (19%) patients
showed small atelectasis in the chest CT and 8 patients
(5%) showed large atelectasis.
SatO2/FiO2 ratio diferences were found among the
groups (p<0.01) (Fig. 3). In the group without atelectasis, we found a SatO2/FiO2 ratio of 357 (230 to 438), compared to 411 (331 to 453) in those with small atelectasis
(p=0.07) and to 182 (113 to 359) in those with large atelectasis (p=0.17). SatO2/FiO2 ratio was lower in patients
with large compared to small atelectasis (p=0.01).
Te worst SatO2/FiO2 ratio was diferent among groups
(p=0.03), being 300 (range 99 to 431) in the patients
without atelectasis, 379 (range 247 to 453) in patients
with small atelectasis (p=0.05), and 182 (range 113 to
359) in patients with large atelectasis (p=0.37). Te
worst SatO2/FiO2 ratio was lower in patients with large
compared to small atelectasis (p=0.05).
In addition, in the no atelectasis group and in the
small atelectasis group, the need for Intensive Care
Unit admission rate was lower compared to large atelectasis group (p < 0.01). In this sense, in the group of
patients without atelectasis 18 patients (15%) needed
to be admitted in the ICU, compared to 2 patients
(7%) in the group of small atelectasis (p=0.37) and
to 6 patients (75%) in the group of larger atelectasis
(p < 0.01). Indeed, ICU admission rate was lower in
patients with small atelectasis compared to large atelectasis (p < 0.01).
Te length of in-hospital stay was diferent among
groups (p=0.01). Patients with no atelectasis required
15 (7 to 23) days of in-hospital admission, compared
to 14 (6 to 23) days in patients with small atelectasis
(p=0.99) and to 40 (17 to 54) days in patients with
large atelectasis (p=0.02) (Fig. 4). Te length of in-hospital stay was longer in patients with large compared to
small atelectasis (p=0.01).
Te duration of oxygen therapy was diferent among
groups (p=0.04). Patients without atelectasis needed
to maintain it for 6 (3 to 10) days, compared to 5 (5 to
10) days in patients with small atelectasis (p=0.48),
and to 20 (4 to 37) days in those with large atelectasis (p=0.04). Furthermore, diferences were found
between these last two groups (p=0.02).
In-hospital mortality was not diferent among groups
(p=0.55). Te percentage of patients who died in-hospital was 11% in patients without atelectasis compared
to 6,7% in patients with small atelectasis and 12.5% of
patients with large atelectasis. Adjusting for PE, (see
Additional fle  1 for more information), in the no atelectasis group, 19% of the patients with PE deceased compared to 6.9% of mortality in those who did not
have PE. In patients with small atelectasis, no patients
with PE deceased (0%), while 8.3% of the patients died
in the group without PE. In the group of patients with
large atelectasis 33% of patients with PE died while
none (0%) of patients without PE died in-hospital.
Discussion
In the present study we found that in patients with
SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia the prevalence of atelectasis
was 24%. Among them, 19% of the patients showed small
atelectasis and 5% of the patients showed large atelectasis. Patients with larger compared to smaller atelectasis
showed less SatO2/FiO2 ratio, higher rate of ICU admission and longer length of in-hospital stay. Among the few
published studies investigating atelectasis in chest CT
in SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia patients, our study includes
the largest number of patients (237 patients screened, of
whom 155 patients met all entry criteria). In our study,
the prevalence of atelectasis was 24% which is higher
than the previously reported (around 5%) [12]. However,
previous studies did not focus on atelectasis but generally describing the most frequently patterns at chest CT
scans [13, 14]. Furthermore, the greatest prevalence of
atelectasis was mostly composed by mild, segmental or
subsegmental atelectasis. No previous study separated
smaller and larger atelectasis associated with the clinical
outcome. We made this distinction based on proposed
pathophysiology of the SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia and its
relationship with oxygenation: it has been suggested that
the progression of the disease would be associated with
more severe hypoxia [15]. Currently and from anatomopathological studies carried out on patients with ARDS,
we know that in addition to difuse alveolar injury and
hyaline membrane formation (typical of all ARDS and
VILI), there are areas of dead space that worsen gas
exchange even more [16]. Moreover, the hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction refex (Euler-Liljestrand mechanism [17]) may further worsen ischemic and thrombotic
phenomena in the lung. Patients with large atelectasis
showed a tendency to a greater involvement of lung tissue by SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia than in those without
and small atelectasis. In fact, they required a higher ICU
admission rate, with greater need of intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation. In addition, patients with
larger atelectasis showed worse oxygenation ratios (Sat
O2/FiO2) during admission and had a longer in-hospital
stay (nearly the double than in patients with small or no
atelectasis). Previous studies reported a lower incidence
of atelectasis in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia
[3]. Our data suggest that the presence of large atelectasis may be a factor afecting progressive evolution to
the ARDS [16]. Te Sat O2/FiO2 ratio and atelectasis
detection by chest CT might be two valuable tools for
the lung function assessment of these patients and hence
might be helpful to predict those patients who will need
mechanical ventilation, ICU admission and prolonged
length of in-hospital stay. In-hospital mortality was not
diferent among patients with no, small or large atelectasis. Tis can be explained by the fact that mortality rate
of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia is not only related to pulmonary injury, but also to development of multiple organ
failures [18]. Te development of signifcant atelectasis
favors more chances of respiratory complications and a
higher morbidity with greater risk of ICU admission and
need for invasive mechanical ventilation. Te establishment of an early treatment with non-invasive respiratory
ventilation to reverse atelectasis or prevent their progression, together with intensive surveillance or in intermediate care, could prevent a progression of lung injury with
a worse outcome in patients in which this condition is
detected.
Our study has several limitations to be addressed.
First, this is a retrospective study, but in a situation of
healthcare collapse, it was impossible to carry out prospective studies which need more time for approval
and organization. However, our hospital has all the
computerized medical history data, making data collection very reliable. We do recognize that a number
of patients that were included in the study did not have
a specifc medical record (it was even, in a number of
cases, the frst time to come to the hospital). Second,
we selected all the chest CT scans in the period with
the highest incidence of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in
our hospital, with high clinical suspicion of PE. Additionally, the scale we used to measure the severity of the
pulmonary afection in chest CT ([8], shown in Additional fle 1), based on the fndings of Wong KT et al. [9,
10], takes into account the percentage of lobar infltration and even pleural efusion, which could be logically
associated with worst outcome. However, there were
no diferences between the large atelectasis group and
the other groups in this scale. Regarding atelectasis, the
same radiologist carried out a visual quantifcation by
lobes for every scan in order to reduce heterogeneity
between various radiologists. Tird, the group without atelectasis might not be considered as a standard
control group but a group of patients with signifcant
oxygenation impairment due to several causes (including PE), hence introducing a possible selection bias as
patients without atelectasis and mild infection would
not be represented. However, this makes our study’s
fndings even more relevant in relation to the diferences between the group of large atelectasis (which
indeed is composed by a reduced number of patients, 8)
and its relationships with outcome compared with the
other groups. We did not evaluate complications occurring during the hospital stay, but we do know that there
are several diferences between the groups regarding
oxygenation, oxygen-therapy needs, ICU admission and
days of hospitalization. Whether if these diferences are
associated directly or indirectly to atelectasis has to be
determined on further studies.
Conclusions
In patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, atelectasis might
appear in up to 24% of patients and the presence of larger
amount of atelectasis is associated with worse oxygenation and clinical outcome. Patients with larger atelectasis
requires more intensive surveillance and might beneft of
open lung techniques.