Background
Gastrointestinal foreign body incarceration as a common
disease in emergency mostly occurs in pediatric department,
with a high incidence in children aged 5 years
and younger [1–3]. In adults, most cases of foreign body
ingestion are associated with factors such as advanced
age, mental disorder, mental retardation, alcohol consumption,
or profit-seeking behavior by prisoners [1].
The occurrence of foreign body-related complications
is closely associated with foreign body types, incarceration
time and incarceration position [4]. Most foreign
bodies (80–90%) can pass through the digestive tract by
themselves without clinical intervention. About 10–20%
of foreign bodies require endoscopic treatment. Less
than 1% of patients require surgery [1, 5]. Since the first
reported successful endoscopic removal of foreign bodies
by McKechnie in 1972 [6], endoscopic treatment
has become the first-choice treatment for foreign bodies
in the upper digestive tract [7, 8]. Flexible endoscope
and rigid endoscope are both widely used. Mouse forceps
and snares are the most commonly used auxiliary
devices to improve the success rate of treatment and
reduce the incidence of operation-related complications.
Few researches reported on the migration of esophageal
foreign bodies into the bronchus. The joint management
of foreign bodies by esophagoscope and bronchoscope
faces a series of challenges. Here we reported a successful
case. An elderly female patient who accidentally
ingested a fish bone incarcerated in the esophagus and
delayed medical treatment, leading to the fish bone puncturing
through the esophageal wall and crossing the left
main bronchus. Under general anesthesia, holmium laser
assisted fiberoptic bronchoscope was used to successfully
remove the fish bone when the expected effect was
not achieved by rigid esophagoscopy. It is hoped that this
study can attribute to the management of some special
cases of esophageal foreign bodies in the future.
Case presentation
A female patient, 72 years old, was admitted for “retrosternal
pain for 4 days during eating” with a healthy
history before. Four days ago, the patient had a foreign
body sensation in the pharynx after eating freshwater
fish. Then she ate as usual but felt retrosternal pain
when eating. One day ago, the pain worsened after eating
rice cake and was accompanied by severe irritant
dry cough without fever, hemoptysis, or hematemesis.
The patient was admitted to Regional medical center for
National Institute of Respiratory Disease, Sir Run Run
Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University.
Chest plain computed tomography (CT) scan suggested
“flat esophagus and bronchial bifurcation with a
high-density shadow, a foreign body was considered with
the length of 2.8 cm that crossed the left main bronchial
wall, and the local bronchial wall mucosa thickened”
(Figs. 1, 2). Treatment was supportive with fasting, fluid
infusion, monitoring and so on. During the operation, a
rigid esophagoscope (S121; Hangzhou Tonglu Medical
Optical Instrument Co., Ltd, Zhejiang, China) was used
under general anesthesia with endotracheal tube. It was
observed that the mucosa ulcer was at the 2 o’clock direction
in the esophagus 26 cm away from the incisors, with
hyperemia and swelling of the surrounding mucosa. No
obvious foreign body was found in the cavity. Under a
fiberoptic bronchoscope (BF-260; Olympus Optical Co.,
Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) via the endotracheal tube, a needleshaped
foreign body (considering fish bone in combination
with medical history) in the proximal part and near
the entrance of left main bronchus could be seen intraoperatively,
and penetrated the bronchial wall. Local
bronchial wall showed granulation tissue hyperplasia,
mucosal swelling and easy bleeding (Fig. 3). After the
granulation tissue was cleaned intraoperatively and the
fish bone was exposed, the holmium laser (VersaPulse
80/100 W PowerSuite; Lumenis Ltd, Israel) with the settings
of 1 J and 8 Hz was used to broke the fish bone in
the middle which was located in the left main bronchus,
and foreign body forceps (JHY-FG-18-120-A4; Jiuhong
Medical Instrument Co., Ltd. Changzhou, China) were
used to remove the two segments, respectively. There
was no significant active hemorrhage in the bronchus
after operation (Fig. 4). The entire operation under the
fiberoptic bronchoscope lasted for 20 min. The foreign
body was a sharp and hard fish bone about 3 cm in length
(Fig. 5). A jejunal nutrition tube was indwelling during
the operation, and nasal-feeding nutrition as well as gastrointestinal
decompression were given postoperatively.
Secondary infection and leakage were also monitored.
No obvious leakage was noted in upper gastrointestinal
contrast half a month after the operation. Then, the jejunal
nutrition tube was removed, and there was no obvious
discomfort when having semi-fluid food through the
mouth.
Discussion
Due to the differences in diet culture, the proportion
of fish bones in ingested gastrointestinal foreign bodies
in some Asian countries such as China is significantly
higher than that in Western countries [9–11]. Among
Chinese populations, if fish bones are stuck in the digestive
tract, treatments such as swallowing whole solid
food will be used rather than emergency medical treatment,
as the case in this study. Later, symptoms of the
patient such as retrosternal pain and difficulty in eating
were significantly aggravated, and a severe irritable cough
appeared. It was probably the folk way that sent the fish
bone deeper into the left main bronchus.
Sharp foreign bodies such as fish bones are usually
incarcerated in the esophagus [10], especially in the
upper esophagus [12, 13]. The outcomes are related to the
three physiological strictures of the esophagus including
the upper esophageal sphincter, the aortic arch or the left
main stem bronchus, and the lower esophageal sphincter.
Another study discovered that fish bones tended
to be affected horizontally in the pharynx and esophagus,
rather than in parallel or oblique positions, making
them easier to penetrate the esophageal wall [11]. In this
case, the ingested fish bone was linear in shape with two
tapered ends, which was easy to penetrate the esophageal
wall. The fish bone gradually moved to the deeper viscera
over time, leading to greater harm.
Complications of esophageal foreign bodies mainly
consist of esophageal mucosal injury, hemorrhage, infection
and perforation, etc., which vary according to the
involvement of surrounding organs and tissue. The incidence
of the ingested sharp foreign bodies can be as high
as 35% [1]. The most serious situation was that foreign
bodies penetrate into the esophageal wall and the aorta,
leading to the aortoesophageal fistula (AEF), which will
cause death by the massive hemorrhage [13]. Our case
was that the ingested fish bone stayed close to the second
stricture of the esophagus, penetrating the wall and
mediastinum, involving the left main bronchus, and contributing
to the esophagobronchial fistula (EBF). Because
of the small fistula, only a period of postoperative fasting
was required without further treatment.
The method to remove gastrointestinal foreign bodies
is associated with the type and size of foreign bodies,
position and time of incarceration, the state of patients
and the habits of doctors [12, 13]. Flexible endoscopy is
the first choice for examination and treatment of upper
gastrointestinal foreign bodies, with a high success rate
(greater than 94%) and fewer complications (0–6%) [1,
10]. While rigid endoscopy is more suitable to deal with
sharp and long foreign bodies. The rigid endoscopy has
some advantages over the upper esophageal sphincter
or hypopharyngeal foreign body incarceration, while the
lower esophageal foreign bodies should be treated by
flexible endoscopy [14]. A recent meta-analysis compares
the treatment of foreign bodies in the upper esophagus
by flexible and rigid endoscopes, and the success rates
and overall complication rates of both are similar [15].
The habits of doctors are also quite different [13]. In
adults, rigid endoscopy are often used as a second-line
treatment after failure of flexible endoscopy, or as a firstline
treatment in more difficult situations, but 85.7% of
patients in a Greek study received rigid endoscopy treatment
[13]. In this case, the fish bone penetrated the
esophageal wall, posing certain challenges to the operation
of rigid esophagoscope.
For sharp foreign bodies like fish bones, emergency
grading of endoscopic intervention time (preferably
within 2 h, but at latest within 6 h) is required [1, 16]. It
is generally recommended to avoid endoscopic operation
and adopt surgical treatment if endoscopic treatment
involves perforation, high risk of bleeding or foreign
bodies having been deeply inserted into the esophageal
wall [17]. In the case of esophageal foreign bodies, the
proportion of fish bone involved trachea and bronchus
is relatively low without clear literature reports, and the
guidelines have not proposed specific operation methods
for this issue, which poses a greater challenge to the diagnosis
and treatment of this case. With the support of
general anesthesia, rigid esophagoscopy was firstly used
to explore the esophagus by the otorhinolaryngologist.
During the operation, the foreign body was completely
invisible at the esophageal end, and only local mucosal
rupture and swelling was observed, indicating that the
fish bone had been deeply inserted into the esophageal
wall. According to the conclusion of previous multidisciplinary
discussions, we then decided that fiberoptic
bronchoscope should be used to remove the foreign body
by a respiratory physician.
Rigid bronchoscopy would have been the ideal
method for removal of a sharp foreign body in the airway
[18]. However, in this case, we did not choose it since
endotracheal intubation and rigid esophagoscope were
applied. Under fiberoptic bronchoscope, the fish bone
had crossed the left main bronchus, with both pointed
ends punctured into the bronchial wall. We had tried to
regress the bone back into the esophagus, but it was difficult
to expose the bone to the esophagus side. Advances
in bronchoscope, such as laser technology, have broadened
the therapeutic options. For adults, laser therapy
is mainly applied in the treatment of airway tumors,
bronchial stones and so on [19]. In the pediatric field, its
most common indication is granuloma clearance before
tracheal fistula removal [20]. As for treatment of foreign
bodies with lasers, no relevant guidelines or recommendations
have been found. Only some case reports in pediatrics
can be consulted. Chicken bone in a 19-month-old
girl and pistachio shell in a 7-year-old boy were successfully
removed by bronchoscope with the assistance
of neodymium (YAG LASER), respectively [21, 22]. In
this case, we found both ends of the fish bone had been
deeply penetrated left main bronchus under fiberoptic
bronchoscope. Bronchial mucosa hemorrhage was obvious
with forced removal of the fish bone. Therefore, we
used the holmium laser to break the foreign body, thus
removing the complete fish bone, successfully avoiding
surgery, and reducing complications as well as medical
costs.
Conclusion
This study reported a case of esophageal foreign body
invading the left main bronchus, which was successfully
removed with the help of holmium laser via fiberoptic
bronchoscope, hoping to provide reference for some special
cases of esophageal foreign bodies. When ingested
foreign bodies involve trachea or bronchus, it is a feasible,
efficient and minimally invasive method to remove
foreign bodies with assistance of bronchoscope. The
application of holmium laser can effectively break the
hard foreign bodies while hold them in a fixed position
relatively, making the operation more convenient, shortening
the operation time and reducing the occurrence of
complications such as hemorrhage. Additionally, multidisciplinary
cooperation plays a key role in the ideal
outcome.