Background
Asthma is a respiratory disease caused by the interaction of genetic and environmental factors, known to be
mediated by epigenetics [1]. Approximately 334  million
people worldwide sufer from asthma. Childhood asthma
mortality varies from 0.0 to 0.7 per 100,000 [2]. Candidate genes for asthma are wide-spread throughout the
genome. Tere are multiple genes involved which may
afect expression of the asthma phenotype. Diferent
genes are related to childhood and adult asthma resulting in a diferent physiological foundation, and diferent
methods of treatment for the two diseases [3, 4].
Genetic variants drive the onset and development of
asthma, including cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein 4 (CTLA4) and interleukin-10 (IL-10) which are
involved in immune system regulation and infammation
[5, 6]. DNA methylation, such as of the gene encoding
the β-2 adrenergic receptor, is the most common epigenetic mechanism in the pathogenesis of asthma, and can
change gene expression in asthmatic patients [7–9]. Acevedo et al. reported that regional DNA methylation and
mRNA levels at the Gasdermin B/ORMDL sphingolipid
biosynthesis regulator 3 locus were associated with the
risk of childhood asthma [10]. Nicodemus-Johnson et al.
reported that the type 2 cytokine IL-13 is a key mediator, and it is upregulated in asthma [11]. Tey found that
a single exposure of IL-13 may induce DNA methylation
changes in an asthmatic’s airway cells and contribute to
various asthma phenotypes. Brand et  al. found that the
epigenetic regulation of T cells can infuence the sensitization and progress of experimental asthma [12]. Based
on these fndings, it is expected that biomarkers for the
early diagnosis of asthma can be determined from the
level of gene expression and methylation regulation.
In a prior study, Yang et  al. demonstrated that DNA
methylation at specifc gene loci are associated with
asthma based on GSE40736 data set, and suggested
that epigenetic changes might play a role in establishing
the immune phenotype associated with asthma. However, the results of that analysis were only at the DNA
level [13]. In the current study, we aimed to identify
critical genes and miRNAs in the progression of childhood atopic asthma. We downloaded DNA methylation
and gene expression data from the GEO database, and
screened critical diferentially expressed genes (DEGs)
with signifcant methylation changes from samples
obtained from atopic asthmatic patients and compared
them with samples from healthy controls. Ten we identifed the Gene Ontology (GO) function and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways of
these DEGs and constructed a gene co-expression and
miRNA–target gene regulatory network. Te aim of this
study is to potentially provide novel diagnostic biomarkers in the nasal epithelia of children with atopic asthma.
Methods
DNA methylation and gene expression data resource
Te DNA methylation dataset, superserie GSE40736,
was downloaded from the National Center of Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
database(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) [14], which
contained two subseries (GSE40732 and GSE40576) that
are gene expression and methylation level detection spectra, respectively. Each set contains 194 peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC) samples of 97 children with
atopic asthma and 97 control children. Te GSE40732
data set was tested on the platform of Nimble Gen Homo
sapiens Expression Array. Te GSE40576 data set was
tested on the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
platform.
Data preprocessing and diferentially expressed gene
screening
After downloading the original microarray data, the
limma package in R software (version3.1.3, https://
bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.
html) [15] was used to normalize the DNA methylation and gene expression data. DNA hypomethylation
and hypermethylation were common cancer hallmarks.
False discovery rate (FDR) values and fold change values
were calculated by using the limma package to evaluate
the DEGs and diferentially methylated genes (DMGs)
between the disease and control groups. An FDR<0.05
and |log2FC|> 0.5 were considered to be threshold
values.
Moreover, the pheatmap package (Version 1.0.8,
https://cran.r-project.org/package=pheatmap) [16] in R
software was used to perform the bidirectional hierarchical clustering analysis for the gene expression and methylation values based on Euclidean distance [17, 18]. Te
pheatmap was constructed to visualize gene expression
values.
Gene ontology function and KEGG pathway analysis
for DEGs and DMGs
Initially, we compared the collection of DEGs and DMGs,
kept the intersection of the two data sets, and analyzed
the overall correlation between the degree of diference
in methylation and expression levels. Te cor.test function (https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/stats/
html/cor.test.html) was used to calculate the Pearson
correlation coefcient. Te expression and methylation
level diferences in opposite directions were reserved for
further analysis. Subsequently, the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery tool, version
6.8 [19, 20] (DAVID, https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) was used
to perform GO function and KEGG pathway enrichment
analysis for the mRNAs with an opposite direction of difference in expression and methylation levels. Te threshold value was considered to be P<0.05.
Analysis of protein–protein interaction network
String, version 10.5 [21] (https://string-db.org/), was
used to search for the interaction between gene product
proteins for genes with opposite expression and methylation levels, and an interactive network was built. The interactive network was visualized by Cytoscape version
3.7.2 software [22] (http://www.cytoscape.org/). Te GO
biological process and KEGG signal pathway analysis
based on DAVID were then performed on the gene nodes
that constituted the interaction network. Te threshold
value was considered to be P<0.05.
MiRNA–target gene regulatory network construction
We used the Human MicroRNA Disease Database [23]
(HMDD, http://www.cuilab.cn/hmdd) to search for miRNAs directly associated with asthma. Te target genes
of asthma miRNAs were then screened using the starBase version 2.0 database [24] (http://starbase.sysu.edu.
cn/). Te starBase database provides the comprehensive
target gene prediction information from fve databases:
TargetScan, picTar, RNA22, PITA, and miRanda. We
selected regulatory relationships included in at least one
of the databases as miRNA-target gene relationship pairs
to construct a miRNA -mRNA regulation relationship.
Cytoscape 3.7.2 was used to display the networks. Finally,
KEGG pathway analysis for target genes was performed
using DAVID software.
Selection and mechanism analysis of candidate agents
In the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database, 2019
update [25] (http://ctd.mdibl.org/), using “asthmatic” as
a keyword, we searched for KEGG pathways and genes
directly related to asthma, and compared them with
pathways in which the genes in the constructed interaction network were signifcantly involved in the relevant
pathways. We selected disease pathways with direct
involvement of the asthma genes, constructed this part of
the network separately, screened genes directly related to
the disease, and conducted mechanism research through
the important pathways of gene participation.
Results
Diferentially expressed genes and methylated sites
screening
Expression and methylation level fles were downloaded.
A total of 933 (239 downregulated and 694 upregulated)
DEGs and 751 (412 hypomethylated and 339 hypermethylated) DMGs were identifed between the asthmatic
and healthy control groups. Volcano plots for the DEGs
and diferentially methylated sites were shown in Fig. 1a
and b. After screening DEGs and DMGs from the gene
expression and methylation profles, the corresponding gene expression and signal values were visualized in
bidirectional hierarchical clustering heatmaps (Fig.  1c,
d). As can be seen in the fgure, the diference between
the selected DEGs and DMGs of the asthma and control groups is signifcant. Te bidirectional hierarchical
cluster heatmap revealed that the samples were clearly
divided into two groups based on the screened DEGs and
DMGs.
Gene ontology and KEGG pathway analysis
We screened a total of 284 intersection genes that were
diferentially expressed in the DNA methylation and
gene expression data set, and analyzed the relationship
between gene expression and DNA methylation changes
by calculating the correlation coefcient (Fig. 2a). Critical gene expression levels and the DNA methylome are
shown in Fig.  2b. We reserved 130 genes for further
analysis whose expression and methylation levels difered
in opposite levels. Among these, there were 35 genes with
hypermethylation and decreased expression and 95 genes
with hypomethylation and increased expression. GO
and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses showed that
the critical genes were primarily related to 24 GO terms
and 10 pathways (Table 1). Te GO identifed genes were
involved in cellular functions including cellular defense
response and oxidation reduction. Te gene pathways
were involved in multiple areas including natural killer
cell mediated cytotoxicity, valine, leucine and isoleucine
degradation, and steroid hormone biosynthesis.
Protein–protein interaction network analysis
In the protein–protein interaction network, a total of 119
nodes were identifed. Tis included 33 hypermethylated,
downregulated genes and 86 hypomethylated, upregulated genes with 426 pairs of co-expression interactions
(Fig. 3).
As shown in Table  2, these genes were signifcantly
associated with 16 GO terms and 10 KEGG pathways.
GO functional analysis found that these nodes were
primarily involved in functions such as cellular defense
response and oxidation reduction. KEGG pathways
were primarily involved in natural killer cell mediated 
cytotoxicity, steroid hormone biosynthesis, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction.
Analysis of miRNA–target gene network
A total of 73 miRNAs that were directly associated with
asthma were screened. We screened the target genes of
these 73 miRNAs, and then compared the target genes
with 130 genes whose expression and methylation level
difered signifcantly. A total of 635 pairs were screened,
and the constructed miRNA-mRNA regulatory network
contains 133 nodes and 635 connected edges (Fig. 4).
As noted in Table  3, nine KEGG signaling pathways in the regulatory network were screened. Tese
included valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation
(P=2.40e−3
), which is annotated to HADH, PCCA, and
ACAA1; pyrimidine metabolism (P=9.54e−3
), which is
annotated to ENTPD5, POLR3A, and ENTPD1; adhesion molecules (P=1.64e−2
), which is annotated to
NCAM1, CDH1, and SPN; neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction (P=1.65e−2
), which is annotated to in
S1PR2, S1PR3, S1PR1, and S1PR5; primary immunodefciency (P=1.76e−2
), which is annotated to IL2RG, and
RFXANK; fatty acid metabolism (P=1.99e−2
), which
is annotated to HADH and ACAA1; purine metabolism (P=2.05e−2
), which is annotated to ENTPD5,
POLR3A, and ENTPD1; cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway (P=2.63e−2
), which is annotated to POLR3A and
CCL4, and cytokine−cytokine receptor interaction
(P=4.27e−2
), which is annotated to CCL2, IL2RG, and
CCL4.
Construction of a pathway network directly related
to asthma
We screened 119 KEGG pathways and 116 genes that
were directly associated with asthma by searching the
CTD database. After comparison with the genes in the
constructed regulatory network and the pathways in
which genes participate signifcantly, an overlapping
KEGG signaling pathway, hsa04060: cytokine-cytokine
receptor interaction, was obtained in which the C−C
motif chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) gene directly related to
asthma is involved. Tis gene is targeted by eight asthma
related miRNAs (hsa-miR-206, hsa-miR-19a, hsa-miR-9,
hsa-miR-22, hsa-miR-33b, hsa-miR-122, hsa-miR-1, and
hsa-miR-23b). As noted in Fig.  5, two additional genes,
IL2RG and CCl4, are involved in this pathway.
Discussion
Asthma is a complex multifactorial disease caused by
the interaction of genetic and environmental factors.
In our study, the hub genes were explored via an analysis of multiple data sets that included samples from
asthmatics and healthy controls. A total of 130 critical
DEGs that were diferentially expressed in DNA methylome were detected. In the miRNA−target gene regulatory network directly related to asthma, an overlapping
KEGG pathway, hsa04060: cytokine−cytokine receptor
interaction, was noted, in which the CCL2 gene directly
related to asthma is involved, and the gene is targeted by
8 asthma related miRNAs. Two other genes, IL2RG and
CCL4, are known to be involved in this pathway.
 CCL2, also known as MCP-1, is one of several
cytokine genes clustered on the q-arm of chromosome
17. Chemokines are a superfamily of secreted proteins
involved in immunoregulatory and infammatory processes. CCL2 is a member of the CC subfamily which is
characterized by two adjacent cysteine residues. It binds
to chemokine receptors CCR2 and CCR4. Te results of
our study also show that CCL2 and CCl4 are involved
in the cyclokine receptor interaction signaling pathway.
CCL2 is closely involved in the infammatory response in
children with asthma [26]. Multiple miRNAs have been
shown to regulate the occurrence of infammation in different diseases through CCL2. Rof et  al. reported that
microRNA-570-3p regulates HuR and cytokine (CCL2
and CCL4) expression in airway epithelial cells [27].
Downregulation of CCL2 induced by the upregulation of
microRNA206 is associated with the severity of HEV71
encephalitis [28]. Chen et  al. reported that miR-22 is
downregulated in PBMCs from patients with coronary
artery disease, and that miR-22 may participate in the
infammatory response by targeting MCP-1 [29]. Tese
fndings are consistent with the results of this study.
Interleukin 2 receptor subunit gamma, the protein
encoded by IL2RG, is an important signaling component of many interleukin receptors, including IL-2, IL-4,
IL-7, and IL-21, and is thus referred to as the common
gamma chain [30]. Mutations in this gene cause X-linked
severe combined immunodefciency as well as X-linked
combined immunodefciency, a less severe immunodefciency disorder [31]. Te pathway analysis showed that
IL2RG was involved in primary immunodefciency and
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction. We speculate
that IL2RG and CCL4 might be important genes related
to childhood atopic asthma, and together with CCL2
participate in the cytokine receptor interaction signaling
pathway that plays a role in childhood atopic asthma.
Tere are some limitations in this study. Te key genes
obtained in this study have not been further verifed.
In addition, the samples in these two data sets are all
PBMCs, which would be more convincing if they were
airway epithelial cells. But our research provides new
biological insights into the development of asthma.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our study identifed a total of 130 DEGs
with signifcant DNA methylation changes. In a regulatory network directly related to asthma, the KEGG signaling pathway hsa04060:cyclokine-cyclokine receptor
interaction was found, in which the CCL2 gene, directly
related to asthma, is involved, and this gene is targeted by
eight asthma related miRNAs. We speculate that IL2RG
and CCL4, which are also involved in this pathway, might
be critical genes related to childhood specifc asthma,
and together with CCL2 play a role in this disease. Te
bioinformatics analysis in this study may provide a valuable and reliable basis for determining biomarkers for the
development of childhood atopic asthma.