Introduction
Gout is the most prevalent inflammatory arthropathy
with a prevalence of 6.8% in South Australia, and it is
the most common form of inflammatory arthritis in
men [1]. Gout is associated with co-morbidities including
the metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease
[2]. Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA), which is also
associated with cardiovascular morbidity, is also very
common, with a self-reported prevalence of 8% in the
Australian population [3]. A higher prevalence of incident
OSA has been observed in older adults with gout
[4]. A recent meta-analysis has shown an association between
gout, serum uric acid and OSA [5]. Overall, it
found that serum uric acid levels in patients with OSA
were higher than in controls. In addition, individuals
with OSA had a higher risk of developing gout, although
this was not statistically significant (HR 1.25 95% 0.9–
1.7).
The association between OSA and gout may be explained
by intermittent airway obstruction during sleep
leading to hypoxia, and resulting in increased serum uric
acid via alteration in cellular metabolism [6]. Given the
cardiovascular complications of both conditions, and
treatability once diagnosed, this is an important area for
further research.
There is likely to be a bidirectional relationship between
sleep and gout, as gout flares may be influenced
by circadian rhythms, and sleep quality is likely to be influenced
by gout flares [7]. A study of 724 individuals
with gout highlighted that attacks are twice as likely to
occur at night [8]. We hypothesized that gout is therefore
also likely to be associated with sleep disruption,
which is known to lead to significant sequelae such as
reduced work performance and road safety [3].
The aims of our study were two-fold. Firstly, to determine
if there is an association between OSA and gout in
a representative Australian adult population. Secondly,
to explore associations between gout and patient reported
sleep outcomes.
Materials and methods
The aims of these study were addressed with a secondary
analysis of the existing database of the Sleep Health
Foundation 2019 web-based sleep health survey. The
primary aim of this cross-sectional survey was to investigate
prevalence of sleep disorders and sleep problems in
the Australian population. The survey additionally included
self-reported diagnoses of diverse chronic health
conditions, including gout. Characteristics of the sample
surveyed have been reported elsewhere [9]. Briefly, the
sample incorporated Australian adults (> 18 years, n =
2044) recruited from an online survey panel by Dynata.
The online panel comprises > 500,000 Australians, and
allows for recruitment of a representative sample of Australian
adults using a three-step randomisation process
aimed at reducing recruitment bias [3, 9]. Participants
were naïve to the content and aims of the survey during
initial recruitment and screening to reduce bias. The
CHERRIES checklist has previously been reported for
this study, see Appleton et al. for details [9].
Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
Diagnosed OSA was determined by an affirmative response
to the question ‘Have you ever been told by a
doctor that you have any of the following conditions? Obstructive
Sleep Apnoea’ (response items: yes, no, refused,
don’t know). Possible undiagnosed OSA (henceforth
possible OSA) was determined based on the frequency
in the past month of symptoms including observed frequent/
loud snoring, and observed pauses in breathing/
stopping breathing during sleep. Possible OSA was
categorised as self-report of witnessed breathing pauses
(i.e apnoeas).
Doctor diagnosed medical conditions were determined
with the question ‘Have you ever been told by a doctor
that you have any of the following conditions?...’ for gout,
arthritis, high blood pressure, obesity, and heart disease.
Response options were yes, no, refused or don’t know;
participants were included in analyses if they provided
either a yes or no response to the question on gout.
Patient reported outcome measures for sleep
Patient reported outcome measures for sleep were
assessed with the following questions and answer options
included in Table 1.
Covariates
Age (years), sex (categories: male, female and other) and
Body Mass Index from self-reported height and weight
were included as covariates. Standard alcoholic drinks
were self-reported, using the question: “Thinking about
alcoholic beverages such as beer, wine, liquor or mixed
drinks, how many alcoholic beverages do you typically
drink each week?”. Responses were categorised to allow
comparison to the Australian guidelines to reduce health
risks from drinking alcohol [10] as ‘none’, ‘<1 standard
drink/day’, ‘>1 to <2 standard drinks/day’, and ‘>2
standard drinks/day’.
Data analysis
Data were analysed using IBM SPSS version 26.0 (IBM
Corporation). Significant differences in sociodemographic
and health characteristics of respondents by gout
(yes or no) were examined using Mantel-Haenszel test
of trend or Pearson χ2 statistic. Multivariable logistic regression
analysis was used to examine associations between
OSA (predictor) and gout (outcome) for
Objective 1, adjusting for known correlates of gout (age,
sex, BMI, alcohol consumption and arthritis).
Multivariable logistic regression analyses were used to
examine associations between gout (predictor) and each
of the patient reported sleep outcomes (summarised in
Fig. 1), with each model adjusted for age, sex and BMI,
selected based on established relationships with sleep
problems in community samples [3, 9]. Significance
values for all models reported are based on the Wald
statistic.
Results
Of the 2044 respondents to the 2019 Sleep Health Foundation
survey, 1948 (95.3%) provided a yes/no response
when asked about gout. Respondents who indicated a
diagnosis of gout (n = 126, 6.5%) were more likely to be
male than female (11.2% v 2.0%, p < 0.001), and reported
a higher prevalence of comorbidities including heart
disease, arthritis, diabetes, high blood pressure and obesity
than those without gout (see Table 2). Respondents
with a diagnosis of gout were, on average, older than
those who did not report a diagnosis of gout (M(+SD);
58.9(+ 16.6) years and (46.1 + 17.0) years respectively).
OSA and gout
The likelihood of reporting gout when a respondent also
had OSA (no OSA, symptoms of OSA or diagnosed
OSA with PSG) is reported in Table 2. Respondents who
had OSA symptoms or diagnosed OSA were 2.6 and 2.8
times more likely respectively to report gout than those
who did not have OSA. The model containing all variableswas
statistically significant χ2(10, N = 1692) = 150.44,
p < 0.001, explaining between 8.5% (Cox & Snell R2) and
22.1% (Nagelkerke R2) of the variance in gout, and correctly
classifying 93.4% of cases (see Table 3).
Gout and patient reported sleep problems
The results of multivariate adjusted logistic regression
analyses for each sleep problem are presented in Fig. 1.
Respondents with gout were 2.5 times more likely to report
doctor diagnosed RLS/PLMS, were 2 times more
likely to worry about their sleep, and were 1.6 times
more likely to have discussed their sleep with a health
professional than those without gout. Over two thirds
(67.3%) of respondents with gout indicated that their
routine allows sufficient sleep, and 62.8% felt that they
regularly achieve adequate sleep. These findings were
not significantly different to respondents without gout.
In contrast, 15.0% of respondents with gout indicated
they have doctor diagnosed RLS/PLMS compared to a
prevalence of 6.7% in those without gout. Worry about
sleep was also higher in respondents with gout (31.9%
compared with 23.6%), and those with gout were more
likely to have discussed sleep with a health professional
than respondents without gout (38.9% compared with
28.5%).
Discussion
In Australian adults, gout was more prevalent in those
with diagnosed or probable sleep apnoea, after adjustment
for relevant confounders. Of the 1948 participants,
126 (6.5%) had gout, and 124 (6.4%) had sleep apnoea
diagnosed by polysomnography. A further 190 participants
(9.8%) had symptoms suggestive of sleep apnoea
without a formal diagnosis. Even after accounting for
age, BMI, sex, alcohol intake and the presence of arthritis,
diagnosis of gout was 2.8 times more likely in respondents
with possible OSA. A participant with
diagnosed OSA was 2.6 times more likely to have gout.
Our results are in keeping with two large primary care
matched retrospective cohort studies, in which patients
with sleep apnoea were almost twice as likely to have
gout [11, 12]. It is known than sleep apnea is under diagnosed
in the community [13].
Our study was novel in that we found the association
also emerged in those with suspected, but undiagnosed,
sleep apnea. Our study design does not allow for consideration
of the directionality of these relationships. However,
a recent study by Singh and Cleveland showed a
higher risk for OSA in patients with gout in the 5%
United States Medicare beneficiary sample. They
propose that two mechanisms are consistent between
gout and OSA – specifically, inflammation and oxidative
stress [4]. Prospective studies with gold-standard measurement
of OSA, and inclusion of serum urate measures
over time, will be required to further examine these
relationships.
Our second aim was to explore the relationship between
gout and patient reported sleep problems. Interestingly,
participants with gout were twice as likely to
have restless legs symptoms or periodic leg movements
of sleep. Restless legs syndrome has been has reported
associations with gout as well as many other comorbidities
including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, thyroid
disease and iron deficiency [14]. However, the mechanism
behind the association between gout and restless
legs syndrome is unclear. In fact, a 2019 study of 281 patients
with restless legs syndrome showed reduced urate
levels compared to controls matched by age and gender.
It is worth noting however, that lower urate levels were
also associated by increasing age, disease duration and
haemoglobin level [15].
Given the prevalence of gout and the substantive financial
burden of sleep-related conditions and flow on
effects including productivity, employment, accidents
and well-being, our findings highlight the importance of
identifying and managing sleep problems in patients
with gout [16]. Those with gout were also twice as likely
to worry about sleep and 1.5 times as likely to have discussed
sleep with a health professional. However, in
those with gout, while there were trends towards issues
with perceived adequacy of sleep and disruption of sleep
secondary to pain, these effects were not significant. This
result was surprising and not in keeping with our proposed
hypothesis.
While gout is implicated in sleep related issues, this
appear to be distinct from pain. One possible interpretation
is that current pain may not be a primary contributor
to sleep disruption in gout. Importantly, these
findings highlight that simply reinforcing the need for
regular, good quality sleep will not be sufficient in this
patient group, as the majority have routines which allow
for adequate sleep. Instead, it will be important to identify
patient-specific sleep complaints and concerns and
manage these on a case-by-case basis. Our findings are
unique in linking gout with a diverse range of sleep outcomes
beyond self reported duration and quality from a
patient perspective, which provides important insight
into the sleep health messaging and advice likely to
benefit patients living with gout. Specifically, patients
with gout differ from the general population, with reports
of feeling they receive adequate opportunity to
sleep. Given the relationship identified between OSA
and gout, this patient group are more likely to benefit
from messaging about assessment for sleep disorders
rather than sleep hygiene (e.g. habitual routines, and
allowing adequate opportunities to sleep).
One of the strengths of our study was the large sample
that closely matched the general Australian population.
It should be noted however, that while the sample was
representative in regards to age, gender and geographical
location across metropolitan and rural locations, there
was a higher proportion of post-school qualifications,
particularly Bachelor degrees or higher, than population
estimates. We used self-reported doctor diagnosed gout,
which has been shown to be reliable in epidemiologic
studies [17]. Findings should be interpreted in the context
of the study limitations. A key limitation is the
cross-sectional nature of our study, so we were unable
to comment on causation. An unmeasured shared risk
factor for both gout and sleep apnea, is an important
consideration, and a source of potential bias in our
study. It is important to note that a large case control
study using primary care data, published earlier this year,
has shown that after adjustment for renal function, recent
use of diuretics and heart failure, the association
between gout and sleep apnea was no longer seen in
males [18]. We were unable to correct for renal function
as were limited to information collected via an existing
patient questionnaire and did not have specifics related
to treatments used.
Our study has highlighted that sleep disorders and
gout are common and frequently comorbid in the Australian
population. Sleep apnoea and gout are both associated
with significant cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality, but are also treatable. An awareness of the coexistence
of both conditions should lead to increased
screening and appropriate treatment tailored to patient
needs. Further research is required to delineate the nature
of the relationship between conditions, and also to
establish if treatment of one condition may influence the
trajectory of the other condition.