Background
Gout is a common, chronic inflammatory disease associated
with high serum uric acid (sUA) levels (i.e., hyperuricemia)
and characterized by recurrent arthritis attacks induced by
monosodium urate crystal deposition throughout the body.
Uncontrolled gout can cause significant joint damage,
tophaceous deposits, organ damage and comorbidity, as
well as impairment in quality of life and substantial economic
costs [1–5].
There are clear evidence-based guidelines showing
that treating to target levels of sUA, typically using
urate-lowering therapy (ULT), will reduce and even remove
the burden of this chronic disease from the patient
and society [6–10]. The American College of Rheumatology
(ACR) and European League Against Rheumatism
(EULAR) recommend an sUA target (‘control’) level of
< 6 mg/dl in the majority of clinical cases, while the British
Society for Rheumatology recommends even stricter
guidelines for those with tophaceous gout of sUA target
levels < 5 mg/dl [6, 7, 10]. Furthermore, guidelines recommend
that gout patients receive urate-lowering therapy
(ULT) after diagnosis and routine monitoring,
although several studies show that gout patients are
poorly managed and that suboptimal treatment of gout
is common in clinical practice with few patients undergoing
regular sUA testing, poor adherence and compliance
to ULT [11–16]. In a study from Germany and the
United Kingdom between 2000 and 2005 and with an
average follow-up time of about 2 years, over 63% of patients
received gout treatment (> 89% with allopurinol),
but only 9–14% of patients with gout performed at least
one sUA test in the 3.5–5-year follow-up period [11].
Additionally, in a recent study using the cross-sectional
US National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys
(NHANES) more than two-thirds of individuals with
gout had sUA levels above target and less than half of
those treated with ULT reached control levels [17].
Among the many barriers to adequate care and
control of this disease is the presence of concurrent
kidney disease [18–22]. Approximately 20 to 40% of
patients with gout have moderate to end-stage
chronic kidney disease (CKD) [20–22]. According to
one study assessing gout quality of care, 26% of gout
patients with renal failure received inappropriate dosing
of allopurinol [13, 23]. Both chronic kidney disease
and gout are adversely affected by hyperuricemia
and require adequate control to minimize adverse
events, comorbidities and mortality [24]. However,
despite the clear benefits of proactive care and sUA
control, choice and dosing of appropriate drug therapies
for these patients are persistent challenges to
the healthcare professional [7, 14, 25, 26].
Studies have shown that patients with gout have
higher HRU than the general population and that the
burden to the healthcare system is increasing [4, 27–31].
In the United States, direct costs of gout were estimated
as high as $18,362 per capita, gout-specific costs reaching
$6179 per person, and an annual estimated total burden
of > $6 billion [4, 31]. Studies show the increased
health and cost burden of comorbidities and age on this
relationship with regard to HRU [4, 31]. However, the
specific contribution of each factor, such as CKD, which
is highly prevalent among gout patients, is not fully
understood [31].
The objective of this study is to determine if healthcare
utilization and survival differs between patients with
incident gout in the presence or absence of CKD. We
will describe healthcare utilization trajectory during the
first 5 years of care for patients with gout with and without
CKD, respectively, to provide crucial insights into
the health outcomes and disease management of the comorbid
patient.
Methods
Study database
Clalit Health Services (CHS) is the largest health care
payer/provider in Israel, with about 4,217,000 insured citizens
that provides care to all ages including > 60% of
adults older than 65 years of age in Israel. The system is
characterized by extremely low annual member turnover
of < 1% [32]. Since 1998, with increasing comprehensiveness,
CHS’s information is kept in a central computerized
data warehouse that includes integrated demographic
data, clinical diagnoses (based on hospital discharge diagnoses,
primary care physician diagnoses, and specialist
outpatient clinic diagnoses), laboratory data results, medical
procedures, and medications (including date of prescription
and quantity and time of medication dispensed).
Death records, including date of death from the Israel
Central Bureau of Statistics, were linked to the Clalit
population using the unique identification number for all
Israeli residents. The need for consent was waived by the
Helsinki Ethics Committee of the CHS (no. 037/2015).
Study population
This is a retrospective cohort study of newly diagnosed
gout between 1/1/2006–31/12/2009 and followed for a
5-year period. For example, patients identified on 1/1/
2006 were followed for 5 years through 31/12/2010 and
patients identified on 31/12/2009 were followed through
30/12/2014. Follow-up data were included for the partial
year the patient left the health plan or died.
Included were patients with continuous enrollment in
Clalit for 1 year prior to date of diagnosis (index date).
Patients had to be at least 25 years old as of index date.
Adults 18–24 years were excluded because the majority
was serving in the Israeli military where they receive full
healthcare coverage. The following criteria developed in
other electronic health record (EHR) studies [33–35] to
identify incident cases of gout were used (Fig. 1):
(1) International Classification of Diseases 9th version
(ICD-9) codes 274 diagnosis from at least one
rheumatologist visit;
(2) ICD-9 274 diagnosis or free-text diagnosis of ‘gout’
from at least two community diagnoses at least 30
days apart between and either
(a) the purchase of at least two gout-related prescription
medications (allopurinol, probenecid,
colchicine, or sulfinpyrazone) at least 30 days
apart with the first within 6 months prior to or
any time after the first community diagnosis or
(b) two sUA test results > 6 mg/dL with the first
within 6 months prior to or any time after the
first community diagnosis at least 30 days apart;
(3) ICD-9 274 diagnosis from at least one hospital
admission diagnosis;
(4) Clalit Health Services internal chronic diagnosis
registry, based on ICD-9 diagnostic codes, diagnostic
free text, procedures and test results [36]; and
(5) Clalit Health Services physician-determined diagnosis
given a ‘permanent’ status in the patient’s medical
record, based on ICD-9 diagnostic codes.
Subject with at least one of these were considered to
have gout. The earliest diagnosis was considered the index
date, and patients were required to have 12months without
any indication of gout (baseline period) to be considered
newly diagnosed (incident cases). Gout patients who
had documentation of at least one of the above criteria
prior to the start of study eligibility were excluded. Patients
whose free-text diagnosis also included pseudo, suspected,
family history, or nephrolithiasis were also
excluded. Finally, 98 subjects with the following diseases
also known to affect sUA levels were excluded: Familial
Mediterranean Fever (ICD-9 277.31) (n = 56), glycogen
storage disease (ICD-9 271.0) (n = 42), Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
(ICD-9 277.2) (n = 0), juvenile gout (ICD-9 277.2)
(n = 0), tumor lysis syndrome (ICD-9 277.88) (n = 0), or
lead toxicity associated with gout (ICD-9 984.9) (n = 1).
Gout patients were categorized by the presence of
CKD at index date as defined by an indication of moderate/
severe chronic kidney disease (based on laboratory
values and using the CKD-EPI creatinine equation to
identify CKD ≥ 3 [37], or a diagnosis or claim for chronic
renal failure, kidney transplantation, or dialysis.
Measures
Demographic variables such as age, sex were collected at
index date. Age was assessed continuously and by groups
< 55 and 55+ years as quality of gout healthcare management
has been shown to decrease with older ages [13].
Socio-economic status (SES) (low, medium, high, or missing)
is an area-level score calculated based on current or
last place of residence thus it likely reflects the patient’s
SES at the end of follow-up. Misclassification of SES as a
result of this definition is considered minimal as SES is
considered to be stable during the non-critical 5-year
period of adulthood in comparison to potential shifts during
one’s early life course [38]. In addition, the use of the
latter SES indicator, as an adjustment for the confounding
effect on resource utilization, is perhaps a better indicator
of the cumulative influence of SES [39]. Individual-level
SES data are not collected by any health plan in Israel due
to Israeli law, therefore SES scores derived by the Israel
Central Bureau of Statistics and based on small statistical
areas were used [40, 41].
Comorbid conditions at or prior to index date include
cancer (ICD-9 140–208), cardiovascular disease (CVD)
(ICD-9 410, 411, 413, 414, 429–434, 436, 438, V45.81/2,
and coronary artery stent insertion and aortic bypass
surgery procedures), diabetes (ICD-9 250), and hypertension
(ICD-9 401–405) were identified using CHS algorithms
[36, 42]. The Charlson Comorbidity Index
(CCI) [43], was used to represent a weighted sum of
multiple comorbid conditions predictive of higher
resource utilization. Greater scores indicated a greater
comorbid burden on the patient.
Clinical characteristics included smoking habits
(current smoker, former smoker, and never smoker) and
body mass index (BMI) (continuous and categorical
coded according to the World Health Organization as:
underweight [< 18.5 kg/m2], normal weight [18.5 to <
25.0 kg/m2], overweight [25.0 to < 30.0 kg/m2], obese
[≥ 30.0 kg/m2], or missing).
Healthcare resource utilization for the five follow-up
years following index date was calculated as the mean of
the total number per year of general practitioner visits,
specialist visits (e.g., rheumatologist or orthopedist), hospital
admissions, use of imaging services (x-ray, MRI,
ultrasound, and CT), or allopurinol (ATC M04AA01) purchase
similar to others’ methods [3, 19, 44]. Mean total
number of tests and test values for sUA levels (last test
value prior to index date) ≤ 6 or > 6 mg/dL were reported.
Survival was examined using date of death.
Statistical analysis
Age-adjusted incidence was calculated using the 2009
Clalit population distribution and direct standardization
according to the Israeli population in 2009 (Central Bureau
of Satistics, 2010) was used to calculate
age-standardized incidence of gout [45]. Standardized
rates and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were used to
assess age-standardized rate ratios by sex. Descriptive analyses
were performed to characterize the patient population’s
demographic, medical history, and clinical
characteristics of patients at index date.
Generalized estimating equations for repeated measures
were used to assess change in healthcare
utilization over the 5-year follow-up period for gout patients
with and without pre-existing CKD at index date
and stratified by age groups < 55 and 55+ years. Model
distributions differed depending on outcome variable
(general practitioners visits, allopurinol purchase = normal;
specialist visits, hospitalizations, and sUA testing =
negative binomial; imaging [data were restructured to binomial
data, i.e., yes/no annual testing, to account for
correlated data due to multiple testing for a single
event] = binomial) with a first order autoregressive (AR
(1)) correlation structure. The AR (1) order is used since
the model is fitting longitudinal repeated measures of
correlated data and similar estimates were observed
when using the unstructured correlation structure. Annual
unit change and 95% CI were presented and when
appropriate, data were transformed from the logarithmic
scale. Data prior to index date was indexed as year 0 and
all subsequent years as years 1 through 5. All models
were adjusted for age, sex, smoking status (current vs
non-current), SES (low vs other), and CCI. During the
5-year follow-up 1673 (20.2%) healthy gout patients
developed CKD. Change in patient kidney disease status
from index date was not adjusted for in models since
the goal of the analysis was to examine utilization based
on characteristics at index date.
Time-to-death was examined using Kaplan Meier survival
curves and the log rank test were used to test
equality of survival distributions between the subgroups
with and without CKD and stratified by ages < 55 and 55
+ years. Patients were right-censored according to the
month they left the health plan. Cox proportional hazard
models were used to assess the risk of death in patients
with and without CKD at index date and stratified by
age group < 55 and 55+ years accounting for age, sex,
SES, CCI, smoking status, BMI, sUA control, and gout
medication use. Proportional hazard assumptions were
used examining the effect of age within each age group.
Hazard ratios (HR) and 95% CI were reported.
Analyses were conducted using SPSS version 23.
Results
A total of 12,940 incident adult gout patients were included
in the study. Age-specific cumulative incidence
rates over a 4-year period per 1000 Clalit members increased
for both sexes with age, reaching the highest
rates for adults 75–84 years (overall = 3.68 per 1000;
men = 5.91; women = 2.14) (Fig. 2). The age-standardized
cumulative incidence for this 4-year time period is 1.28
per 1000 (95% CI 1.23–1.32). A higher cumulative incidence
was observed for men (2.07 per 1000, 95% CI
1.99–2.16) compared to women (0.55 per 1000, 95% CI
0.52–0.59) with a standardized rate ratio of 3.74 (95% CI
3.45–4.05, p < 0.05).
During the 5 years of follow-up from index date, there
were 8286 (64.0%) and 4654 (36.0%) gout patients with
and without CKD, respectively (Table 1). Of this cohort,
3421 patients died (26.4%) and 233 (1.8%) left Clalit with a
total of 55,206 person-years of follow-up. The average age
of gout patients at index date was 63.8 ± 15.6 years.
Thirty-six percent (n = 4654) of all incident cases of gout
had CKD at their index date. Gout patients without CKD
at index date tended to be younger (without CKD = 58.1
± 14.7 years vs with CKD = 74.0 ± 11.3 years), male (without
CKD = 80.1% vs with CKD = 68.4%), of low SES (without
CKD = 19.3% vs with CKD = 16.5%), and current
smokers (without CKD = 15.8% vs with CKD = 6.8%) compared
to those with these conditions. The health status of
gout patients at index date indicated that 43.0% of patients
are obese, with a larger percentage among those without
(45.3%) than with (38.8%) CKD at index date. CVD
(38.4%), diabetes (28.9%), hypertension (65.6%) and cancer
(12.1%) were the most common comorbidities in gout patients
at index date and were substantially higher among
those with CKD at index date. Similarly, upon diagnosis
69.1% of gout patients had a CCI ≥1 with higher CCI
scores for those with compared to those without CKD at
index date (without CKD = 58.0% vs with CKD = 89.0%).
Prior to index date, 29.4% of patients had no recorded
sUA level. Patients without compared to those with
CKD at index date had substantially higher missing test
values (37.8% versus 14.4%). Of those with available sUA
test data, 19.0% of patient without CKD had controlled
sUA (< 6 mg/dl) at index date compared to 9.1% of patients
with CKD at index date. Mean sUA levels were
7.6 ± 1.7 and 8.9 ± 2.1 mg/dL for those without and with
CKD, respectively (p < 0.001). In addition, at index date
31.4% of patients had purchased at least one
gout-related medication in the previous year, with higher
rates among those with compared to without CKD at
index date (with CKD = 27.1% vs without CKD = 39.2%).
Healthcare utilization was calculated from one-year
prior to index date to each year after index date over the
5-year follow-up period for patients with and without
CKD and stratified by age group < 55 and 55+ years according
to the population at the beginning of each
follow-up year (see Table 2). Over the 5-year follow-up
period from index date, 33.6% of patients presenting
with CKD at index date either died or left Clalit, compared
to 9.3% of those without CKD at cohort entry.
Substantially more patients were lost to follow-up
among the older age group (12.4% without CKD and
35.3% with CKD) compared to gout patients in the
younger age group (4.4% without CKD and 8.5% with
CKD). During the year prior to diagnosis, younger patients
with CKD compared to patients without CKD had
twice as many general practitioner visits and imaging
tests performed, over four times more hospital admissions,
almost triple the average months of allopurinol
purchases per year and the number of sUA tests performed.
Similar, but more attenuated differences were
observed for those in the older age group. Between
group differences for patients with versus without CKD
were observed for unadjusted and adjusted models (p <
0.001). There were statistically significant changes in rates
from year 1 to year 5 for healthcare utilization among all
gout patients (p < 0.05) with the exception of younger patients
and general practitioner visits where rates remained
stable over time regardless of CKD status (Table 2).
Among younger patients, the rate of change over time did
not differ for those with or without CKD. Decreasing
number of visits per patient were observed for specialists,
imaging, hospitalizations and sUA testing, while the number
of months of allopurinol use increased similarly for
those with and without CKD over time. For example,
those with CKD < 55 years purchased allopurinol on average
for 3.49 ± 4.15months in their first year from diagnosis
and 4.36 ± 4.61 months in their fifth year from
diagnosis. Among those 55+ years, the rate of change differed
significantly between those with and without CKD
for (p < 0.05) for average number per year of general practitioner
visits, specialist visits, and months of allopurinol
purchases. Healthcare resource use decreased for all with
the exception of monthly allopurinol purchase for CKD
patients 55+ years where rates increased from 2.71 ± 4.05
to 3.39 ± 4.63 from year 1 to 5.
Survival curves were estimated for this patient population
illustrating significant differences in survival probabilities by
subgroups, CKD status and age group (p < 0.001) (Fig. 3). Of
the 3421 patients who died during the 5-year study period,
the majority had CKD (without CKD < 55 years = 4.9%; with
CKD < 55 years = 22.4%; without CKD 55+ years = 29.9%;
with CKD 55+ years =55.8%). Mean survival times differed
significantly between groups (without CKD < 55 years: 59.1
± 6.0 months, with CKD < 55 years: 54.5 ± 14.3months,
without CKD 55+ years: 53.5 ± 15.3months, with CKD 55+
years: 45.4 ± 20.3 months; p < 0.001). Cox regression models
assessed hazard of survival from diagnosis and adjusted for
index date characteristics: age, sex, SES, CCI, smoking status,
BMI, sUA control (< or ≥ 6mg/dl), and gout medication
use. Cox models were examined for those < 55 and 55+
years. For both age groups, the risk of dying was higher
among those with compared to those without CKD (HR<55
years = 1.65; 95% CI 1.01–2.71; HR55+ years = 1.50; 95% CI
1.37–1.65).
Discussion
The present population-based study followed 12,940 incident
gout patients for 5 years and compared healthcare
utilization for patients with CKD and without CKD at
their gout diagnosis. We demonstrated that patients with
gout and CKD have greater rates of healthcare
utilization at the start of follow-up than those without
CKD, regardless of age. The additional health impairment
of the patient with gout and CKD did not affect
the rate of change on the burden of healthcare
utilization over the 5-year period for adults < 55 years,
however differentially influenced the rate of healthcare
resource utilization (HRU) use for patients 55+ years.
An increased mortality risk of 65 and 71% for those with
CKD compared to without CKD was observed for
patients < 55 years and 55+ years, respectively. The expected
differences in HRU among those with CKD and
elderly compared to non-CKD and younger groups, were
not unexpected, however were not consistently apparent
across all resource types and groups.
The relationship between gout and kidney disease is
complex. Patients with gout are at an increased risk of
CKD and CKD-related mortality, and patients with CKD
are at an increased risk for hyperuricemia, which is a
risk factor for gout [21, 46, 47]. For all gout patients,
recommendations support the ability and need to control
sUA levels to < 6 mg/dl [8, 48]. Reaching this target
requires close monitoring due to potential drug-drug interactions
and adverse events related to ULT use especially
for CKD patients [48, 49]. For example, treating
gout patients with reduced renal function may require
dose escalation of allopurinol to offset its interaction
with furosemide [24, 48]. Among CKD patients, control
of hyperuricemia is debated among experts [26, 48, 50]
and clinical guidelines for these patients note that there
is insufficient evidence to recommend lowering serum
uric acid in order to prevent CKD progression [51, 52].
In the present study there were several indicators of
hyperuricemia monitoring and control, including sUA
testing rates, sUA levels prior to diagnosis, and allopurinol
purchase. We observed consistently higher average
sUA testing per year for patients with CKD compared to
those without CKD, regardless of age suggestive of closer
monitoring for this sub-group, however, change in rates
over time did not reveal differential changes by these
sub-groups. After controlling for confounding factors,
the average number of months that a patient purchased
allopurinol increased for younger patients irrespective of
CKD status, decreased for older patients without CKD,
and remained stable for older patients with CKD, indicating
a sensitivity of approach to treating gout according
to age and comorbid conditions. It should be noted
that while uncontrolled disease and poor clinical outcomes
are often attributed to inadequate clinical monitoring,
patients in the current study had high annual
testing rates and ever-tested rates in the previous 5-year
period relative to the reported rates in other countries
[11, 19]. Finally, while the relationship between sUA
monitoring over time and mortality was not assessed, we
saw substantially higher mortality rates over the
follow-up period for those with than those without
CKD. These results may thus provide important insight
into the burden of this comorbid disease, which persists
despite effective clinical monitoring.
The ability to identify incident cases of gout, classify
them according to CKD status and follow their healthcare
utilization and survival over a 5-year period is a
strength of this study and adds further perspective to the
complexities related to gout management. The healthcare
system in Israel is universal and provides physician
care and a basic basket of medications and services to all
residents. Conducting a population-based study utilizing
data from the largest health care payer/provider in Israel
provides an opportunity to study healthcare utilization
and survival in gout patients independent of the effect of
access to care. The relevance of these findings lies in the
generalizability of the Israel cohort to that of others.
Specifically, it is important to note that the incidence of
gout in Israel of 1.29 per 1000 (95% CI 1.23–1.32) and
rates by sex are similar to those reported in other countries,
such as Sweden, Taiwan and UK [20, 53, 54]. Likewise,
socio-demographic characteristics of the cohort are
similar to that of other patient cohorts, with higher proportion
of gout cases among older adults and men, and
an unclear association with SES [19, 54, 55].
The results, however, are not without their limitations.
First, clinical notes were not available for analysis in the
dataset, which may lead to a misinterpretation of a
healthcare encounter. Second, since we did not account
for change in CKD status from index date, our results
may reflect an attenuated relationship. Specifically, if
those in the non-CKD group develop CKD during the
follow-up period, their HRU and survival will be more
similar to the CKD group. Also, the use and dose of
ULT may not be equally distributed among CKD and
age groups and may influence disease control and the
resultant resource use. The potential bias associated with
this uncontrolled confounder is unknown, however,
others using data from Israel showed that medication
adherence is related to SES, which is controlled for in
the regression models and that those with comorbidities
have improved compliance [30]. Next, identification of
incident cases was limited by the availability of historical
data by which we assumed the index date to be the first
encounter for gout with the EHR system and not the
first diagnosis. The Clalit EHR records are incomplete
with regards to emergency department use due to out of
system use. The lack of this information detracts from
assessing the full extent of gout, regardless of subgroup
on the economic burden to the healthcare system. Further
insights into the relationships identified in the study
were limited by our inability to examine time from disease
diagnosis, gout flares or tophi, and cause of death.
In addition, while the relatively large sample size allowed
for increased power to detect difference, caution should
be applied to the relevance of difference.
Conclusions
In light of the challenges facing clinicians to ‘cure’ gout,
these findings provide critical evidence of differences between
patient characteristics, healthcare utilization and
outcomes of this at-risk sub-group over the course of the
disease. Future work should explore factors associated
with these outcomes and barriers to gout control such as
annual sUA testing and medication adherence, to better
understand patient management by these subgroups.