Background
In 2018, cervical cancer (CC) caused 311,000 deaths
worldwide, and 90% of these deaths occurred in lowand
middle-income countries (LMICs) [1]. The WHO
recently called for the elimination of CC as a highly
preventable public health problem [2]. CC screening
programs worldwide have relied on cytology, visual
inspection after coloration with acetic acid (VIA) or
human papillomavirus (HPV) detection either alone or
combined to screen for cervical precancerous or cancerous
lesions at an early stage. Cytological screening was
initiated in European countries in the mid-twentieth
century and led to a dramatic reduction in the incidence
and mortality of CC [3]. Because of its high cost, primary
VIA was considered a more cost-effective alternative to
be implemented on a large scale in LMICs. However,
this strategy showed mitigated success mainly because it
requires substantial labor and because its performance
can be highly variable [4, 5]. More recently, evidence
from two randomized controlled trials in India and South
Africa has shown the superiority of primary HPV screening
over primary VIA screening to prevent CC occurrence
[6, 7], but it is unknown whether primary HPV
testing can be successfully replicated in countries characterized
by low income, high mortality and weak health
systems.
Burkina Faso exemplifies such a situation. Primary VIA
screening was implemented at the national level a decade
ago, but its effects on reducing CC incidence remain
unclear [8]. In this context, the Partnership for Action
and Research against Cervical Cancer in West Africa
(PARACAO) project launched by the nongovernmental
organization (NGO) Doctors of The World (DOTW) aims
to introduce HPV-based screening at the primary health
care level in Ouagadougou, the main city of Burkina Faso.
The intervention was based on the premise that primary
HPV screening and subsequent management (triage and
treatment) should be performed on the same day, the socalled
“screen-and-treat” approach, to increase women’s
chance of being fully screened and treated [9].
Our primary hypothesis was that the PARACAO could
lead to high screening completion among eligible women.
The secondary hypothesis was that this new screening is
well accepted by women.
The purpose of this study was to simultaneously assess
the PARACAO implementation process and its effect
on screening completeness and women’s satisfaction to
understand the mechanisms underlying the impact of
the intervention. We also aimed to examine the effects of
contextual factors on implementation and effectiveness
outcomes to help implementers design effective implementation
strategies.
Methods
Context
In 2010, the estimated annual incidence of CC in Burkina
Faso reached 1230 women diagnosed and 838 deaths
from the disease. As the leading cause of cancer mortality
among women in the country [10, 11], the Ministry
of Health considered CC a public health priority in 2011,
resulting in many actions at the local and national levels.
Since April 2016, CC screening has been included as a
free service of the national health package for women. In
Burkina Faso, the decentralized health system is divided
into three levels. The peripheral level operates at the
community and district level, providing basic preventive
and curative care, it is the entry point in the health system.
When necessary, patients can be referred from the
primary level to the intermediate or central level, which
consists, respectively, of regional hospitals and university
or national hospitals [12]. Additionally, biomedical services
are divided between public and private (including
traditional health practitioners) sectors.
Currently, the national CC control strategy relies on
VIA screening and cryotherapy delivered at primary and
secondary healthcare facilities nationwide. In addition to
VIA screening, colposcopy and more advanced treatment
(LEEP, hysterectomy) are available in some private clinics
or in the university hospitals of the two main cities (Ouagadougou
and Bobo Dioulasso). Despite being covered by
the national health plan, women are often required to pay
between $1 and 4 US dollars to receive screening because
of recurrent shortages in material supply (speculums and
gas for cryotherapy) [13].
Description of PARACAO intervention and its
implementation strategy
The PARACAO was developed based on WHO guidelines
and on a baseline of formative research [14] (see
Additional file 1: Table S1).
The screening strategy included primary HPV testing,
triage of HPV-positive women with VIA and prompt
treatment of women at need. HPV testing was available
either through self-performed or midwife-performed
collection of vaginal specimens.
Women with VIA-positive lesions that fulfilled the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) criteria
for cryotherapy [14] were supposed to be immediately
treated with thermal ablation. Otherwise, they were
referred to an identified clinic for the appropriate treatment
with the full cost covered by DOTW.
The entire screening process – from HPV testing to
result disclosure, VIA and treatment if needed – was set
to be delivered in a single visit, according to the “screenand-
treat” approach (Fig. 1).
The intervention was implemented in 2019 in two
urban primary healthcare centers in Ouagadougou. Their
general characteristics are shown in Table 1. These sites
are believed to be similar to other urban primary health
centers in terms of population, activity, staff and equipment.
The intervention targeted women attending these
health facilities for CC screening or for other healthcare
services (family planning, child vaccination, or gynecological
issues). Women were considered eligible for
HPV-based screening if they were aged 25–55 years old
and had no hysterectomy. If they had ongoing menstruation
and/or genital infection at the time of the screening,
they were considered temporarily ineligible until the condition
was resolved. There were no specific geographic
criteria for recruitment.
The PARACAO implementation strategy was embedded
within the usual model of care delivery of the participating
healthcare facilities. Table 2 shows the theoretical
framework of the PARACAO. Four components were
implemented in each participating facility from May to
December 2019 (Fig. 1):
Component 1 – Integration of healthcare services – The
Burkina-based DOTW program coordinator provided
changes in structure and equipment required for HPV
testing within each participating facility. It consisted
of the identification of dedicated rooms for CC screening,
building rehabilitation to fit the Genexpert platform
requirement (dust, temperature and space) [15]
and adequate equipment provision (HPV sampling kits,
VIA kits, thermal ablation material, GeneXpert platform,
cartridges, furniture, and day-to-day supplies) for
the intervention. Tasks for HPV testing were integrated
into healthcare providers’ (laboratory staff and midwives)
workload to deliver a “screen-and treat” approach.
Component 2 – Education of healthcare providers –
The DOTW program coordinator organized staff training.
Laboratory staff received 5-day off-site training
conducted by the CEPHEID training team and a member
of the National Tuberculosis Laboratory, who was trained
and an expert in the use of GeneXpert. All midwives at
participating sites received off-site three-block training.
Each training block lasted for 5 days, was conducted by
national experts and DOTW national staff and addressed
a specific topic: CC screening in general, VIA realization
or HPV-based strategy with counseling and sampling
options (self or midwife performed).
Component 3 – Educational outreach visits – Weekly
supervisory visits to each participating facility were
intended to ensure that the screening delivery protocol
was followed, to assess the fidelity of the project
implementation, to identify barriers to implementation
and possible strategies to overcome barriers, to reinforce
healthcare provider competencies and to verify document
and data quality. These visits were performed by
DOTW supervisors, and the connection between healthcare
providers and supervisors was facilitated by a midwife,
identified as a focal point (FP).
In addition, a member of the National Tuberculosis
Laboratory, who was trained and an expert in the use of
GeneXpert, performed the monthly supervisions of the
laboratory staff.
Component 4 – Patient counseling – Midwives delivered
counseling regarding CC screening to women during
their first visit to the participating facility. Part of
this counseling consisted of offering the choice between
two methods of vaginal sampling for HPV testing: selfperformed
or midwife-performed collection. Counseling
was repeated at each step of the screening process
(post-HPV test results, post-VIA and posttreatment) to
persuade women to adhere to care management and recommendations.
The screening process was entirely free.
All staff (laboratory and midwives) were involved in
HPV-based CC screening without receiving financial
incentives.
Study design
PARACAO was the first intervention to deliver HPVbased
cervical screening under routine conditions
before potential dissemination throughout the country.
To better understand the interplay between PARACAO
effectiveness and its implementation, we designed a
pragmatic hybrid-effectiveness implementation Type III
study [16] using mixed methods [17, 18]. Therefore, we
focused primarily on PARACAO effectiveness and secondarily
on the process evaluation of its implementation.
The latter evaluation was performed according to
Medical Research Council (MRC) guidelines [19]. Following
a baseline of formative research and using consultations
with main stakeholders and researchers (see
Additional file 1: Table S4), we defined a theory of change
[20] (ToC, Fig. 1) that depicts the various components
of the implementation strategy, the assumed pathways
through which these components could bring the targeted
changes (mechanisms of change) and the underlying
hypotheses that need to hold true for those changes
to occur.
Based on this ToC, we considered three subcategories
of indicators for the process evaluation: fidelity, whether
the intervention was delivered as intended; reach,
whether women came into contact with the screening
offer and appropriate services if needed; and dose, the
quantity of intervention implemented. We also assessed
whether adaptations of the intervention were required
to fit the context of the participating centers and make it
more acceptable to women and healthcare providers. The
study was conducted from July to December 2019 using a
concurrent parallel quantitatively driven mixed-method
design [18] (see Fig. 2) that consisted of a cohort study,
routine data use, direct observations and semistructured
interviews.
Sampling, data sources and collection
Table 3 outlines the data sources, participants, methods
used and outcomes.
Quantitative data
Cohort study Women were recruited while attending one
of the participating facilities for CC screening and were
followed up until completion of the screening sequence.
The inclusion and exclusion criteria in the cohort were
similar to those considered for screening eligibility.
Data were collected through questionnaires at each
step of the screening sequence: after women returned
their sample to the laboratory, after they received their
HPV test result and after they underwent VIA and treatment
if needed. When women did not return to the
healthcare center over the 30 days following the sampling,
they were contacted by phone.
The questionnaires collected demographic information
(age, screening history, living area, and socioeconomic
level), CC literacy, intervention delivery data (choice of
the sampling method, understanding of test results and
recommendations (see Additional file 1: Table S2), date
and time for testing, result and postresult management,
triage and treatment), and satisfaction at each step of
the screening sequence. Socioeconomic (SES) levels
were calculated using a wealth index (see Additional
file 1: Table S3) according to the asset method [21] and
divided into terciles. Participant cervical cancer literacy
was assessed after cervical specimen collection using
the CC Literacy Assessment Tool (C-CLAT), a 16-item
instrument that has been validated in various contexts
[22–24]. Each item of the C-CLAT was scored as binary
(0 = incorrect, 1 = correct), and the total score computed
as the sum of individual items ranged from 0 to 16, with
higher scores indicating higher literacy.
Weekly supervision report Weekly supervision reports
regarding the participating facilities were compiled for
the first implementation semester. Weekly supervision
reports were retrieved from the project monitoring
and evaluation weekly reports starting from the
project conception (2018) to the end of the first implementation
semester. An in-depth search was made by
looking for data related to the implementation process
and indicators.
Facility routine health information system Each participating
facility has a health information system that collects
routine data. We retrieved data derived from two
registries: CC screening process (clinical data) and HPV
testing (laboratory data) for the first implementation
semester. Collected clinical data consisted of women’s
screening history and description of screening steps (date
and time, sampling method, HPV results, VIA results,
treatment performed and referral when needed). Laboratory
data consisted of day and time for sampling reception,
sampling validity, HPV results and genotyping, and
time and date for results transferred to midwives..
Qualitative data
Direct observations Direct observations were performed
at each participating facility. The anthropologist
performed participant observations during the first
2 months of the project implementation. He repeatedly
observed various screening activities that took place
in the waiting room, in the cervical screening room
(sampling performance, the results communication,
VIA triage and treatment) and in the laboratory room
until saturation was obtained. Realized at various times
of the day and of the week over 2 months, the observations
covered 90 medical visits and 30 laboratory
procedures.
Semistructured in-depth interviews Maximum variation
sampling was used to achieve a diverse sample of
providers of various qualifications, sexes and seniorities
(n = 08 per facility) for individual in-depth interviews.
The same method was used to obtain a diverse sample of
20 women in terms of age, religion, ethnicity, and HPV
status (n = 10 per facility).
The anthropologist conducted semistructured in-depth
interviews with the women in their language (Dioula
or Mooré) and recorded them between September and
December 2019. Women were contacted 2 months after
their involvement in the screening process and met outside
the facilities. The interviewed women received transportation
fee reimbursement as compensation for their
time. Semistructured in-depth interviews conducted in
French with healthcare providers were performed during
their working time and were recorded. All interviews
were conducted throughout the implementation stage.
Outcomes
Effectiveness outcome The primary outcome was participant
screening completeness. A screening sequence
was considered complete in each of the following cases:
(1) when an HPV-negative woman was informed of the
result of her HPV test, (2) when an HPV-positive woman
had a subsequent negative VIA test, or (3) when an HPVpositive
woman with a subsequent positive VIA test
received appropriate treatment.
The secondary outcome was satisfaction with the
screening proposed, measured at each step of the screening
sequence – postsampling, postresult and post-VIA if
applicable. Assessment was realized through a 3-point
Likert scale—fully agree, agree, disagree—exploring four
dimensions: willingness to repeat the screening; satisfaction
regarding the explanation delivered; satisfaction
regarding the intervention delivered (sampling performance,
VIA and treatment); and willingness to encourage
close friends to participate in the same screening
procedure.
Process evaluation All indicators are listed in Fig. 1.
Fidelity The included individual measures of fidelity
were derived from the cohort study and were related
to the completion of the different steps of the screening
and facility-based measures of fidelity that arose from
the weekly supervision reports. Fidelity was considered
optimal when the elements listed above were successfully
completed and the expected rate was 100%.
Reach Reach was measured at the facility level and
was defined by the daily number of women screened per
center. We assumed 20 working days per month with a
level of desired achievement set at 4 women screened per
day and per center. Data were extracted from the facilities’
routine health information systems.
Dose Indicators of dose were assessed at the individual
level using data from the cohort study.
Qualitative data
Women’s experience We explored women’s knowledge
on CC, their motivation to undergo screening and their
experience with HPV-based screening.
Healthcare workers’ experience We explored healthcare
workers’ experience with the implementation, their
relationships with implementers, adaptations made
throughout the first stage of implementation and the reasons
for deviation from the intervention protocol.
Data analysis
Quantitative and qualitative analyses were performed
independently, and the results were triangulated to look
for similarities and discordances. Quantitative data were
analyzed using R software version 3.6.3, and qualitative
data were analyzed using NVivo software version 12.6.0.
Quantitative data analysis
Screening effectiveness and implementation Data were
described using counts and proportions for categorical
data, means and standard deviations or medians
and interquartile ranges (IQRs) for continuous data.
The primary outcome was measured as the proportion
of women with a complete screening sequence among
screened women. The secondary outcome was measured
as the proportion of women highly satisfied, i.e., answering
“fully agree” to all of the satisfaction dimensions.
Effects of implementation variability on effectiveness
outcomes We performed three multivariate logistic
regression models to test the association between effectiveness
outcomes (screening completeness, postsampling
and postresult satisfaction) and individual measures
of fidelity and dose. As screening completeness was by
definition achieved when a single visit occurred, we performed
a subgroup analysis focusing on women who
had a multiple-visit approach. Implementation indicators
that were considered nondiscriminant (i.e., variables
with more than 95% or less than 5% frequency) were not
included in the models. When collinearity among variables
was detected, only one indicator was selected. The
variables were eventually included in the multivariate
logistic regression model if they were significantly associated
with the outcome in bivariate analysis using a cutoff
point of p < 0.20. Each model was adjusted for the health
center and demographic information (age, screening history,
socioeconomic level, travel cost and literacy score).
The associations between post-VIA satisfaction or posttreatement
satisfaction and implementation variables
were not explored due to the limited group sizes (n = 55
and n = 5).
Comparison of implementation variables and effectiveness
outcomes between centers was performed using the
chi-square test for binary variables and Student’s t-test
or the mood test for continuous variables. The association
between demographics and effectiveness outcomes
was also analyzed using multivariate logistic regression
adjusted for the health center.
Qualitative data analysis Direct observation notes
were transcribed and compiled through an observation
report. All recorded interviews were transcribed and, if
necessary, translated in French by the initial interviewer.
Reports, transcribed interviews and administrative
reports were imported into NVivo software. An inductive
analysis of observations and each interview was performed
that led to major theme extraction as defined in
the thematic analysis approach [25]. After being grouped
into a scheme reflecting the implementation process,
findings from observations and interviews were triangulated
with relevant literature and discussed with a panel
of experienced anthropologists.
Ethical considerations
The study received full ethical approval from the Ethics
Committee of Health Research of Burkina Faso
(n° 2019-5-064). All women received an information
note and signed a consent form before inclusion in the
cohort study. Informed consent was obtained from all
participants.
Results
Quantitative findings
Between July 1st and September 30th, 2019, 350 women
attended CC screening services, of which 317 (90%) were
eligible for HPV-based screening and eventually included
in the cohort study (Fig. 3). Table 4 presents the demographics
of the screened women. The majority of them
were aged between 25 and 35 years old (61.4%), lived
in Ouagadougou (97%) and had no previous screening
history (65.3%), with no difference between study
sites. Despite the wealthiest women attending Center B
and the poorest women attending Center A (p < 0.001),
the CC literacy level was similar between centers with a
median score of 10/16.
Screening completeness Among the 317 screened
women, 299 (94%) had a complete screening sequence
(Fig. 3 and Table 5). The more screening steps that
were needed, the lower the screening completeness
achieved. Of the 68 women (21.4%) who tested HPV
positive, 55 (80.8%) had a VIA triage test, and of the 6
HPV + VIA + participants, only 3 were treated. Screening
completeness did not differ between centers (Table 5).
Women’s satisfaction The proportions of women highly
satisfied varied across the screening steps. The highest
satisfaction scores were observed after disclosure of the
HPV test results (94.6% of women highly satisfied). Postsampling
satisfaction was significantly lower in Center B
than in Center A, while it was the opposite for post-HPV
test result satisfaction (Table 5).
Fidelity All implementation activities at the facility
level in terms of equipment, structure, staff training,
supervision and referral system to ensure an optimal
environment for HPV-based screening were successfully
completed (Fig. 4A). All screened women were counseled
by midwives before screening and were exempted from
fees (see Additional file 1: Table S5). Midwives offered a
choice of sampling method in 72.5% of cases (57.5% in
Center A vs 87.9% in Center B, p < 0.001). Only 27.4% of
women benefited from a single visit, with no difference
between centers (27.5% in center A vs 27.3% in Center B,
p = 0.98).
Reach In Center A, the trend of daily screened women
was uneven, with a peak in July followed by a decrease in
August and December (Fig. 4B). In Center B, the screening
rate was lower but constantly increased from May to
December. In both centers, the reach indicator stabilized
at approximately four screened women per day after a
3-month implementation period.
Dose The average time to submit samples to a laboratory
was 1.22 h (SD = 0.88) and was twice as high
in Center B than in Center A (see Additional file 1:
Table S6). Overall, the HPV test was performed using
self-sampling in 67.5% of cases, with fewer performed
in Center B (50%) than in Center A (85%), p < 0.001. The
average time between specimen sampling and results
disclosure was 2.7 days (SD = 4.01), with no statistically
significant difference between centers. A total of 92.4%
of women correctly understood their HPV results, and
74.4% of them correctly understood the recommendations
made by the midwives for postresult management.
The understanding of the results and recommendations
was similar in both centers.
Effect of implementation on effectiveness Having been
screened in a single visit and the time to return samples
to the laboratory were not associated with screening
completeness (p = 0.43 and p = 0.67, respectively)
in the bivariate analysis. In the multivariate analysis
(see Additional file 1: Table S7), screening completeness
was positively associated with having performed a selfsampling
(adjusted odds ratio (ORa) = 4.18; 95% confidence
interval (CI) [1.09–17.72]) and having a good
understanding of the test results (ORa = 10.62 95% CI
[2.10–63.04]). The same factors were found when the
analysis was restricted to women who did not benefit
from a single visit (see Additional file 1: Table S7), alongside
a higher odds of not completing the screening process
when the time until result disclosure increased
(ORa = 0.16, 95% CI [0.02–0.89]).
Postsampling satisfaction was not associated with any
of the dose indicators (see Additional file 1: Table S8).
Postresult satisfaction was negatively associated with
the level of understanding of the results (ORa = 0.06
95%CI [0.01–0.23]) (see Additional file 1: Table S8). Postresult
satisfaction was higher when women received
their results within 24–48 h instead of the same day
(ORa = 7.03 95% CI [1.40–54.79]).
Role of demographic characteristics Demographic
characteristics were not associated with screening completeness
(see Additional file 1: Table S9). However,
postsampling satisfaction decreased among women
aged 36–45 compared to that among women aged
25–35 (ORa = 0.52 95% CI [0.30–0.88]). In addition, the
adjusted odds of being highly satisfied was almost two
times higher among women with a screening history than
among women without a screening history (ORa = 1.97
95% CI [1.10–3.63]). Postresult satisfaction was positively
associated with the amount of money spent on travel (see
Additional file 1: Table S9).
Effects of context on implementation outcomes A difference
between the reach of the centers was observed
at the beginning of the implementation, and these differences
can be explained by a “launching effect”. Indeed,
the official start of the PARACAO was announced on TV
and in newspapers, and despite the announcements indicating
that two centers would be involved, the campaign
was more focused on one of the two centers.
Likewise, the differences in dose and fidelity found
between centers could be explained by differences in
internal organization. One center had a dedicated midwife
for screening, which resulted in no need for task
shifting while she was performing screening. That was
not the case in the other center.
In addition, despite having similar populations in their
service areas, the two centers had different staffing and
activity capacities (Table 2), which could also explain the
differences found in effectiveness and implementation
outcomes.
Qualitative findings
Adaptation The main adaptation that was implemented
to make the PARACAO fit different contexts involves
the “screen-and-treat” approach. In one center, HPV test
results could be given on the same day as the sampling,
but if VIA was needed, the women had to return another
day. In the other center, women were systematically
asked to return the next day to obtain their test results. In
both centers, laboratory staff adapted the initial plan by
setting closing times for sample collection that matched
their own organizational schedules. The closing times
were 10:00 am in one center and 11:00 am in the other,
which allowed laboratory staff to perform other routine
tests without affecting their working hours (7:00 am to
4:00 pm). Finally, women self-selected themselves and
did not come after a certain time of the day, as they knew
that screening would no longer be available (see Additional
file 1: Table S10).
The counseling was also adapted to improve women’s
understanding as perceived by the caregivers. Indeed,
health workers expressed concerns regarding the communication
of screening results: “How do we explain
HPV-positive results in the local language?” (Healthcare
provider, 12 years of experience). To circumvent these
language difficulties, the counseling was often adapted
without using either HPV or CC vocabulary: “It’s ok, you
have nothing” was a sentence commonly used.
Healthcare worker’s satisfaction During interviews, the
healthcare workers praised the capacity strengthening
offered by the training during the implementation process.
Indeed, few had received formal training for VIA,
and they gained knowledge and self-confidence through
the training: “it helps us to work with more confidence
[…] now we know the difference when we see the cervix.
In terms of knowledge, it really gave us something” (midwife,
8 years of experience). Likewise, the laboratory staff
considered that they were trained for more than HPV
testing: “it’s a plus for us, because you can test many other
things than just HPV with this platform. You just have to
change the cartridge and the software, and you can test
TB, hepatitis B…” (laboratory staff, 25 years of experience).
However, all of them pointed out the additional
workload due to the HPV screening strategy as expressed
by a midwife “before it was simple, now we have to take
time to explain, explain again before doing the test, and it
takes much more time” (midwife, 8 years of experience)
and suggested some solutions, such as “we said to the
NGO that maybe it would be better to group women and
screen them once a week […]” (laboratory staff, 7 years of
experience).
Women’s satisfaction Patient interviews showed that
women were motivated by their peers to obtain screening:
“A colleague of mine, she did the test and she told me
that I should do it, it’s free” (woman, 29 years old, high
school education). This was particularly the case since
the PARACAO was perceived as “a novelty brought by
white people, so it has better quality than the old method
(VIA test)” (woman 34 years old in the waiting room,
previously screened, primary school education). However,
they often expressed their disappointment about
the counseling quality when asked about their screening
experience: “the explanations the midwife gave me were…
not good. She didn’t explain to me anything about the
cancer before the test. When I came back for the results,
she explained, but just a little bit.” (woman 30 years old,
college education, never screened). This disappointment
was higher among women who had heard of the screening
procedure from peers: “My cowives told me that they
explain the cancer causes and give advice. […] but when I
came, nothing like this happened” (woman 33 years old,
never screened, primary school education, right after her
screening). Furthermore, the choice offered for sampling
collection raised mixed feelings among women and may
have affected satisfaction. Some participants believed
that the healthcare providers should have decided instead
of them, while others were happy with the opportunity
offered. From interviews, it appeared that the women
with the highest level of education and prior awareness
of the screening novelty were more likely to choose selfsampling,
as it respected their intimacy: “I appreciated it
[the self-sampling] more, because with the old version and
the speculum, it hurts. This time, I didn’t feel anything.
And I didn’t have to lay down, it was good.” (woman,
26 years old, previous screening, college education).
Women without prior knowledge and with a lower level
of education relied more on caregivers: “I think that if
the midwife does the sampling it’s better […] I trust them
more, it’s their job, not mine” (woman 33 years old, never
screened, no education).
Discussion
This study provides insight into the implementation
process of an HPV-based cervical cancer screening program
(Fig. 5), which is important for the future expansion
of HPV-based screening of CC as envisioned by the
WHO [26]. We found that the healthcare providers of
both facilities adhered relatively well to the various components
of the screening implementation and accepted
integrating HPV screening into their work schedules.
However, they had to adapt the strategy by moving from a
“screen-and-treat” approach to a multiple-visit approach.
This adaptation was the result of a dialogue between midwives
and laboratory staff in both centers to facilitate the
integration of screening activities into the existing work
structure, revealing a context modification according to
Stirman’s classification [27]. As observed in other contexts,
this type of adaptation to fit an organization could
enhance sustainability [28, 29].
Despite the modifications, both facilities nearly
achieved the level of desired screening activity (4 women
screened per day), and although women rarely received
results on the same day that they provided the samples,
94% of them had a complete screening sequence. These
findings mitigate the usual paradigm whereby multiple
visits result in a high dropout rate among women [30,
31].
Through this analysis, we identified aspects of the
implementation process critical to screening completeness
and satisfaction. The main determinant for screening
completeness was the understanding of the results by
the women. This result is linked to the poor counseling
quality as expressed by the women. The importance
of counseling content on screening uptake, treatment
adherence and health behavior has been demonstrated
for other health conditions [32, 33], and evidence indicates
that it is more important than counseling duration
[34]. In our study, midwives complained about the lack
of adequate words in the local language for delivering
the correct message. This issue could be resolved by
adapting messages to the local language with the help of
social scientists or linguists. Indeed, the literature shows
that effective health communication requires both cultural
and language adaptations [35, 36]. Self-sampling,
whether chosen or not, was also found to be associated
with screening completeness. This method prevents
women from undergoing a gynecological examination
during the first screening step and thus diminishes the
embarrassment associated with this examination, which
is one of the main barriers to cervical screening [37–39].
In addition, self-sampling as an empowering tool [40]
may have played a role in this high completion rate.
Other hypotheses could be raised to explain the high
completion rate. First, many women were interested in
this new screening strategy, as it was imported by westerners,
which was perceived as a “guarantee of quality”,
leading to reduced dropouts due low-quality health services
[41, 42]. A similar situation was found by Doctors
Without Borders in Niger, where NGOs targeting health
issues were positively perceived by the population [43].
DOTW is an NGO known for its work with communities,
which may explain why women were more prone
to participate and return to the health center when contacted
by DOTW [44].Moreover, the program was implemented in an urban
area within a major city, where constraints associated
with healthcare access—road conditions, field work,
distance—are less important [38, 45], which could also
explain this high completion rate [37].
Of note, we found that women living farther from the
participating facilities were more likely to be satisfied.
This counter-intuitive result could be explained by the
fact that these women were attracted by the novelty of
the screening and were unfamiliar with the center, and
hence had different expectations from those living in the
immediate vicinity of the center.
We found that screening completeness and patient
satisfaction were higher for a rapid two-step approach
(within 48 h) than for a single-visit approach. This suggests
that cumulative wait time at the healthcare center
may hinder screening satisfaction and that the two-step
strategy might better fit in this context. Observations and
interviews in healthcare centers revealed that wait times
were related to health service organization and staffing.
This raises questions about the potential effect of adding
new services or, more generally, integrating new services
into saturated centers. Studies report conflicting results,
with some showing that integration may improve service
use without changing health outcomes due to imposing
additional workloads [46] and others showing that integration
has positive long-term effects [47]. Although
further research is needed to clarify the effect of CC
screening integration [48], our findings highlight the
implementation components that are essential to providing
HPV-based screening at the primary-care level [49].
If the single-visit screen-and-treat approach is to be prioritized
in a future national strategy, important changes
to staffing or in work structure will be required. Either
more lab technicians will be needed, which seems quite
unlikely with the current limited health budget; midwives
will need to be allowed to perform HPV testing, which
could facilitate a one-step approach [50]; or reliable
point-of-care HPV testing that does not require a traditional
laboratory setting must be developed [51]. Such
alternatives need to be further explored.
Some limitations to our results are worth noting. First,
the assessment encapsulated the early stages of implementation
and may not capture all aspects of the project
in terms of reach, dose and fidelity. However, we believe
that early adaptations are of central importance and will
shape the final form of the project. Furthermore,, observations
performed during this first stage may have modified
healthcare workers’ behavior (Hawthorne effect).
However, we tried to mitigate this effect through the
observation process itself (establishing rapport, long-time
observation) and later through a triangulation between
all qualitative and quantitative data. Similarly, we may
have encountered a recall bias regarding women’s screening
experience as interviews were performed 2 months
after the screening started. This could have led to overestimation
of extreme experiences (positive or negative).
However, findings from interviews were convergent with
findings from the cohort study, which suggests that this
bias may have been reduced. Our study was limited to
two centers, which makes generalization of our findings
difficult. We tried to overcome this issue through our
cohort study sample size and maximum variation during
interviews with women to reflect various screening situations.
In addition, the study sites were located in urban
areas without access restrictions. Maintaining a single
visit for the screen-and-treat approach may turn out to
be more important in such settings, but more research is
necessary to confirm this. Another limitation that should
be acknowledged is the absence of information on the
outcomes of the women who were referred for cancer or
large treatment management.
Policy implications Our results highlight that further
research is needed to grasp the potential success of HPV
implementation in rural settings (Fig. 5). However, we
have demonstrated that some gaps could be filled in the
near future to drive HPV-based screening in urban settings.
First, offering formal systematized counseling at
each step would improve women’s understanding while
reducing healthcare workers’ wording issues. Then, an
individual facility preparedness assessment needs to be
performed before implementation to account for the
existing workload and healthcare workers’ needs in terms
of adaptation. Additionally, as a multiple-visit approach
will probably be used, establishing a pragmatic follow-up
strategy through community health workers and accurate
registries would help in reducing this risk. Finally, a guarantee
for free-of-charge CC screening is one of the most
important steps to promote successful implementation.
Conclusion
Despite some limitations, we believe that our results have
important implications for future programs and healthcare
providers in low-resource settings, especially in the
context of expanding HPV-based screening strategies at
the primary-care level.
First, the single-visit approach should not be the ultimate
goal for HPV-based cervical screening, and the
multiple-visit approach is an acceptable option in the
urban context as long as results are given within 48 h and
adequate counseling is provided. Baseline assessment is
needed to adapt the intervention to workload and staffing
constraints to reduce the wait times for testing and result
disclosure as much as possible. Efforts should be made
to involve patients in deciding their sampling collection
method and to counsel them with appropriate language
and wording. These results will help decision-makers
design effective future HPV-based screening implementations
in resource-constrained settings.