Background
There is a U-shaped relationship between the energy
cost of transport per unit distance (CoT; J kg−
1 m−
1) and
walking speed (m s−
1) [1]. This U-shaped CoT-speed
relationship in walking provides a specific walking speed
minimizing the CoT in each individual, which is called
the optimal speed [2] or economical speed (ES) [3–6].
The ES or a speed at which the CoT becomes minimal is
inherent in each individual under normoxia or moderate
hypoxia on a shallow gradient [4–6], in the elderly participants
who received long-term training [7], and in
obese adolescents with a successful reduction of body
fat [8]. On the contrary, the ES becomes slower due to
load carriage [9], obesity [10–12], and increased body
weight (BW) during pregnancy [2]. Collectively, these
results suggest that the ES becomes slower when BW is
increased.
BW support (BWS) is available to provide an acute
experimental reduction of BW during walking, and it
reduces the CoT in human locomotion [13, 14]. The
oxygen consumption was much lower with BWS at
heavy exercise intensities, but not so much at light and/
or moderate exercise intensities [13], assuming that the
effect of BWS on the U-shaped CoT-speed relationship
in walking could be greater at faster speeds than
slower speeds. These assumptions suggested that a rightward
(faster) shift of the U-shaped CoT-speed relationship
would be observed with BWS compared to normal
walking (NW). Since a rightward shift of the U-shaped
CoT-speed relationship provides a faster ES [15], we
hypothesized that the ES would be faster with BWS compared
to NW conditions.
In relation to the physiological and clinical significances
of the ES, many studies have reported that the preferred
walking speed (PWS) was almost equivalent or close to
the ES in able-bodied individuals regardless of obesity
[10–12], pregnancy [2], and sex [10]. In contrast, individuals
who have undergone heart surgery or a lower limb
amputation and prosthesis users prefer a slower PWS
than their ’calculated’ ES [3]. These results suggested that
the able-bodied individuals selected their PWS on the
basis of minimized CoT during walking. However, calculating
the ES is best done by measuring the CoT values at
5–8 different speeds [3–6, 8–12, 15, 16], indicating that
20–30 min is required to determine each individual ES.
This is presumably fine for a small number of fit individuals,
but it could be hard for individuals whose physical
fitness is poor. If the PWS is equivalent to the ES, then
the ES of individuals whose physical fitness is poor could
be roughly predicted with a significant reduction of their
physical strain. We also hypothesized that the PWS
could be equivalent to the ES irrespective of the use of
BWS if minimizing metabolic cost is the primary factor
explaining the PWS. However, the ES and PWS have not
yet been tested with BWS in a relatively large number
of healthy young participants. Thus, the purpose of this
study was to compare the ES and PWS under the BWS
and NW conditions to test the above hypotheses in this
study.
Methods
Participants
Forty healthy young males including 13 recently tested
participants [17] were involved in this study. They are
recreationally trained with some previous walking experiences
on a treadmill. It has been reported that there is
a sex difference in the U-shaped CoT-speed relationship
in walking [8, 18], so we recruited male participants only.
Their mean age, stature, and BW were 19.7 ± 0.8 years,
1.70 ± 0.06 m, 62.8 ± 8.7 kg, respectively [mean ± standard
deviation (SD)]. BW was measured before testing the
BWS condition. In accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki, a written informed consent was obtained from
all participants after they were provided with information
about the purposes, experimental protocols, and
possible risks of this study. This study was reviewed and
approved by the ethical committee established in Kyushu
Sangyo University before starting the data collection
(H28-0001-1).
Body weight support (BWS)
A body suspension apparatus that lifts the participants’
torso by an elastic harness was installed surrounding a
motor-driven treadmill (Fig. 1a; Well Load 200E, Takei
Scientific Instruments Co., Ltd., Niigata, Japan) [17]. A
force transducer (TSA-110, Takei Scientific Instruments
Co., Ltd., Japan) was situated between a controller and
a spring (30 cm free length with a spring constant of 5.7
kg cm−
1). In the preliminary testing, most of the participants
were uncomfortable at the inguinal region if more
than 30% of their BW was supported. Thus, we chose 30%
of their BW by the spring segments. This setting allowed
the participants to swing their legs normally.
Protocols and determination of economical speed (ES)
All participants continuously walked on the treadmill at
seven walking speeds (0.67, 0.89, 1.11, 1.33, 1.56, 1.78,
and 2.00 m s−
1) in the order from the slowest (0.67
m s−
1) to the fastest (2.00 m s−
1) speed on the level (0%)
gradient for 4 min at each walking speed. The order of
NW and BWS conditions were randomized, and the latter
condition was tested 5–7 days later after testing the
former condition. At any walking speed, the participants
were asked to select their preferred step frequencies.
They wore underwear, short sleeve T-shirts, running
shorts, socks, and same shoes with different sizes. Total
weight of these clothes ranged from 0.3 to 0.4 kg. Air
temperature of the experimental room was maintained
from 19 to 20 °C. Oxygen uptake (
VO2; mL kg−
1 s−
1) and
carbon dioxide output (
VCO2; mL kg−
1 s−
1) were continuously
measured with a computerized breath-by-breath
system (AE-310S, Minato Ltd, Japan). Calibration of the
gas analyzers was conducted before each measurement
with well-known gas concentrations (
O2 15.22%, CO2
5.17%, and N2
79.61%) and room air. An average VO2
and
VCO2
for the final 2 min at each speed was provided to
calculate the CoT values with a following equation [19].
The CoT values were compared at each walking speed
between conditions. A U-shaped relationship between
CoT values and walking speeds in each participant was
approximated with a quadratic equation [4–6]:
where the coefficients a, b, and c are determined by the
least squares regression with CoT values obtained from
seven walking speeds. The ’calculated’ ES, at which the
U-shaped CoT-speed relationship in walking becomes
minimal, can be obtained when a differential function of
the Eq. 2 (CoT’(s) = 2a speed + b) is zero [4–6]. Thus, the
ES in each participant was determined with a following
equation:
The use of either net CoT values (absolute minus
standing energy cost) or gross (absolute) CoT values
may be a matter of some controversy [2, 4]. A previous
study argued that the standing energy cost represented
CoT (s) = a·speed2 (2) + b·speed + c
ES m s−1 = (3) −b
2a
different physiological states than the dynamic state of
steady-speed walking [2]. The ES calculated by the net
CoT values was significantly slower than that calculated
by using the gross CoT values [2]. Several studies
observed that healthy people prefer walking speeds at
or near the speed associated with their minimum gross
CoT [2, 3, 8, 10, 11, 16], so we used the gross CoT values
in this study. To make potential comparisons with other
studies, we report the mean standing energy cost was
97.8 ± 12.0 J kg−
1 min−
1 (1.56 ± 0.19 watts kg−
1).
Determination of preferred walking speed (PWS)
The PWS was determined within a few days after the
metabolic measurements under the BWS and NW conditions.
The participant warmed up on the treadmill
at or near his ’calculated’ ES for 1 min and then rested
while seated on a chair. After the warming up session, the
participant started walking on the treadmill in a ramp
manner under the control of external computer (4.63 ×
10−
3 m s−
2 = 1 km h−
1 per minute) from 0.56 m s−
1.
When the participant initially chose his PWS, he held
that treadmill speed for a while. And then the voluntarily
modified the treadmill speed up or down by 2.78 × 10−
2
m s−
1 (0.1 km h−
1) to finally determine his PWS [16].
During the PWS determination protocol, treadmill monitor
panel was covered with a corrugated board not to
present the treadmill speed to the participants, indicating
that a hysteresis effect and tester’s behavior (e.g. manual
operation of the treadmill speed on the monitor) could
not influence the individual PWS. The order of the BWS
and NW conditions was randomized.
Statistical analysis
The ESs observed under the BWS and NW conditions
were compared with a paired two-tailed t-test. The CoT
values as well as observed ES and PWS with BWS and
NW were compared with a two-way repeated measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) within-participants using
online software (ANOVA 4). If a significant F values was
obtained, Ryan’s post hoc test was further applied to
the appropriate data sets to detect significant mean differences;
its statistical power has been reported to be
equivalent to Tukey’s post hoc test [20], and it can be
used regardless of the data distribution [20]. A Bland–
Altman plot was applied to evaluate whether each data
set involved systematic bias [21], which consists of ’fixed’
bias and ’proportional’ bias. If 95% confidence interval
(
CI95%) of the individual PWS–ES differences included
zero, there was no systematic bias between ES and PWS
in each condition. The CI95%
was determined by a following
equation
where dm is the mean of the individual PWS–ES differences,
t39 is the t-distribution value with a degree of freedom
of 39, SDd is the standard deviation of the individual
PWS–ES differences, and n is the total number of the
participants. To evaluate whether the data set involved
proportional bias, a correlation analysis was conducted
between individual PWS–ES differences and individual
average of the ES and PWS. If there was a significant correlation,
there was a proportional bias between ES and
PWS. The upper and lower limits of agreement were
determined using a following equation:
Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. All data were
presented as mean ± SD.
CI95% = dm ± t39 · SDd · n−1 (4)
(5)
Upper and lower limits of agreement = dm ± 1.96·SDd
Results
The CoT values were significantly decreased by 9.2%
(1.56 m s−
1), 15.6% (1.78 m s−
1), and 20.8% (2.00 m s−
1)
with BWS than NW, but not at speeds slower than 1.33
m s−
1 (F = 7.901, p = 0.006; Fig. 2). A significantly faster
ES was observed with BWS (1.61 ± 0.11 m s−
1) than NW
(1.39 ± 0.06 m s−
1) (t = 11.420, p < 0.001; Fig. 2). The PWS
was not significantly different from the ES under both
conditions (F = 0.215, p = 0.646; Fig. 3a). From a calculation
using the Eq. 4, the CI95%
values ranged from − 0.087
to + 0.092 under NW and from − 0.105 to + 0.125 with
BWS. The dm ± SDd values were 0.003 ± 0.079 under
NW (Fig. 3b) and 0.010 ± 0.129 with BWS (Fig. 3c). There
was a significant relationship between individual PWS–
ES difference and individual average of the ES and PWS
under NW (r = 0.670, p < 0.001; Fig. 3b), but not with
BWS (r = 0.156, p = 0.337; Fig. 3c).
Discussion
The CoT values were significantly lower with BWS than
NW at speeds faster than 1.56 m s−
1, however, no significantly
lower CoT values were observed at speeds
slower than 1.33 m s−
1 (Fig. 2), resulting in a significantly
faster ES with BWS than NW (Fig. 2). These results supported
our first hypothesis. However, the metabolic rate
during walking at any walking speed has been reported
to decrease linearly with increasing body weight support
[13, 22–24], and the reduced metabolic rate seemed
to depend on walking speed [13, 22–24]. These partial
discrepancies between our present study and some previous
studies would be derived from different characteristics
of used apparatus, such as torso suspension with
a long elastic harness [22–24] and lower-body positive
pressure [13]. As technical considerations, the faster
ES with BWS was potentially associated with a characteristics
of a fluctuation of the vertical force caused by
spring-like characteristics of our apparatus (Fig. 1b). The
stroke length of the spring of our BWS apparatus is much
shorter than others [22–24]. When using such an apparatus
during walking, the vertical force tends to fluctuate
especially at faster speeds (Fig. 1b), because vertical displacement
of the center of body mass increases as walking
speed increases. At speeds faster than 1.56 m s−
1, a
percentage of BWS increased by ~ 34% at the propulsive
phase of a gait cycle (Fig. 1b), which allows more
mechanical work to redirect the center of body mass
upward and forward [25]. Reducing the mechanical work
at the propulsive phase potentially reduce the metabolic
rate or energy cost of walking [26–28], indicating that the
reduced CoT values with BWS at speeds faster than 1.56
m s−
1 could be attributed to the accelerated increase in
the vertical force at the propulsive phase by the springlike
behavior of our BWS apparatus.
In support of our second hypothesis, the PWS was
equivalent to the ES not only under the NW but also with
BWS (Fig. 3a). No fixed bias was found between ES and
PWS in both conditions, because the dm was almost zero
(blue lines in Fig. 3b, c). Instead, there was a proportional
bias between ES and PWS under NW, but not with BWS,
because there was a significant relationship between individual
PWS–ES difference and individual average of the
ES and PWS under NW (r = 0.670, p < 0.001; Fig. 3b).
However, most of the plots under NW was within the
upper and lower limits of agreements (Fig. 3b). The CI95%
values ranged between negative and positive values in
both conditions (Fig. 3b, c), indicating that there was no
systematic bias between ES and PWS in both conditions.
These statistical results mean that the PWS was almost
equivalent to the ES, and the PWS can be a substitutable
index of the individual ES, at least, in our participants. A
recent longitudinal survey revealed that normal walking
speed in daily lives, being essentially linked to the PWS,
was already associated with physical and biological functions
of accelerating aging even in midlife [29]. PWS can
be easily determined in each individual, so that a practical
use of the PWS in our daily lives may contribute to
monitor our locomotion ability. Other notable intervention
studies reported that the PWS was slower on rough
terrain compared to smooth terrain, and that the PWS
was significantly slower than the ES on both terrains [30].
Visual disturbance also modified the PWS [31]. Therefore,
we should acknowledge that the PWS can be modified
by several human factors, such as gait instability and
visual cognition, through modifications of individual’s
optimal combination of stride length and step frequency
to minimize the CoT. On the basis of this interpretation,
metabolic minimization is presumably the central mechanism
to explain the PWS in able-bodied healthy young
males.
Study limitations should be acknowledged. First, this
study recruited healthy participants only. As explained
before, patients after heart surgery or prosthesis users
prefer a slower PWS than their ’calculated’ ES [3]. However,
a use of BWS apparatus can reduce the metabolic
rate during walking [13] and running [14, 17] on the
treadmill. Given these previous findings and our current
results (Fig. 2), a use of BWS apparatus could be effective
for training purposes in individuals whose physical
fitness is poor. Another potential limitation was that only
30% BWS was tested. As far as we know, a short-stroke
spring-like BWS was used only once in the past [17].
In association with the installed spring characteristics,
more studies are necessary to understand physiological
responses if more and/or less than 30% BW was supported
by the spring-type BWS apparatus.
Conclusion
Reduced CoT values at faster walking speeds made the
individual ES faster with 30% BWS compared to the NW.
This was due to a spring-like behavior of the BWS apparatus
to redirect the body mass upward at faster than 1.56
m s−
1. We also found that the ES was equivalent to the
PWS in both conditions, suggesting that the PWS could
be mainly determined by the metabolic minimization in
healthy young males. This result further derives that the
PWS can be a substitutable index of the individual ES in
these populations.