Background
As wrestling is a weight-categorised sport, wrestlers and
coaches take advantage of body size and physical strength
using rapid weight loss (RWL) strategies. Until 2017,
a rule of United World Wrestling stated that an official
weigh-in had to be conducted on the evening before each
competition [1]. In 2018, this rule changed to requiring
a weigh-in each morning [2]. In contrast, Judo changed
the weigh-in timing from morning before each match to
the evening before the match [3]. Other sports, such as
professional boxing and mixed martial arts, still perform
a weigh-in the day before the competition. Thus, there
are some rules depend on the type of sports, and optimal
weigh-in rules are still under argument.
Traditionally, many male wrestlers (38–69%), particularly
in the lightweight and middleweight classes,
attempt to “make weight” by losing > 5% of their body
mass approximately one week before their competition
and then ingest fluids and food to recover their physical
condition as quickly as possible [4–6]. Common
RWL methods include food and fluid restriction, fasting,
eating less food during each meal, decreasing carbohydrate
intake, increasing exercise, saunas and baths,
and training with rubber suits [4, 5, 7]. These methods
induce dehydration [8, 9], and decrease muscle glycogen
(mGly) [10, 11]. As a result, aerobic and anaerobic
performance decrease [12] and immune [13, 14] and
cognitive functions are impaired [15]. However, wrestlers
and coaches have considered that even if RWL
reduces strength or endurance performance, these can
be recovered through sufficient fluid and nutrition
intake because the weigh-in was conducted in the evening
before the day of each tournament. In addition, a
recent review reported that an RWL of 5–8% body
mass with a small impact on health and performance
has remained acceptable practice [16]. Thus, if we
accept RLW within a suitable range, the best nutrition
strategies for recovery must be elucidated to achieve
the best performance.
MGly is a major energy source of moderate- to highintensity
exercise [17]. Wrestling is an intermittent,
combative sport requiring technical, tactical and psychological
skill that demands absolute muscle strength and
power on both the upper and lower body [18, 19]. Each
match lasts approximately 6 min (two, 3 min rounds with
a 30 s rest) including tackling, pushout, lifting, throwing,
and blocking, which are high-intensity movements [20],
and wrestlers must compete in up to five matches [21].
Therefore, the strategies of mGly recovery in the morning
before the wrestling matches are important.
To the best of our knowledge, few studies, with only
one manipulated carbohydrate intake after RWL, have
investigated nutrient strategies to recover mGly overnight,
which is generally the time between weigh-in
and the first match. Only one study of Rankin et al. [22]
reported the effects of carbohydrate intake from a highcarbohydrate
meal (75% energy) compared with those
of a moderate-carbohydrate meal (47% energy) for a
5 h recovery period on anaerobic performance. In the
study, anaerobic performance tended to be higher after
a high-carbohydrate meal than a moderate-carbohydrate
meal, which was 99.1% and 91.5% of baseline after recovery,
respectively, although mGly concentration was not
obtained. As a nutrition guideline, the carbohydrate recommendation
after or during exercise is described to be
dependent on the exercise situation, such as intensity and
duration [23]. However, the carbohydrates required to
recover mGly between RWL and the match on the next
morning remain to be elucidated.
The aim of this study was to examine the effect of a
high-carbohydrate meal of 7.1 g kg−
1 on the mGly concentration
after RWL and an overnight recovery meal.
To obtain the recovery process of mGly and short-term
mGly synthesis, we measured these at 2 and 4 h after initiating
the recovery meal. We hypothesized that a highcarbohydrate
meal induces recovery of the mGly deficit
after an overnight recovery phase.
Methods
Participants
Ten male collegiate wrestlers (age, 20.9 ± 0.5 year; height,
168.9 ± 4.3 cm; body mass, 73.2 ± 8.2 kg; % body fat,
11.2% ± 2.0%) were recruited from two teams in Japanese
colleage after receiving information about this
study from their team coaches. All subjects belonged to
the East Japan Collegiate League and had competed in
wrestling matches on an international (n = 3), national
level (n = 5) and regional level (n = 2). Eligibility into the
study required participants: (1) ≥ 18 years of age, (2) had
experienced losing over 6% of their body mass before a
major competition, (3) free of any metabolic, thyroid,
or heart diseases. All participants submitted their written
informed consent before the experiment began. This
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of
the Japan Institute of Sports Sciences (036 in 2014).
Experimental design
All participants were instructed to complete their daily
life dietary and training records before the experiment.
Participants visited our institute on the day before baseline
(BL) measurements and ate their usual amount of
dinner in a buffet restaurant by 21:00. They were given
instructions to abstained from taking alcohol or stimulant
beverages and to refrain from hard exercise for at
least 12 h prior to BL measurement. They were allowed
to drink mineral water after 23:00.
We obtained anthropometric measurements, body
composition, and mGly concentration, and took blood
and urine samples at 06:30 (BL). After the measurements,
we instructed them to lose 6% of their body mass. The
methods of weight loss is described in detail elsewhere
[8]. At 53 h after BL measurements, they visited the laboratory
for measurements after 6% RWL (R0). After the
R0 measurements had been collected, the participants
were provided with three prescribed meals (Table 1) to
consume between 17:30 and 23:00, which was similar to
previous study [24]. MGly concentrations were obtained
2 h (R2) and 4 h (R4) after initiating the prescribed meal.
Measurements were taken again on the next morning at
06:30, 13 h after initiating the prescribed meal (R13).
Anthropometric data and body composition
All participants voided their bladders before measurements
of height, body mass, and body composition were
taken, and they each wore a bathing suit. Height and
body mass were obtained barefoot to the nearest 0.1 cm
with an automatic stadiometer and weight scale (A & D
Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) after voiding. Body composition
was obtained using dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA;
QDR 4500, Discovery A [S/N 84498], fan-beam scanner,
software version 12.7.3.2; Hologic, Waltham, MA, USA).
Detail method of DXA is described in the previous study
[8].
Cross‑sectional area measurements
The cross-sectional area (CSA) of the right femoral region
was obtained with the participants in a supine position
by 3-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) device
(Magnetom Skyra; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) at each
time point. First, localization images were obtained from
the 3 anatomic planes (sagittal, coronal, transverse). The
CSA of the muscles and subcutaneous fat in the femoral
region was estimated at 50% position between the upper
end of the greater trochanter and the knee joint gap (repetition
time 500 ms, echo time 8.2 ms, matrix 256 × 256,
field of view 240 mm, thickness 10 mm). Each CSA was
computed by tracing each area using special image analysis
software (ISIS, Hitachi Ltd., Japan) by one researcher.
Muscle glycogen concentration
MGly concentration from right thigh was measured using
carbon (13C)-magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS), as
described elsewhere [25, 26]. To obtaine the 13C-glycogen
signal, a 3-Tesla magnetic resonance system (Magnetom
Verio; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with a 13C–1H double-
tuned surface coil of 10 cm diameter (Takashima seisakusho,
Japan) was used. The reproducibilityof mGly by
13C-MRS with repositioning and reshimming was coefficient
of variation of 3.5% in our laboratory [25], and that
of 6.6–9.5% in a previous study [27].
Blood and urine sampling and analysis
Blood samples were collected from the antecubital vein
into vacuum-sealed serum collection tubes and vacuum
tubes containing dipotassium ethylene-diamine
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) and sodium fluoride at three collection
time points (BL, R0, and R13). The samples were
centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, and whole
blood, serum and plasma samples were stored at 2–4 °C,
except plasma for arginine vasopressin, which was stored
at − 80 °C until analysis. Urine samples for urinary specific
gravity and osmotic pressure were obtained from
each participant into 10 mL tubes and stored at 2–4 °C
until analysis. All blood and urine analyses were outsourced
to an independent laboratory (LSI Medience
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
Energy and macronutrient intake
A survey of all food and fluid intake was conducted
before the baseline measurement (baseline) and during
the 53 h RWL period (weight-loss period). We
instructed participants to weigh all consumed food,
supplements, and bevarages using a scale, and record
these with photograph. Energy and macronutrient
intake determined over the 3 days included 2 training
days and 1 day off before the baseline measurement,
and daily intake was calculated by adjusting for the
training period as 6 days. Participants recorded all consumed
food and fluid during the 53 h RWL period. The
methods of calculation of energy and macronutrient
intake is described in detail elsewhere [8].
Statistical analysis
Sample size was calculated from the statistical power
(1 − β) at 0.8, the α error at 0.05 and significant minimum
effect size (f) at 0.6 based on the change in mGly
concentration [11]. This power calculation determined
that a minimum sample size of eight participants (for
a repeated one-way ANOVA with five measurements)
was required to detect a statistically significant difference
in mGly concentration change using G*Power 3.1.
Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS
statistics 24 for Windows (IBM, Chicago IL, USA) and
expressed as means ± standard deviation. Paired t-test
was used to compare mean difference between baseline
and weight-loss period. Comparisons of means
were performed using linear mixed model, and multiple
comparison test was performed using Bonferroni posthoc
test.
Results
Nutrient intake and body mass
Daily energy intake decreased by 67.6% ± 11.2% during
the weight-loss period compared with that of the
baseline (Table 2). Body mass significantly decreased
by 4.6 ± 0.6 kg (6.4% ± 0.7%) at R0 compared with BL
(p < 0.05; 95% confidence interval, CI 4.2–5.2) (Fig. 1).
Body mass then increased by 2.2 ± 0.5 kg after the first
recovery meal (R0–R2) and by 3.3 ± 0.5 kg after the
second (R2–R4), but body mass at R13 was 1.7 ± 0.6 kg
(2.3% ± 0.8%) lower than BL.
Body composition and cross‑sectional area of the right
thigh
A mean fat mass reduction of 0.4 ± 0.3 kg (p < 0.05;
95% CI 0.1–0.8) and fat-free soft tissue reduction of
4.2 ± 0.3 kg (p < 0.05; 95% CI 3.8–4.6) were observed after
RWL (R0) (Table 3). At R13, fat mass did not change
from R0; however, the fat-free soft tissue recovered by
3.0 ± 0.4 kg (p < 0.05; 95% CI 2.6–3.4). Muscle CSA significantly
decreased by 5.9% ± 1.3% (p < 0.05; 95% CI
9.4–12.2) from BL to R0 and increased by 3.8% ± 2.0%
from R0 to R13 (p < 0.05, 95% CI 3.5–9.8), which was still
lower than that of the BL (p < 0.05; 95% CI 1.8–6.4). There
were no significant difference in the cross-sectional area
of subcutaneous fat, bone and residual did not change at
any point in time.
Muscle glycogen concentration
MGly concentration decreased by 36.5% ± 10.0% at R0
compared with BL (p < 0.05; 95% CI 15.1–35.3) (Fig. 2),
had not recovered by R2 (p < 0.05; 95% CI 14.5–30.7) or
R4 (p < 0.05; 95% CI 2.8–30.7) and remained lower than
BL (p < 0.05; 95% CI 1.5–23.8), even 13 h (R13) after initiating
the prescribed meal containing 7.1 g kg−
1 of carbohydrate.
MGly store rate was 1.8 ± 2.7 mM h−
1 from
R0 to R2, 3.3 ± 4.2 mM h−
1 between R2 and R4 and
0.5 mM h−
1 between R4 and R13.
Blood and urine content
Because one participant ate a dinner containing a higher
fat content before pre-measurement compared with their
usual meal, we analyzed the data from nine participants
(Table 4). Hemoglobin, total protein, albumin, creatinine,
uric acid, urea nitrogen, free fatty acid, total cholesterol,
high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol, low-density
lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol, sodium, magnesium, and
urinary specific gravity at R0 were greater than those at
BL. By contrast, glucose, insulin, triglyceride, and testosterone
were lower at R0 than at BL. Additionally, creatinine,
uric acid, and triglyceride at R13 were statistically
different compared with these measurements at BL.
Discussion
In the present study, we discovered that body mass and
mGly concentrations do not return to pre-RWL levels
after overnight recovery, even with the consumption of
a high-carbohydrate meal (7.1 g kg−
1 body mass) after
6% RWL. To our knowledge, this is the first study that
obtained mGly changes during RWL and recovery using
13C-MRS. If we convert our mGly values to wet weight,
assuming the density of fat-free mass is 1.1 kg L−
1 [28],
our basal values (69.0 ± 10.3 mmol kg−
1 wet wt) agree
with those of Houston et al. [10] (62 mmol kg−
1 wet wt in
the vastus lateralis). The mGly concentration decreased
by 36.5% after 6% RWL for 53 h in the current study. The
reduction in mGly concentration was also similar to that
of Houston’s study (46% for a 96 h RWL of 8%). The mGly
reduction rate calculated from the percentage of reduction
and duration of RWL was 17% per day in the current
study, 11% per day in Houston’s study. Thus, our results
supported this previous study. Our participants’ intake
of carbohydrate and protein were drastically less than
that of BL values or dietary recommendations for weight
loss [29]. Therefore, the amount of decrease in mGly was
reasonable.
The fat-free soft tissue and muscle CSA decreased by
6.3% and 5.8% after RWL and recovered by 4.5% and
3.7% after taking the prescribed meal in the current
study. These changes were similar to the study by Kukidome
et al. [30], who reported that a lower muscle area
decreased by 5.9% after 7.0% weight loss for 1-week
and regained by 4.2% by the wrestling tournament.
Our participants experienced dehydration such as fluid
restriction and sweating with rubber suits during RWL,
which affect total body water and the percentage of water
in fat-free mass [8]. Indeed, several blood and urine
indexes indicated dehydration (total protein, albumin,
uric acid, sodium, magnesium and urinary specific gravity)
at R0. Therefore, decrease in fat-free soft tissue and
muscle CSA may be mainly associated with a decrease in
hydration status in fat-free soft tissue. However, increase
in the muscle CSA likely reflects rehydration in fat-free
soft tissue and increase in intracellular water by glycogen
accumulation. Most of blood and urine indexes of R13
returned to BL in the current study. In addition, previous
studies suggested that mGly loading increases in muscle
CSA of the vastus muscles and was probably due to an
increase in intracellular water binding to glycogen granule
[26, 31]. Furthermore, we found that total body water
changed after RWL and recovery in the previous study
[8], indicating that these body water changes might relate
to mGly change.
RLW-induced reduction in mGly concentration did
not again reach BL values after 13 h recovery in the
current study. Most studies have examined short-term
(0–6 h) or long-term (> 24 h) recovery strategies, and
few studies examined a 12 h mGly recovery. Piehl et al.
[32] reported that mGly recovered to 68.8% of at-rest
values at 10 h after exhaustion (18% of mGly at rest),
and it took 46 h to recover to rest levels. The calculated
means of carbohydrate intake in their study were 216 g
(5.1 g kg−
1) for a 10 h recovery and 1116 g (15.9 g kg−
1)
for a 46 h recovery. Although the mGly restoration in
current study (81.7%) was higher than the previous
study [32], if athletes could consume more carbohydrates
for longer periods, such as in professional boxing
or mixed martial arts (e.g., 24 h), mGly recovery would
likely have been enhanced. The mGly storage rate was
1.8 mM h−
1 from R0 to R2, 3.3 mM h−
1 from R2 to R4,
and 0.5 mM h−
1 from R4 to R13 (mean, 1.1 mM h−
1 for a
13 h recovery). MGly accumulation calculated from Houton’s
study [10] was 1.6 mmol kg wet wt−
1 h−
1 for a 3 h
recovery, which is similar to the current study. However,
these values are lower than the mGly accumulation range
of 5–10 mmol kg wet wt−
1 h−
1 after extreme endurance
exercise [33]. Therefore, it was considered that the recovery
of mGly may be lower after RWL than after endurance
exercise.
We considered several reasons for the low mGly storage
in the current study. First, glucose transporter isoform
(GLUT-4) relates closely to glucose uptake. During
and after endurance exercises, muscle contraction
increases insulin-independent glucose uptake to muscle
by GLUT-4 translocation. However, in the present
study, we expected translocated GLUT-4 to be less than
that after exhaustive exercise because the participants
did not eat the recovery meal immediately after exercising.
GLUT-4 mediated glucose uptake is strongly affected
by insulin, that effect is larger than insulin-independent
glucose uptake [34]. Participants in the current study
were wrestlers who were well trained and ingested large
amounts of carbohydrates after RWL. Hence, we believe
that the difference in insulin-independent glucose uptake
after exercise is rarely relevant. Second, mGly reduction
after RWL was lower (36.5%) than that of previous studies
(67–91%) [32, 35]. Zachwieja et al. [36] reported that
mGly and glycogen synthase activities were negatively
correlated [36]. Indeed, in our study, mGly concentration
at R0 was 45.4 mM, which was higher than that in
previous post-exercise studies [35, 37]. Third, the amount
of carbohydrate intake may affect mGly restoration.
Although a recent review recommended 7–10 g kg−
1 of
carbohydrates during an overnight recovery period after
RWL [16], 7.1 g kg−
1 of carbohydrate may be insufficient
to restore mGly. In the current study, serum insulin levels
were decreased by RWL and recovered by consuming a
high-carbohydrate meal. Furthermore, free fatty acid levels
increased at R0 and returned at R13. These data suggest
that RWL induced gluconeogenesis, and we expect
that not only mGly but also liver glycogen was decreased.
Therefore, more carbohydrates may be needed to fill glycogen
in both the liver and muscle. Finally, we considered
that the macronutrient balance affects mGly storage after
RWL. Previously, Burke et al. [38] provided evidence
that when the carbohydrate intake is < 1.2 g kg−
1 h−
1, the
addition of protein enhances post-exercise mGly synthesis.
By contrast, the fat content (60 g, 18.5% energy) in
the current study may prevent carbohydrate absorption.
Eating high glycemic index carbohydrate foods after prolonged
exercise induces a greater recovery of mGly concentrations
than low glycemic index carbohydrate foods
[39]. Therefore, future studies should attempt to compare
the meal-contained manipulated macronutrient.
This study has some limitations. First, as we did not
measure physical performance, the relationship between
high-carbohydrate intake after RWL and physical performance
was equivocal. Second, we did not clarify the
mechanism of mGly synthesis because interrupted blood
samples and muscle samples could not be obtained during
the recovery phase. Furthermore, since we only measured
mGly in the right thigh, changes in mGly in other
parts, such as arms or liver, were not clarified. Third, we
did not have a control group, and we performed only one
carbohydrate intervention. Therefore, further study is
required to examine whether the amount of carbohydrate
after RWL is associated with mGly recovery. Finally, we
had estimated appropriate sample size by repeated oneway
ANOVA before the experiment. Post-hoc test by the
linear mixed model was justified enough power at 1.7
using Rstudio.
Conclusions
We conclude that a high-carbohydrate meal of 7.1 g kg−
1
body mass after 6% RWL was insufficient to recover the
mGly during a 13 h recovery phase. Therefore, to avoid
wrestling match with lower mGly level, optimal nutritional
recovery strategies need to be further investigated.