Background
Nowadays, it is well known that exercise performed adequately and regularly  has physiological [1], psychological [2] and immunological [3] benefts to human health.
Most patients with chronic diseases can beneft from
appropriate daily exercise [4]. People with cystic fbrosis
(CF) can beneft from regular exercise participation not
only in terms of increased respiratory capacity but also
the prevention of comorbidities, as the current therapies
and new medications have markedly prolonged the lifespans of people with CF [5].
During the past decade, many research groups have
observed the positive efects of structured exercise on
aerobic physical capacity, health-related quality of life
and pulmonary function [6–10]. An improvement in lung
function [11, 12], and reductions in infection and infammation [13], the hospitalization rate [14] and fatigue
[15] have also been observed due to exercise or physical
activity. Ward et  al. confrmed that exercise is a fundamental therapeutic intervention for people with CF [10].
Radtke et al. observed no adverse side efects of exercising [8]. Consequently, regular and adequate participation
in exercise can be assumed to be an essential part of the
lives and management of people with CF.
Nevertheless, evidence regarding the efcacy of exercise training in people with CF is still limited, and the
most efective exercise frequency, intensity, type and time
still need to be identifed [8, 10]. Moreover, there is a lack
of evidence regarding efective strategies for promoting
participation in physical activity at home that is sustained
for at least six month by people with CF [16]. Web-based
exercise interventions are believed to be a promising
solution [17, 18].
We developed a personalized, web-based exercise program to promote regular participation in exercise. Te
use of this web-based concept has already been shown
to be feasible for patients with CF over a period of eight
weeks [18]. Te aim of this study was to examine the feasibility of this web-based exercise intervention and its
impact on participation in exercise over the course of an
entire year. Additionally, we evaluated self-reported participation in exercise, lung function and exercise capacity
before, during and after one year of the intervention.
Methods
Study design
Tis observational, web-based exercise intervention lasted 52  weeks and is a part of the cystic fbrosis
online mentoring for microbiome, exercise and diet
(COMMED) study. Within COMMED a CF physician,
a dietician and a sport scientist could personally interact with the participants via a website and directly at
three specifc time points. Te CF physician was present
at each testing timepoint. Te dietician could provide
nutritional recommendations at each testing timepoint.
Whereas the information exchange with the medical
doctor and the dietician was voluntary, the participants
were obligated to exchange information with the sports
scientist weekly. Te parameters regarding participation
in exercise throughout the intervention were analyzed
after 52 weeks. Additionally, we compared self-reported
physical activity, lung function and exercise capacity
at baseline (T0), after the frst 12  weeks (T1) and after
52 weeks (T2).
Participants
Te participants were recruited at the medical Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Allergology and Cystic
Fibrosis of the University Medical Centre in Mainz, Germany. People with CF who met the following criteria were
included in the study: age>12  years, FEV1%pred.>28
and<100 and/or lung clearance index (LCI)>9. Te
exclusion criteria were orthopedic, rheumatic, cardiovascular or neurological contraindications; no internet
access; and an acute exacerbation. Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants (or their parents or guardian). Te study was approved by the Human
Ethics Committee Rhineland-Palatinate (837.288.16 (10,
607)) and conformed to the Code of Ethics of the World
Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki).
Design of the web‑based exercise program
Figure 1 illustrates the design of the weekly feedback loop
between the participants and the sports scientist that
operated via the website, which is described in the following section.
At baseline, the participants performed an incremental
modifed walking test (s. Fig. 3) on a treadmill until they
reached voluntary maximum exhaustion to identify any
exercise-related risks or symptoms, maximum exercise
capacity and individual training zones.
Afterwards, the participants were registered on the
website and received training material, including three
resistance bands (Pinoft®), a heartrate monitor (Polar
FT7), a Redondo ball and two tennis balls. On the
website, the participants could download all exercise
descriptions, illustrated manuals or videos; upload their
training protocols; receive their weekly training recommendations; and chat with other participants.
At the start of every week, the participants received
a message on the website containing a tailored training
plan for the following week. Tis training plan comprised
endurance, strength, fexibility and coordination training
sessions and integrated preferred physical activities.
Continuous and interval training were recommended
for endurance training. Te participants could choose
their preferred endurance exercise type (brisk walking,
running, cycling, rowing, swimming). Te recommended
exercise intensity was mainly based on the individual
anaerobic threshold (IAT) and the variation in oxygen
saturation (SpO2) measured during the exercise test.
Strength (module 1), coordination (module 2) and
fexibility (module 3) training sessions were created by
the sports scientist and uploaded with descriptions, pictures and videos on the website. Module 1 to 3 could be
performed with the training material that had been provided or with everyday objects in the home environment.
For instance, the disease-related strength training module
consisted of fve complete training sessions: (1) “training
with own body weight”; (2) “training with free weights or
flled water bottles”, (3) “training with resistance bands”,
(4) “training with the Redondo ball”, (5) “training on the
gymnastic mat”. Sets and repetitions of each session and
the specifc combination of the three modules could be
varied and adapted by the sports scientist.
As a third additional option, the participants could
pursue their preferred physical activities, such as horseback riding, tennis or climbing.
At the end of each week, the participants had to upload
their hand-written exercise protocol (JPEG/PDF) to the
website. Tis exercise protocol contained the performed
exercise sessions, the duration of each session and the
individual load and discomfort in each session. Te individual training load was indicated by the mean heart rate
per session (HR), measured by the HR monitor, and the
rated perceived exertion (RPE 0–10). Rated perceived
discomfort (RPD 0–10) was the indicator for exercise
tolerance.
After the participants provided feedback via the weekly
uploaded training protocol, the sports scientist adapted
the exercise program for the upcoming week. Figure  2
shows the decision strategy employed by the sports scientist to adapt the training for the following week. During periods of acute infection or exacerbation or while
on holiday, participants could interrupt the training
program.
Defnition and assessment of exercise participation
as primary outcome
Te primary outcome was participation in exercise over
the course of one year. Te exercise participation parameters were the time spent training and training frequency
over 52  weeks for the entire group and for each individual. Terefore, 52 hand-written training protocols for
each participant (n=572) were evaluated. Table  1 presents the exercise participation-related parameters.
Additionally, the participants completed the “Physical Activity Questionnaire” (IPAQ) [19], on which they
reported their physical activity during the past seven
days preceding the intervention (T0), after 12  weeks of
the intervention (T1) and after 52 weeks of the intervention (T2). Te number of minutes spent training and frequency reported in domain four of the IPAQ, “leisure”
(vigorous; moderate), were evaluated.
Assessment of lung function and exercise capacity
as secondary outcomes
Lung function (FEV1, FVC (%pred.)) and maximal and
submaximal exercise capacity (VO2peak, six-minute
walk test distance (6MWTD (m)), maximum work rate
(Powerpeak (w)), work rate at the individual anaerobic
threshold (PowerIAT (w)), and heart rate at the individual
anaerobic threshold (HRIAT (beats/min)) were the secondary outcomes. Tese parameters were measured at
baseline (T0), after 12 weeks (T1) and after 52 weeks (T2)
of the intervention.
Forced expiratory volume in one sec (FEV1) and forced
vital capacity (FVC) (%pred.) were assessed using fowvolume spirometry (MasterScope®Body, CareFusion,
Germany) in accordance with the criteria of the American Torax Society/European Respiratory Society. FEV1
and FVC were determined as the highest of three acceptable measurements and expressed as a percentage of the
predicted reference value according to the Global Lung
Function Initiative [20].
Te 6-min walk test (6MWT) was conducted to assess
submaximal exercise capacity.
Te 6MWTD was the output of the 6MWT. Te participants had to achieve their maximum distance within
6  min while moving at their fastest possible walking
speed.
Te cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET), including
a lactate analysis, was performed to assess submaximal
and maximal exercise capacity. A modifed incremental
walking test protocol [21] was performed on a treadmill
(Saturn, HP Cosmos®) with increasing speed (km/h) and
incline (%) until maximum exhaustion was reached (s.
Fig. 3). Te increments lasted three minutes.
Ventilation of O2 (VO2) and CO2 (VCO2) (Ergostick,
Geratherm®), lactate (L) (EKF diagnostics®; Winlactat
3.0 Mesics GmbH), heart rate (HR) (ECGpro, AmedTec®), peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) and
rate of perceived exertion (RPE) [22] were measured during the 6MWT and the CPET. L samples were taken from
the ear lobe after each increment of the CPET. Te individual anaerobic threshold (IAT) was determined according to the Dickhuth model [23]. VO2peak was determined
to be highest VO2 during the last 30 s of the CPET.
Statistical analysis
Microsoft Excel (2013) and IBM SPSS Statistics version 23.0 were utilized. We analyzed the exercise participation data exploratively (mean, standard deviation,
median, min, max, range, 95% confdence intervals). We
performed repeated-measures ANOVA for the analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes. To test the
violation of the assumption of a normal distribution, the
Shapiro Wilk-test was conducted. Mauchly’s W-test was
performed to test for sphericity. Te Greenhouse–Geisser correction (ε) was applied when the assumption of
sphericity was not met. Te signifcance level of p<0.05
was set for all statistical analyses.
Results
Initially, 17 participants were included in this study.
Six of those participants dropped out, and 11 participants were included in the fnal data analysis for the
entire year. Tis participant group had a mean age
of 32.9  years (SD±11.4), mean FEV1%pred. of 72.3
(SD±17.3) and a mean BMI of 22.7 kg/m2
 (SD±2.18)
(Table  2). Of the 11 included subjects, six were males
and fve were females. Te dropout rate of 35.3%
occurred for the following reasons: no response after
three weeks (n =1), difculties with changing life circumstances (n=1), severe pulmonary exacerbation
(n=1), infections immediately before T2 (n =2) and
acute kidney failure (n=1).
Exercise participation throughout the year
Te weekly exchange between the sports scientist and
each participant remained feasible throughout the year.
Communication was interrupted briefy during vacations
and in some cases due to inpatient stays. Te number of
training sessions and the training duration in minutes
were extracted from 572 handwritten training protocols.
Table  2 and Fig.  4 show the descriptive analysis of the
groups’ exercise participation during the 52 weeks of the
intervention.
Subjects 8 and 11 achieved the most exercise training
time (>300 min/week), most training frequency (>4 sessions/week) and participated in 85% [8] and 88% [11] of
the predetermined training weeks. To achieve this high
level of exercise participation, subject 8 chose hiking and
climbing as the main activities, whereas subject 11 preferred swimming, running, cycling, resistance exercise
and horseback riding. Terefore, subject 8 had a higher
overall exercise intensity than subject 11 had.
For the analysis of the variation in exercise participation throughout the year, the 52 weeks were divided into
13 four-week training sections. In the frst training section, the participants participated in 137.31 (SD: 95.7)
training minutes. In all of the following training sections,
the number of minutes spent training were. Te highest
mean numbers of training minutes were achieved in the
third (195.01, SD: 134.99), seventh (210.7, SD: 104.56)
and tenth (205.18, SD: 125.72) training sections. From the
frst four-week (1–4) section to the third four-week section (9–12), the number of training minutes increased by
42%. Figure 5 shows the mean training minutes achieved
for each training section.
In the frst training section, the participants participated in 3.2 (SD: 1.4) training sessions. Only in section
nine was the number of mean weekly training sessions
lower. Te maximum numbers of training sessions
occurred in training sections three (3.5, SD: 0.9), six (3.5,
SD: 1.3) and seven (3.4, SD: 1.3). Figure 6 shows the training sessions completed in each training section.
Te mean numbers of minutes spent training and
training sessions in each for the 13 four-week training
sections for the seven participants could be included in
the repeated-measures ANOVA due to the listwise exclusion of missing data. Missing data resulted from training
sections for which no mean value could be calculated for
a participant, because in at least one of the four weeks
the training was interrupted. Te data were normally
distributed at all timepoints (p>0.05) except in training
section  2 (p=0.01) for the number of minutes spent
training. Sphericity was not observed (p=0.000) between
the training sections. Greenhous Geisser correction was
applied. Repeated-measures ANOVA revealed no signifcant diference between the training sections with
regard to training minutes (p=0.366) or training sessions
(p=0.478). Te distinct range of the confdence intervals, i.e., the heterogeneous participation in training in
the group, led to the non-signifcant diferences between
each training section.
Self‑reported physical activity at T0, T1, T2
Te self-reported physical activity of eight participants
who completed the IPAQ at T0, T1 and T2, could be
included in the repeated measures ANOVA due to the
listwise exclusion of missing data. Missing data resulted
from the absence of information provided in the questionnaire at least at one timepoint (3/33). Te data were
normally distributed at each timepoint (p > 0.05), and
sphericity was observed (p=0.806). Tese 8 participants reported a mean of 179.38 min (SD: 120.9) at T0,
250.63  min (SD: 124.1) at T1, and 166.88 (SD: 155.4)
at T2. Tere was no signifcant diference between the
timepoints (p=0.120). Te self-reported number of
minutes spent training increased by 39,7% from T0 to
T1. Tis identifed increase was no longer evident after
52 weeks.
Lung function and exercise capacity at T0, T1, T2
From T0 to T2, there were slight decreases in the
mean FEV1 −3.9%pred. (p=0.102) and in the FVC of
−1,9%pred. (p=0.575); slight increases in the VO2peak
of+1.5  ml/min/kg (p=0.413), the 6MWTD of+26  m
(p=0.287) and the Powerpeak of+0.11 w/kg (p=0.362);
and slight decrease in the PowerIAT of −0.01 (p=0.714)
and the HRIAT of −4 b/min (p=0.230) (Table 3).
Tere were heterogeneous changes in the secondary
outcomes in the interindividual comparison. Te changes
in exercise capacity are shown in Fig. 7. Figure 8 shows
the changes in lung function for each participant across
all tests. Seven participants increased their 6MWTD,
seven increased their VO2peak, nine decreased their FEV1
and seven decreased their FVC.
Under the exploratory assumption that a fve percent
change in pulmonary function and exercise capacity
from T0 to T2 could be considered clinically relevant,
the following observations can be made: Subjects 1, 3, 6,
and 9 improved their 6MWTDs by more than 5%. Only
participant 10 experienced a worsening of the 6MWTD
by slightly more than 5%. Participants 1, 7, 8, 9, and 10
improved their VO2peak by more than 5%. Participants
5 and 6 experienced decreases in their VO2peak of more
than 5%. Only participant 10 improved the FEV1 by more
than 5%. Participants 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 11 experienced
reductions in their FEV1 of more than 5%. Participants 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, and 10 improved their FVC by more than 5%.
No participant experienced a reduction in the FVC. Considering the individual changes in secondary outcomes as
a whole, it is interesting that participants 1, 3, 6, 8, and
9 experienced reductions in their FEV1 by more than 5%
but experienced improvements in the parameters of exercise capacity of more than 5%.
Discussion
Taking into account that according to the WHO guidelines for physical activity, 150 min/week is recommended
for healthy adults [25] and that overall adherence of
young people to exercise recommendations is generally
poor, the overall achieved mean training time of 178 min
per week is noteworthy. Te mean training time was
lower in the frst four-week section (<150  min/week)
than in the following 12 training sections (>150  min/
week). Tis means that a sustained increase in training
minutes can be assumed to be indicative of the long-term
suitability impact of the intervention.
However, a progressive increasing trend in exercise
participation could be observed only until the seventh
four-week training section. In the following training
sections, exercise participation fuctuated. Tese fuctuations could be related to the normal health changes
in people with CF that occur over the course of a year
or to reduced reporting. Te exercise participation
protocol had to be written by hand and then uploaded
to the website as a scan or image. Tis appeared to be
more a result of the circumstances of the study than a
necessary element of the program, and the automatic
acquisition of training data, and the transformation of
the web-based concept into a mobile application could
solve this issue in the future. Moreover, fuctuations in
exercise participation could also be due to the time of
year, as infections are more common in colder months
and engagement in physical outdoor activities usually decreases somewhat during those months as well.
Additional indoor training opportunities at home such
as endurance training on an ergometer might support
exercise participation during the colder periods of the
year.
As shown in the results, the self-reported number of
minutes spent training and sessions in domain 4 of the
IPAQ were also higher at T1 than before the intervention, which strengthens the assumption that the exercise
intervention could support exercise participation in people with CF. Notably, the exercise participation assessed
at T0 and T1 on the IPAQ was higher than the reported
exercise participation reported in our protocols. However, the percentage increase in exercise participation
from T0 to T1 (IPAQ) or from the frst training section
to the third training section (exercise protocol) was similar. Te potential overreporting on the IPAQ has also
been reported previously [26]. An automated, objective
measurement of exercise participation utilizing reliable
wearables might further verify this observation in future
studies. At T2, the exercise participation reported on the
IPAQ was lower than that at T1, which might attenuate
the long-term suitability of the intervention.
Considering these observations, the long-term feasibility of the web-based concept is clear, and exercise participation did increase, especially during the frst three to
seven month of the intervention; however, the long-term
suitability (>7 month) should be further investigated.
Remarkably, despite slight increases in VO2peak and
6MWTD, slight decreases in FEV1 and FVC occurred
after our intervention. Even a “stabilization” of these
parameters over the course of a year in people with progressive disease [27] would be considered a positive outcome. Most interestingly, fve participants experienced
reductions in their lung function but enhancements or
no changes in their exercise capacity. However, we cannot assume that this “stabilization” occurred only due
to our intervention. One reason is the lack of a control
group and potentially infuential factors, such as medication, which come into play during a one-year intervention under real-world conditions. A recent study, which
evaluated a large international sample of people with CF,
confrmed the importance of exercise capacity as a predictor for long-term mortality [28]. In this context, even
a small increase in exercise capacity, despite an observed
reduction in lung function in our study, may have a positive efect on long-term survival in our participants.
However, while we have now shown the practicability
of a long-term web-based approach, the concrete health
efects need to be determined.
Tere are other reports of telehealth approaches to the
management of CF [28–33]. Cox et al. [29] demonstrated
the feasibility and acceptability of the internet-based program “Active Online”, which lasted eight weeks, in combination with phone calls every second week in ten adults
with CF (mean age 30 years and mean FEV1 50%pred.).
Tey suggested conducting a randomized controlled trial
to examine the efect on participation in physical activity.
In 2018, Chen et al. [30] addressed the issue of the risk of
cross-infection in the population of CF patients. Terefore, they examined the use of a live-streaming platform
that ofered supervised and interactive group exercises.
In this examination, ten patients had to perform 30 min
of aerobic resistance training three times per week for six
weeks. Te patients completed 85% of the training sessions, and they reported enjoying the training and gave
the platform a high rating. Te efects on physiological parameters were not reported. Te efectiveness of a
home-based video game program for young CF patients
was tested by Del Corral et al. [31]. Te research group
observed that six weeks of the video game intervention
during rehabilitation improved the participants’ sixminute walk test distance and health-related quality of
life, among other parameters. Te patients completed
a 30- to 60-min training session fve days per week, but
they included very young patients (mean 13  years old)
with a mean FEV1 of 82.7% predicted. A year later, Tomlinson et al. [34] presented the concept of “video calling
via skype”. Nine patients completed eight weeks of this
intervention, during which an exercise therapist supervised all sessions. Tey achieved 68% compliance but
also reported no changes in the health parameters. All of
these studies were short-term interventions.
Recently, elaborate and promising study protocols for
web-based RCTs have been published. Hebestreit et  al.
[30] published a study protocol for “Activate-CF” involving a “partially supervised conditioning program” based
on the use of pedometers, with an international, multicenter randomized controlled trial design. Lang et  al.
[31] presented a study protocol for a 12-months multimodal telehealth-based outpatient physiotherapy service
and compare the usual outpatient physiotherapy service
with the telehealth intervention CyFiT, eHAB®. Tis software allows real-time video sharing, the measurement
of motion in various joint, and virtual group-based sessions combined with the use of an activity tracker. Terefore, it remains to be determined how these approaches
afect exercise participation in people with CF and infuence their lung function and exercise capacity. Innovative person-centered, web-based algorithms aiming in
automatically increase and measure physical activity, set
personalized physical activity goals, and determine the
type and duration of physical activity [35] could also be
considered in the design of future studies.
Limitations
Some limitations of our study must be taken into
account. Te most important is the small sample size and
its heterogeneity due to the inclusion of participants at
every stage of CF. Tis limitation, combined with a lack
of a control group, potentially attenuates the power of 
the reported p-values, which should rather be considered
as a supplement to the performed exploratory analysis.
A general estimation of the most efective exercise type,
duration, intensity and frequency for people with CF
cannot be derived from the results. Additionally, over
the course of an entire year, our participants needed continuous changes in medications and sufered from acute
infections or pulmonary exacerbations, which infuenced
the outcome. Te analysis of exercise participation was
based on self-reported protocols. Factors such as social
desirability or obliviousness could have caused reporting bias. Nevertheless, self-reporting allows a mentor to
receive individual feedback from participants about their
current perceptions, eforts and training progression. Te
recruitment of more participants, the inclusion of a control group, the automation of training data acquisition,
the measurement of preintervention exercise participation and the restriction of the exercise options could
help overcome the above-mentioned limitations in future
studies.
Conclusions
Te web-based concept was feasible for the  participants over the course of an entire year and supported
their exercise participation. Te weekly feedback loop
between participants and the sports scientist enabled
the provision of regular personalized exercise counselling. Automatic acquisition of the training data and a
mobile application could further improve this web-based
concept. Te potential increase in exercise capacity due
to increased participation in exercise over a prolonged
period of time, despite a decrease in lung function,
should be further investigated. Finally, if integrated into
usual care, this approach could facilitate the prescription
of regular personalized exercise and promote exercise
participation in the daily lives of people with CF.