Background
Muscular asymmetry, especially in professional athletes,
increases the risk of injury, as pointed out by various authors
examining asymmetry of muscles in football
players, basketball players, and people with spinal pains
[1–4]. Surface electromyography is considered a reliable
and credible tool for assessing the post-effort myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue of muscles. In this kind of
analysis, the most often used parameters of the sEMG
signal are changes in amplitude scope and in the mean
or median frequency of total capacity spectrum. In some
studies however physical effort did not decrease the median
frequency sEMG signal [5–8].
Many authors have used the Biering-Sorensen test to
examine a myolectrical manifestations of fatigue level
and determine differences in the muscular work of symmetrical
muscles [9–11]. To meet the needs of analysing
muscular myolectrical manifestations of fatigue in different
body positions, various elements of the Biering-
Sorensen test have been modified, such as body position
and the time of conducting the test [12, 13]..
The asymmetry of gluteus maximus muscles has been
described in the literature most often in the contexts of
walk and isolated positions [11, 14]. In short track, previous
research has dealt with the muscular work of only
one limb or with asymmetry in the myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue of muscles during skating. Felser et al.
studied athletes skating in a straight line and in curves
[15]. Neuromuscular activation was higher in the right
leg, while with the reduction in skating speed decreased
neuromuscular activity, but only when skating in a
straight line. This indicates that the right leg has higher
activity during skating in curves. Studying athletes skating
in a straight line and in curves during the subsequent
laps, Hesford et al. found considerable asymmetry
in oxygen supply to the two legs. The authors did not report
effects of this asymmetry, but offered suggestions
for training [16]. Stoter et al. showed that the bioelectric
tension of muscles of speed skaters was correlated
with speed at different sections of the track, but
they did not analyse whether muscular asymmetry affected
this phenomenon [17]. At present, the literature
of the examined phenomenon contains analyses of
muscle myolectrical manifestations of fatigue in many
variants [18]. Non-invasive methods of determination of
myolectrical manifestations of fatigue parameters also
include surface electromyography (sEMG). Analysis of
the sEMG signal frequency of the power spectrum provides
useful information concerning local muscle myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue [7, 19].
The idea behind the study was initiated by the coaches
of the Polish National Team, worried about the asymmetry
in the skaters and the related increased injury risk.
Even though the coaches try to focus as much of the
training as possible on symmetrical work, they stress
that training on ice accounts for about 60% of the training
volume and skating to the left is a typical asymmetrical
work. Since the level of asymmetry varies from
athlete to athlete, the coaches stress the importance of
customised training, which would help them improve
muscular symmetry in each athlete in an optimal way.
The main research hypothesis is that intensive shorttrack
training leads to asymmetry of the gluteus maximus
muscles. Thus, the paper aims to study the size of
asymmetry in muscle activity and assess the difference
in fatigability between the right and the left gluteus maximus
muscles of the Polish Women’s National Team in
short track, and to compare this fatigability with that in
non-training women.
Methods
Participants
Two research groups took part in the tests. The experimental
group included eight female members of the Polish
National Team in short track, with a mean age of
18.7 ± 2.9 standard deviation, mean height of 162.4 ± 2.4
cm, and mean body weight of 57.2 ± 5.9 kg. The control
group included eight female students active in sports
(but not in speed skating), with a mean age of 20 ± 0.9,
mean height of 169.1 ± 4.1 cm, and mean body weight of
68 ± 4.2 kg. These students were randomly selected from
among female students of physical education at Opole
University of Technology. The research was conducted
during the training cycle, after a weekend break in training,
to avoid the short-term effect of myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue accumulation due to the training.
The participants were informed about the purpose and
course of tests and signed a consent to participate in the
tests. The tests were approved by the Bioethical Commission
of the Chamber of Physicians in Opole, Poland.
In interviews conducted before the tests, all the respondents
declared they were right-handed and right-legged
in daily and sports activities (e. g., tossing a ball, kicking
a ball, supporting with a foot during swinging). Furthermore,
a kick-a-ball test (with three attempts) confirmed
all the participants were right-legged, while the modified
Edinburgh questionnaire confirmed they were righthanded
[20].
Procedures
The sEMG signal frequency in the gluteus maximus muscles
was examined in an isometric contraction using the
position from the Biering-Sorensen test [11, 12]. To avoid
too high loads for the skaters, the tests were stopped after
60 s of the contraction, and they were not continued until
the subject was unable to hold the position because of
muscle myolectrical manifestations of fatigue. The effectiveness
of the myolectrical manifestations of fatigue test
during a 60-s contraction was confirmed by Mutchler
et al. [21]. During the test, the subjects were lying on a
horizontal table on the abdomen, with the iliac crests
aligned to the edge of the table and the lower limbs attached
to the straps around the ankle joints. They were
instructed to hold the body (head, shoulders, and torso),
without support, horizontally to the ground as long as
they could, with the arms crossed at the chest (Fig. 1).
The EMG measurement
In the test, a 16-channel EMG system (produced by
NORAXON DTS) was used, which recorded signals with
an accuracy of 16 bits at a sampling rate of 1500 Hz.
The bio-electric test of activity of the right and the left
gluteus maximus muscles was carried out by the SENI
AM methodology [11, 22]. To improve the adherence of
the electrodes, before the test, the hair was shaved and
the skin was cleaned in the place where the electrodes
were to be stuck. Surface electrodes (Ag/AgCl) were
placed on the muscle between the movement point and
the tendon attachment, along the longitudinal middle
line of the muscle. Signal processing and EMG analysis
were performed using NORAXON MR-XP 1.07 Master
Editionx software.
Myolectrical manifestations of fatigue-related changes
(frequency shift) in the frequency content were calculated
for the raw EMG signal (Fig. 2) obtained during a
static contraction. Unfiltered raw sEMG was analysed
step-wise in 1000 ms increments over the selected portion
of the measurement (60 s in the Biering-Sorensen
test). The mean frequency was calculated for each step
using values based on the frequency power spectrum
(calculated by a Prime Factor Fourier Transformation).
A myolectrical manifestations of fatigue slope (being a
regression coefficient from a linear regression line
between the mean frequency and time) was estimated
for each participant. The mean value of the slopes of
these lines were analyzed with mixed ANOVA withinbetween
interactions taking into account the side factor
(left/right muscle) and the studied group (experimental,
control). sEMG frequency power spectrum is expected
to shift to lower frequencies during fatiguing contractions,
and the mean frequency analysis can be used to
estimate the magnitude of that shift. This phenomenon
is well established for static contractions at constant load
levels and believed to reflect local myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue (Fig. 3.).
Technical specification of NORAXON DTS is as
follows:
– basic noise of the device, below 1 uV RMS,
– input impedance above 100 Momh,
– CMR (common signal rejection factor) greater than
100 dB,
– sampling frequency 1500 Hz,
– gain500.
Statistical analysis
The slopes representing the subjects’ myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue were analyzed with mixed
ANOVA within-between interactions. The two groups
(short track and control) constituted the betweensubject
factor, and the two sides (left leg and right
leg) constituted the within-subject factor. Since the
interaction was significant, Tukey’s post hoc tests
were applied for pair-wise comparisons of the four
factor combinations. For the analyses, a 0.05 significance
level was used. All analyses were made in Statistica
v. 13.1.
Results
In the ANOVA, the main effect of the group was nonsignificant
(F (1, 14) = 2. 964, p = 0.107). The main effect
of the side (right-left) of the muscle, however, was significant
(F (1, 14) = 20.323, p < 0.001), and so was the
group-by-side interaction (F = (1, 14) = 6.111, p = 0.0268)
(Fig. 4). Tukey’s tests (Table 1) showed that the right
and the left muscles of the skaters (i.e., the subjects in
the experimental group) differed in myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue (p = 0.001); this difference was nonsignificant
in the control group. The subjects from the
two groups did not differ in the myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue of the left muscle, they did in
the myolectrical manifestations of fatigue of the right
muscle. The elite speed-track skaters had higher myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue in the right muscle than
the non-training subjects. Size differences are shown in
Fig. 4.
Figure 5 shows significant interactions that indicate
that the average slope differences between the right and
left muscles differ between the two groups. The more to
the left a point lies, the greater the difference between
the subject’s muscles was. All elite skaters, the asymmetry
is visible in the graph (so the points lie far to the
left from the zero line). In a non-trained group only a
several people had this asymmetry (so only a few points
lie far to the left of the zero line). We see thus that the
interaction was significant because the groups differed in
these differences (representing asymmetry) in the myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue of the right and the left
muscles.
Figure 6 pairs the left and right maximus gluteus muscles
for each subject. This graph clarifies that the nontraining
subjects who had a small difference in the myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue of the muscles had in
general low myolectrical manifestations of fatigue of both
muscles. While the subjects from the two groups did not
differ in the myolectrical manifestations of fatigue of the
left muscle, they did in the myolectrical manifestations of
fatigue of the right muscle: the elite speed-track skaters
had higher myolectrical manifestations of fatigue in the
right muscle, and higher than the non-training subjects
(p = 0.001; Table 1 and Figs. 4 and 5).
Discussion
The research aimed to determine differences in muscle
myolectrical manifestations of fatigue in the left and the
right maximum gluteus muscles in female short-track
skaters and compare these differences with those in
healthy non-training women.
What was surprising, however, was so high asymmetry
of muscle myolectrical manifestations of fatigue observed
in the members of the Polish Women’s National
Team in short-track speed skating. In general, short-
track training focuses on symmetrical movements, so it
should not generate so high asymmetry between the right
and the left gluteus maximus muscles. Too high asymmetry
in these muscles can increase the risk of injury, so
is unfavourable in high-performance athletes [1–3]. thus
its importance should not be underestimated in professional
sports that involve alternating limb movements.
Such high asymmetry, as in the tested athletes, however,
has not been observed in the non-training subjects.
Asymmetry in an experimental group can be caused by
specific training in short-track. Small asymmetry in nontraining
people is likely a normal phenomenon, and it
should not increase the possibility of injury.
Even though experiments without the control group
are difficult to interpret, most studies on muscle myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue did not include nontraining
subjects [15, 16]. The control group was included
in the experiment to analyze muscle asymmetry
in skaters against the background of non-training
people, which did help us draw richer conclusions about
the studied phenomenon.
The studied skaters train at a skating rink in about
60% of the annual training volume, remaining 40% being
focused on symmetrical training of both limbs. Various
elements of their individual skating techniques—especially
the technique of skating on curves—can cause
asymmetry in the gluteus maximus muscles, an unfavourable
phenomenon in speed skating because of the
increased injury risk it poses. Unfortunately, the
phenomenon of muscle asymmetry in professional
short-track skaters is still poorly studied, which makes it
difficult to design a training process that would not generate
asymmetry. Asymmetry in muscle fatigability is
certainly not limited to short track, however. Mastalerz
et al. [23] reported differences in myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue between the muscles of the right and the
left legs in runners, reaching from 12,5% to 26,5%, depending
on the muscle Hartz et al. measured the myolectrical
manifestations of fatigue index through the
induction of shoulder evation movement [24].
Felser et al. showed that muscle tension activity in
muscles of both legs differed between the moments of
skating in a straight line and in curves; greater differences
occurred in the right leg muscles [15]. This
result stresses the importance of the cornering technique,
likely that element of the training which most
strongly increases asymmetry of leg muscles. Hesford
et al. also observed asymmetry in legs of though they
studied the oxygenation of the quadriceps muscle
[16].
Study’s limitations
The limitation of the studies was the size of the experimental
group, but due to the specificity of the group, it
was not possible to study more athletes.
During the experiment, the skaters were in the middle
of the training cycle. On the other hand, the tests
were conducted after a weekend break in training, so
the muscles were relaxed; had the tests been conducted
right after training, the muscles would have
been tired, which might have affected the tests. During
the gluteal muscle myolectrical manifestations of
fatigue research, there was no reference to the activation
of other muscles to develop myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue. In future studies, it is therefore
worth increasing the number of muscles to better investigate
the myolectrical manifestations of fatigue
process. The sEMG signal frequency change analysis
method we used is not a direct method to determine
the myolectrical manifestations of fatigue level but
only an indirect method.
Conclusions
Elite female short-track skaters have significant asymmetry
in fatigability of the gluteus maximus muscles.
In healthy individuals there is no statistically significant
difference in the asymmetry of myolectrical manifestations
of fatigue the gluteus maximus muscles.
The results offer an important lesson for the coaches
of the Polish Women’s National Team in short-track
skating.