Background
Health needs of the local community
There is a continuous ageing trend in the population of
HKG. In the forthcoming decades, the number of people
in HKG aged 65 or above will increase to 2.16 million by
2031 and 2.56 million by 2041 [1]. Similar ageing trends
are found in CHN [2]. According to the Prediction Report
on the Development Trend of Population Aging in CHN,
there were 241 million Chinese citizens aged 60 or above
in 2017, about 17.3% of China’s total population. This
figure will peak at 487 million, or nearly 35% in 2050. The
ageing population presents substantive problems for social
services such as reductions in the working-age population
and increasing fiscal pressure on healthcare, social welfare,
and other services for older adults [2, 3]. Owing to the
effects of net medical inflation, population growth and
ageing, and assuming the service enhancement continues
with the historical trend, Hong Kong’s recurrent social
welfare and health expenditure as a percentage of nominal
GDP would increase from $56.9 billion and $52.4 billion
in 2014 and 2015, respectively, and to $523.3 billion and
$563.6 billion in 2041 and 2042, respectively [4]. A structural financial deficit may then strike within a decade in
HKG due to the gradual increase in older adult’s social
and health expenditure and reduction in working-age
population [2, 3].
Despite the fact that the benefits of participating in
physical activity (PA) are well documented [5], only
about 30% of older adults aged 60 to 69 years, participated in sufficient PA in HKG and CHN [6, 7]. Agerelated fitness degradation was also found in Chinese
older adults [8]. Responding to the population ageing
and its social implications, Governments [3, 9] have initiated programs to promote active ageing to enable older
adults to stay active and remain healthy (e.g. offering
older adults with diversified courses on an on-going
basis, training for the trainers). Therefore, developing
effective interventions (e.g., light volleyball in this study)
is critical for promoting active lifestyles among older
adults that can reduce the number of elderly adults
becoming frail at an early stage.
Chase et al. [10] conducted a systematic review and
meta-analysis to determine the effects of supervised PA
(e.g., resistance exercise and aerobic PA) interventions
on physical functioning among older adults and concluded that supervised PA interventions were effective at
improving physical functioning (d = .45). Limitations of
the reviewed twenty-eight studies were identified, as 1)
few related studies from Asia; 2) small sample sizes with
median control group size of 19 participants; 3) intervention duration did not meet the current World Health
Organization (WHO) global recommendation of 150 min
of PA per week [5]; and 4) lacking of control group or
RCT study design.
In CHN, a systematic review [11] found promising
evidence of the positive health benefits (e.g. mental and
physical health, quality of life, and balance) of traditional
Chinese sports [e.g., Tai Ji Quan (or Tai Chi), and
Qigong] and PA among older Chinese adults. The limitations of previously reviewed studies suggest that larger
scale interventions with prospective follow-ups, RCTs
with representative and sufficiently powered samples,
and the use of valid and reliable outcome measures are
recommended for future research. Importantly, Guo and
colleagues [11] mentioned that other than these mainstream activities, there are more than 900 types of Chinese sports/PAs (including the newly developed sport,
LVB) in existence [12]. More research is needed to explore and evaluate the health impact of these nonmainstream activities. This is in line with the suggestion
of Blewitt and Chockalingam [13], that further investigation should be conducted to identify new PA for older
adults to gain the benefits of being physically active.
Qualitatively, Franco [14] reviewed the existing literature on older adult’s opinions on participation in PA.
Among the 132 studies included, older adults valued PA
participations and programs that emphasized “interaction with peers such as preferred group-based activity”, “professional instruction”, and “physical limitations
such as discomfort and concerns about falling”. Similar
themes about older adult’s perspectives on currently
existing PA programs/interventions were found in Van
Dyck et al. [15]. Furthermore, older adults who were
interviewed suggested new PA (e.g., aquafitness or LVB
in this study), not just regular activities like walking and
cycling, should be selected as intervention activities.
Likewise, the Hong Kong older adults also suggested interventions “providing more sport training classes
(19.4%)” can help the promotion of Sport for All [7].
Based on the aforementioned considerations, we found
that there is a gap between research and service relative
to promoting active ageing.
Scientific evidence supporting the strategies to address
the needs proposed in this project
Among different types of PA, LVB is a new PA (also can
be a sport) modified from traditional volleyball that may
help reduce fitness-related degradation and increase PA
among older adults. In contrast to traditional volleyball,
LVB uses a lighter weight (LVB 150 g vs. traditional volleyball 250 g) and larger sized (LVB 80 – 83 cm in circumference vs. traditional volleyball 65-67 cm) ball. The
LVB ball travels in the air at a lower velocity and for a
longer time, which increases the playability and rally
time among players during the games. It thus makes the
LVB game more accessible to those with ageingassociated degradation (i.e. slow movements and reaction time, etc.). LVB, as a modified PA, is preferable to
other traditional sports (even as it is adapted to older
adults) because LVB is a non-contact and team-effort
sport and is played with two teams separated by a net.
These LVB features reduce the older adults’ likelihood
of injury, such as falling, and these features address the
recommendations of Franco [14] regarding factors that
facilitate older adult’s participation in PA. Additionally,
the LVB playing court (i.e., a standard-sized badminton
court) is smaller than a standard volleyball court, which
enables the promotion of LVB in sport facilities that
normally have limited space in HKG. Moreover, with the
popularity of the China National Volleyball team and annual HKG professional volleyball competition (i.e., FIVB
Volleyball Nations League), volleyball is a traditional and
popular sport in HKG. Volleyball is one of the sports
taught in the school Physical Education curriculum in
HKG and CHN. All of these factors favor LVB promotion in HKG in the future.
Studies in CHN indicated that older adults gained
physical and psychological health benefits from regular
LVB practice [16]. However, some limitations were
found in these studies, such as unclear fitness component measurements and lack of control groups. In 2018,
Leung et al. [17] conducted a quasi-experimental intervention to evaluate the effects of a 15-week LVB intervention on physical and psychological attributes among
78 Hong Kong older adults (≥ 60 years) by comparing
LVB to a modified form of physical activity, rouliqiu
(RLQ), and to a control group. Compared to the control
group, LVB participants experienced significant improvements in agility, cardiovascular endurance, upper
and lower extremity muscle strength, and physical activity enjoyment. Compared to their RLQ counterparts,
participants in the LVB group demonstrated greater cardiovascular endurance, upper extremity muscle strength,
and physical activity enjoyment. This pilot study suggested that the effectiveness of LVB on promoting older
adult’s health should be further investigated using a
larger-scale RCT, combined with follow-up measures in
the community. Health practitioners may consider LVB
as an adapted physical activity intervention to promote
health outcomes in older adults in the future.
Objectives
In response to the promising results of the LVB pilot
study and the priority of allocating resources to the prevention of age-related fitness degradation in HKG, the
present project aims to extend the aforementioned work,
which is to investigate the effectiveness of a LVB intervention on physical and psychological health attributes
among older adults in HKG. Specifically, the objectives
of this study are:
(1) compare the effects of a 16-week light volleyball
(LVB) intervention program, with a TC program in
terms of improving functional fitness among
Chinese older adults aged 65 years or above;
(2) compare the effects of a 16-week LVB intervention
program, with a TC program in terms of improving
psychological attributes (i.e., resilience, physical activity enjoyment) among Chinese older adults aged
65 years or above;
(3) compare the effects of a 16-week LVB intervention
program, with a TC program in terms of improving
quality of life and balance among Chinese older
adults aged 65 years or above; and.
(4) evaluate the effectiveness of both interventions
from the participants’ perspective in order to gain
insight into the links between intervention elements
and outcomes (e.g., identify mediators and
moderators of program success).
Methods
Study design
This study utilizes both quantitative and qualitative
methods with a larger sample (approximately 315 participants). We will adopt a RCT design to evaluate the effectiveness of the LVB intervention on health outcomes
against an active comparison group (TC), and a control
group. TC is chosen as our active control group because
both LVB and TC are whole-body exercises, originating
from China, and both are suitable for older adults and
benefit older adults’ health [17, 18]. Next, compared to
team-based LVB, TC is an individual PA that may impact the health and quality of life of older adults differently (e.g. perhaps psychologically). Evidence about the
association between social support and PA suggests that
older adults with greater social support (e.g. less social
isolation) are likely to continue exercising [19]. Others
[20, 21] demonstrated that increasing amounts of social
support in community based group PA interventions
were associated with increasingly beneficial effects (e.g.,
social functioning) relative to PA intervention and program adherence. Additionally, TC is a very popular
activity among Chinese older adults [7]. When LVB is
promoted or becomes popular in Hong Kong communities on a larger scale during the later phases of this project, TC is a good candidate for the PA utilized by the
active control group in the current study. Perhaps a
comparison between LVB and TC may provide some
insight about PA promotion among HKG older adults in
the future. We hypothesize that the LVB and TC interventions will produce significant improvements in selected physical and psychological health attributes
compared to the control group. We expect the LVB
intervention to be at least as effective as the TC intervention in enhancing health outcomes in older adults.
Study intervention (objective #1–3)
In order to answer project objectives (a)-(d), the study
will adopt a RCT. About 315 participants will be randomly assigned into LVB group, TC group and control
group in 1:1:1 ratio; this will be about 103 participants
in each group. Data will be collected at baseline (pretest), after a 16-week intervention (post-test), and 6
months and 12 months after the intervention is completed. The intervention will be based on the previous
program specifically designed for older adults in LVB
[17] and in TC [18]. Each program consists of 32 training sessions, with 2 × 90-min sessions per week. The
duration of the proposed intervention is consistent with
the recommendation of U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) for PA recommendations [22].
The LVB Group’s program will be delivered by registered coaches from the Light Volleyball Association of
HKG (LVBAHK). Content for this program is designed
by the project co-ordinator (PC) and LVBAHK, which
was found to be effective for improving health of older
adults [17]. The TC Group will utilize a simplified 24-
form Yang Style TC that is designed for easy learning
and mastery. Participants will be led by a qualified TC
instructor, and they will replicate instructor’s motions,
postures, and movement speed. Any incorrect performance will be rectified by the instructor in the class.
During the intervention, the control group participants
will be instructed to maintain their normal daily activity
and join regular non-exercise social gatherings in order
to balance the psychosocial effect (i.e., to maintain the
internal validity of the study) of regular gatherings for
the LVB and TC groups.
Participants
Inclusion criteria for participants will be (a) aged 65
years and above; (b) living in the community independently; (c) absence of diagnosed cognitive impairment;
and will have (d) no participation in a structured PA
program for two years preceding the study; and (e) passing score on the Timed-up-and-go test (TUG) and
Abbreviated Mental Test (AMT). The TUG [23] and the
AMT [24] are to assess participant’s physical competence and cognitive functioning, respectively. Participants i) whose time exceeds 20 s on the TUG or ii)
whose AMT score is less than 6 or iii) who exhibit
steady hypertension (160/90 mmHg or above), arthritis,
and/or neurological disorders, will be excluded from the
study.
Sample size calculation
We computed a projected sample size using a statistical
power analysis by G power [25]. The analysis was based
on effect size (Cohen’s d=1–1.88) from a previous study
showing significant improvement in functional fitness
(Cohen’s d = 1.88) and physical activity enjoyment
(Cohen’s d = 1) following a LVB intervention, a control,
and a comparison group [17]. With a more conservative
effect size (Cohen’s d = .5), a total sample of 237 older
adults is required in this three-group design study in
order to achieve a power of 80% at a significance level of
5%. Finally, we aim to recruit 315 participants (45 participants per center, 7 elderly centers are needed, 105 participants in each group) in total, with a 25% expected
dropout rate [26].
Recruitment and procedures
Participants will be recruited via a presentation offered
by the research team and via advertisements in the local
neighborhood elderly centers (NECs). An information
session (e.g., aims and procedures of the intervention)
will be delivered to groups of potential participants. Participants will be advised of the confidentiality of personal
data and informed that they can voluntarily withdraw
from the project at any time without prejudice. Upon
agreement from participants, data collection will be conducted in person by a research assistant and trained student helpers after obtaining informed consent. At the
first testing session, participants will do the screening
test (i.e., TUG, AMT). Prior to the physical measures
(pre-test), participants will complete the questionnaires,
socio-demographic questions, height, weight and percentage of body fat using a Tanita machine (model:
TBF-410GS). Participants will then take the functional
fitness tests in the standardized order used in Leung
et al. [17]. The intervention will begin in the second
week and continue as described. Participants will
complete the post-test (same as the pre-test) within 7
days of following the 16 week (4 months) intervention.
As suggested by Fjeldsoe et al. [27], two follow-up tests
will be done 6 months and 12 months after completion
of the intervention. All participants will receive a
HK$100 (US$12) supermarket cash voucher as incentive
for their participation. *See Fig. 1 for the design of the
study using the CONSORT guidelines for RCT.
Measures
Physical attributes
Functional fitness The Senior Fitness Test Manual [28]
will guide the measurement of physical attributes of the
participants. The tests consist of seven items: chair stand
test (lower body strength), arm curl test (upper body
strength), chair sit and reach test (lower body flexibility),
back scratch (upper body flexibility), 8-ft up-and-go test
(agility and balance), 2-min step test (aerobic endurance), and body mass index (BMI; kg/m2). These tests
were found to be reliable (ICC: .80–.98 for participants
in trials) and valid through content, construct and
criterion-related analyses [28].
Balance test The Balance System SD (Biodex) will be
used to measure balance ability of participants in our
intervention study. This system has previously been
used to assess balance in a group of Hong Kong
Chinese older adults [29]. In the test, participants will
be asked to maintain the vertical projection with their
centre of gravity in the centre of the platform by observing a vertical screen located 30 cm in front of
their face. Each assessment will take 20 s, with 10-s
rest periods in between. The average of the results
from three trials will be obtained. Reliability (test-retest reliability = .69–.80) and validity of the balance
test was supported in the studies of Parraca et al.
[30] and Finn et al. [31].
Resilience The 25-item Resilience Scale (RS) [32] will
be used to measure resilience (i.e., the outcomes of
successful adaptation despite challenging or threatening
circumstances of participants). This scale is reliable
(test-retest reliability = .8; Cronbach’s α = .95) for
Chinese elderly populations [33]. The exploratory principal component analysis also found that RS was valid in a
four-factor structure.
Quality of life Quality of life will be measured using the
Chinese version of the Medical Outcomes Survey 36-
Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) [34]. The reliability and validity of the SF-36 questionnaire have been
confirmed for Chinese individuals [34]. This survey contains eight domains: physical functioning (PF), physical
role, bodily pain, general health (GH), vitality, social
functioning (SF), emotional role, and mental health. In
the present study, only PF, SF and GH will be included
in order to lower the participants’ burden to complete
the questionnaires. Examples of the items include asking
participants if they encountered any restrictions or limitations while performing moderate PA, such as moving a
table, using a vacuum cleaner, bowling, playing golf, and
walking. The score ranges from 0 to 100 and a higher
score indicates better physical functioning.
PA enjoyment The short version (8 items) of the PA
Enjoyment Scale (PACES) [35], translated to Chinese,
will be used to measure participants’ PA enjoyment
throughout the study. The Scale was originally developed by Kendzierski and DeCarlo [36]. This short version the PACES questionnaire is a reliable and valid
instrument for assessing PA enjoyment in Chinese older
adults [35]. In specific, the test-retest reliability and internal consistency was moderate (intraclass correlation
coefficient = 0.614) and high (Cronbach’s alpha =
.91–.92), respectively. Its convergent validity was
supported that PACES was moderately correlated with
quality of life in older adults.
Data analysis
Data will be analysed using SPSS 24.0 with a significance
level of .05. To answer study objectives (a)-(c), generalized estimating equations (GEE) models will be used to
analyse mean changes in outcomes over time among the
three groups with adjustment for baseline characteristics
showing statistically significant differences among the
groups. GEE models was used in similar study such as
Kekäläinen et al. [37] and it take into account the Intraclass correlation coefficient of responses within an
elderly centre and correlations between repeated measurements in the same individual. In addition, the GEE
models do not require complete data and can be fit even
when individuals do not have observations at every time
point. Descriptive statistics of the socio-demographic
variables (e.g., frequency, M and SD) will also be
computed.
Qualitative study (objective #4)
Participants
In order to identify the effectiveness of the intervention
from the participants’ perspective and make recommendations for maximizing retention and developing future
interventions and maximizing retention, thirty participants from LVB group will be recruited purposively,
stratified by gender and intervention completion (vs
non-completion) of intervention. A participant who has
attended at least 80% of the sessions [38] will be considered an intervention completer.
Procedures
LVB participants in the RCT will be invited to join a
qualitative arm of the study. Semi-structured group interviews (groups of 4) will be used to collect information
on participants’ (a) experiences and thoughts about the
program, (b) comments about the design of the intervention, and (c) changes in their PA engagement, and
physical and psychological changes in relation to the
intervention program. Interview questions will be based
on the literature related to PA interventions from a Social Ecological perspective [39]. These questions will be
pilot-tested on 10 older adults and investigators involved
in the study.
Data analysis
All interviews will be transcribed verbatim and verified.
To facilitate data reduction, qualitative data analysis
software QSR-NVivo will be used for thematic coding.
During coding, data will be organized into conceptual
categories/themes based on the Social Ecological Model
(SEM) (e.g., individual, interpersonal, organizational,
community, and policy levels of impact) [40]. Two independent coders will read, re-read, and code a portion
of the interview transcripts independently to ensure that
coding is done in accordance with the research questions, and to triangulate data analysis. Lastly, coded transcripts will be compared and discussed among the
coders and investigators again to further facilitate the
development of themes related to the SEM.
Discussion
This RCT and qualitative study aims to investigate the
effectiveness of a LVB intervention on physical and psychological health attributes among older adults in HKG.
We hypothesize that the LVB and TC interventions will
produce significant improvements on the selected
physical and psychological health attributes compared to
the control group. We expect the LVB intervention to
be at least as effective as the TC intervention in enhancing health outcomes in older adults. The expected and
direct beneficiaries are expected to be:
Older adults in HKG will benefit from enhancing
their physical and psychological health after participating
in a 16-week LVB intervention. Also, they will benefit
from improved service delivered to the older adults
through non-government organizations that promote
LVB. Older adults in control group, even not involving
in PA will also increase the understanding about their
own fitness level by doing fitness tests (both short and
long term);
Non-government organizations (NGOs) will benefit
because they will have access to information and resources related to a newly developed PA, LVB. These
NGOs will also benefit by enhancing their members’
health outcomes as a result of participation in the project. The results of the qualitative study will also provide
evidence-based information (e.g., workforce, service delivery) to practitioners to achieve a more effective
organization of LVB and other PA programs in the future. Finally, this collaborative project will increase the
NGOs’ awareness of promoting healthy ageing (e.g., LVB
or other programs) through more effective and active
community engagement (both short and long term).
Government departments such as the Food and
Health Bureau, and Leisure and Cultural Services Department in Hong Kong, will benefit from the data and
evidence to support their policymaking in relation to PA
promotion for older adults. Policymakers will benefit
from working together to provide quality and sustainable
health services to the public, and in return, the healthcare expenditures will be reduced in HKG government.
Policymakers will also have a better understanding of
the effectiveness and efficiency of a PA promotion program such as which elements would work better for
older adults. On a macro scale, this project may inform
HKG government about the ways of promoting healthy
ageing using promotion of LVB as an example of moving
from mass participation, to regular practice and training,
and to sport competitions (e.g. in the Master Games) in
the future (long-term impact).
LVB and Volleyball associations in HKG will benefit
from promoting LVB in HKG. Very likely LVB will be
further promoted in other countries of the world (both
short and long term).