Background
Pelvic congestion syndrome (PCS) is a disease with
heterogeneous clinical presentation. After exclusion
of other causative pathologies, PCS is defined by a
combination of uterine or ovarian varicose veins and
chronic pelvic pain for more than six months [1]. The
VEIN-TERM transatlantic interdisciplinary consensus
document of the American Venous Forum (AVF)
describes PCS as a chronic venous disease, comprising
pelvic and post-coital pain, perineal heaviness, and
acute urinary urge, caused by ovarian or pelvic venous
reflux or obstruction. Vulvar or perineal varicoses may
also be observed [2]. Premenopausal multiparae appear
to be the most affected [3]. The exact prevalence of the
disease, however, remains unclear due to the lack of
recent, interdisciplinary diagnostic criteria. Available
retrospective analyses report a significant proportion of
premenopausal women to demonstrate varicose pelvic
veins in the pelvic area, which appear, however, to be
rarely symptomatic [4, 5]. It has been estimated that up
to 40% of all cases of female chronic pelvic pain might
be related to PCS [6].
The pathogenesis of PCS is poorly understood and is
primarily based on the observation of symptom alleviation
after interventional or surgical treatment of congested
pelvic veins. The heterogeneity of symptoms,
however, points to multifactorial processes that foster
pelvic venous insufficiency. Dysfunctional venous valves,
a vasodilatory effect of estrogen, and impaired involution
after mechanical injury in late pregnancy have been
proposed to cause primary PCS [6, 7]. Secondary PCS
is characterized by anatomical obstruction, such as the
venous compression in nutcracker or May-Thurner syndromes
[3, 8]. Despite etiological differences, either type
of PCS is similarly characterized by an increase in the
volume of pelvic veins in combination with characteristic
pain, which tends to worsen toward the end of the day or
after long periods of standing due to orthostatic pressure.
This observation is interpreted as a local release of pain
and inflammation-mediating factors such as bradykinin
or substance P as well as mechanical compression of local
structures such as nerves [9, 10].
Radiological examination demonstrating insufficient,
congested pelvic veins presents the second pillar of PCS
diagnosis. Guidelines or consensus statements regarding
the choice of radiological techniques or diagnostic cutoffs
for pathologic venous diameters, however, are not available
to date [11]. Special consideration must be given to
the position of the patient during imaging, however, as
supine positions may not represent maximum pelvic
vein dilatation. To date, there is no evidence supporting
primary surgical approaches if they are not indicated for
other pathologies. In particular, any clinical benefit of
laparoscopy has to be addressed critically as the combination
of patient position and increased intraperitoneal
pressure is likely to conceal congested veins [12].
Considering the lack of standardized diagnostic criteria
and high rate of under-diagnosis, correct anamnesis
remains the main pillar of correct PCS diagnosis [13].
PCS, however, has been primarily associated with the
premenopausal state and postmenopausal remission of
symptoms has been termed a hallmark of PCS [6, 14].
This perception is challenged by recent, sporadic observations
of newly diagnosed symptomatic postmenopausal
patients with pelvic or vulvovaginal varicose veins,
suggesting that limiting diagnostic criteria to premenopausal
patients may prevent a subset of patients to access
available therapeutic options [15, 16]. To address this
potential diagnostic gap, we thereby present the first systematic
report on a symptomatic postmenopausal PCS
patient who experienced a full alleviation of symptoms
after receiving the standard-of-care usually applied to
respective premenopausal patients.
Case presentation
A 69-year old multipara with three vaginal deliveries
and no preexisting medical conditions was admitted
to our center due to chronic pelvic pain without morphologic
correlates. The patient reported pelvic heaviness
and diffuse pelvic pain, gradually increasing over
recent years. The pain was described to characteristically
increase during the course of the day and peak
at a visual analog scale (VAS) score of 7 in the evenings,
significantly impairing the patient’s quality of
life over time. The patient could not identify an exact
time point of symptom onset or a trigger of the pelvic
pain. Gynecological examination showed no significant
results, and laboratory tests showed no signs of inflammation.
A diagnostic abdominal multiphase contrast
CT scan revealed dilated uterine and ovarian veins
(left ovarian vein up to 11 mm diameter, right 7 mm).
No other pathologic findings were recorded. After ruling
out any other causative pathology, PCS was suspected
despite the patient’s menopausal state, based
on both radiological findings and characteristic pain
anamnesis. The patient declined conservative therapeutic
approaches and consented to an interventional
coil embolization of both ovarian veins after a particular
discussion about the unusual suspected postmenopausal
diagnosis. Embolization was performed by an
experienced interventional radiologist in an outpatient
setting within 3 weeks after the initial diagnosis. After
administration of local anesthesia, the right femoral
vein was cannulated, and a short 6-French sheath was
introduced with a guide wire. A 5-French Sidewinder I
angiographic catheter was placed for exploration of the
left renal vein as previously described [17]. A diagnostic
angiography performed during the procedure demonstrated
a dilated left ovarian vein with reverse flow
corresponding to venous insufficiency, as previously
suspected (Fig. 1a). The contrast agent reached the
small pelvis without resistance (Fig. 1b). After cannulation
with a Penumbra Lantern
® Microcatheter (Alameda,
CA, USA) and exploration with a Boston Scientific
Fathom™ 16 guide wire (Marlborough, MA, USA), the
left ovarian vein was sealed in its whole course with
Penumbra Ruby
® Coils (Alameda, CA, USA) (Fig. 2b).
No remaining reverse flow was demonstrated on
diagnostic angiography (Fig. 2a). The procedure was
repeated on the contralateral side. Similarly, the right
ovarian vein, presenting as a regular anatomical variant
ending in the inferior vena cava, was explored using
a Sidewinder I catheter. Diagnostic angiography demonstrated
venous insufficiency and reverse flow of the
right ovarian vein. After sealing with two additional
coils as previously described for the right ovarian vein,
no reverse flow was observed. The procedure was performed
without complications, and the patient left the
hospital two hours after without pain or symptoms. At
the follow-up visits three weeks and 18-months later,
the patient reported no symptoms with a VAS score of
0, and no use of analgesics for pelvic pain.
Discussion and conclusions
Even though no clinically confirmed case of postmenopausal
PCS has been systematically reported to date,
isolated references of postmenopausal patients who fulfill
diagnostic criteria and experience a lasting alleviation
of symptoms after respective standard treatment for
PCS strongly suggest its incidence. The herein described
case of an interdisciplinarily managed, postmenopausal
PCS patient experiencing prompt alleviation of symptoms
after interventional coil embolization thereby challenges
the classic perception of a strictly premenopausal
pathology.
A case report by Bildircin et al. [16] described a 44-year
old multipara who was reported to have had PCS for
9 months. Therapeutic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy led to quick alleviation of symptoms,
and intraoperatively, bilaterally dilated ovarian
veins seemed to support the suspected diagnosis [16].
However, a histologically confirmed 4 × 5 cm mature teratoma
of the right ovary was removed during the surgery,
and no pain history was reported, which challenges the
correct diagnosis of PCS in this specific case. Further, no
assessment of the 44-year-old patient’s menopausal status
was provided.
A study by Siqueira et al. included 22 symptomatic PCS
patients up to age 55 who were treated by embolization
of uterine varices. Of note, the authors reported that
seven patients (31.8%) were postmenopausal upon inclusion
but did not clarify how menopausal status had been
assessed. No significant difference in therapy success
was reported between pre- and postmenopausal patients
[15]. Similarly, the largest retrospective study of endovascular
treatment of PCS to date included 202 patients
with a mean age of 43.5 years (range 27–57 years), and
is also likely to have included postmenopausal patients
[18]. The authors do not challenge the fact of menopausal
status in their patient cohort, despite the prevailing
literature documenting PCS as a premenopausal disease.
Neither respective study, however, featured a gynecological
patient cohort as patients were primarily screened for
varicose veins of the lower extremities after examination
by a vascular surgeon. No gynecological examination was
performed to confirm the diagnosis of PCS or to question
menopausal status. Moreover, no precise definition
of diagnostic criteria for PCS was given, which may leave
the correct diagnosis of PCS in question.
A recent exploratory study by Szaflarksi et al. evaluating
the prevalence of ovarian venous congestion in adult
patients may be considered of particular interest, as
authors report 13.7% of 1042 female abdominal and pelvic
CT scans to show venous congestion. The average age
of the observed patient cohort was 47 years, indicating
that a significant percentage of patients may have been
of postmenopausal state. Due to the exploratory design
and radiological focus, however, authors did not report
whether or not patients fulfilled clinical criteria of PCS
[19].
In the present case, the characteristic pain anamnesis
and pre-interventionally described congested veins with
reverse flow during angiography secured the diagnosis
of postmenopausal PCS. Immediate alleviation of symptoms
after the intervention supports that the congested
veins induced the symptoms. Based on both previous literature
and the present observation, it may be assumed
menopausal status may not be an optimal diagnostic criterium
to identify patients eligible for respective available
treatment options. Moreover, postmenopausal PCS
patients may be successfully treated following the same
standardized procedures as previously described for premenopausal
patients. This assumption, however, has to
be confirmed in larger patient cohorts to allow for general
applicability and to improve estimates of postmenopausal
PCS prevalence and demographics.
Interventional coil-embolization of ovarian veins,
as performed in the present case of a postmenopausal
patient, may be considered a safe and effective gold
standard to alleviate symptoms of venous congestion. A
systematic review of 473 patients who underwent interventional
coil embolization reported clinical alleviation
of symptoms in 82.1–100% of cases. Complications
were reported to be rare and comparably mild, such as
local hematoma after cannulation. Recurrence rates
were reported to be minimal [3]. Laborda et al. reported
a remission of pain in 93.9% of patients with a followup
of 5 years, with approximately one-third of patients
achieving complete symptom relief. Thirteen percent
experienced clinical recurrence of any degree. Four coil
dislocations were described, which did not provoke subsequent
complications [18]. Three more interventionalradiological
trials including 31, 19, and 10 patients,
respectively, reported comparable results and face comparable
limitations to those previously discussed [20–22].
Both the interdisciplinary management of interventional
radiologists and gynecologists as well as the long
follow-up period represent particular strengths of the
present report, which thereby provides the first systematically
contextualized and documented observation of
postmenopausal PCS. However, supplementary earlier
imaging results to assess the time at which the congestion
of pelvic veins occurred would have added value to
the present case. A pre- and post-interventional standardized
quality of life questionnaire might have added
valuable quantifiable clinical information as a starting
point for further clinical studies.
In contrast to the previous, particularly older literature,
PCS does not appear to be solely limited to premenopausal
patients. As patient history remains one of the main
pillars of accurate diagnosis, introducing the concept of
postmenopausal PCS to current research may greatly
aid in standardizing therapeutic approaches for affected
postmenopausal patients.