Background
The term domestic violence refers mainly to intimate
partner violence, but may also include abuse by
any member of a household. In recent years, violence
against women, particularly intimate partner violence,
has become a social and public health issue throughout
the world. According to the 2017 WHO report, one
in three women (35%) globally has been a victim of
domestic violence [1]. Although the burden of the
problem varies from country to country, available studies
show that the burden of the problem is high in African
countries [2–6].
In Ethiopia, violence against women and girls continues
to be a major problem. According to EDHS 2016 report,
34% of ever-married women age 15–49 have experienced
either physical, sexual, or emotional spousal violence [7].
Likewise, a systematic review of 15 articles on domestic
violence from 2000 to 2014 also shows that the lifetime
prevalence of domestic violence against women by an
intimate partner was ranged from 20 to 78% [8].
Spatial statistical techniques give a prominent benefit
for examining the distribution of health problems.
Research evidence shows that the distribution of IPV
spatially varies. This variation was attributed to community-
level characteristics. High prevalence was observed
in areas where black American women reside in the
USA [9] and, around entertainment areas in Canada
[10]. Likewise, clusters of IPV have also been observed
in poorly educated areas, high public disorder, and high
concentrations of immigrants [11].
Despite the benefits of spatial techniques, it has not
been well used in health literature. In the Ethiopian context,
the spatial distribution pattern of IPV has not been
broadly explored. As far as my literature research is concerned,
no article has been found which shows the distribution
of domestic violence in Ethiopia using this
technique. Therefore, the current study uses spatial analysis
tools to determine the distribution and factors associated
with IPV among women aged 15–49 in Ethiopia.
Methods
Study design and setting
The study uses data that was extracted from EDHS
2016 dataset. In EDHS 2016, a community-based crosssectional
study was conducted by the Central Statistical
Agency (CSA) from January 18 to June 27, 2016, in
Ethiopia.
Ethiopia is an ancient country located in the Horn of
Africa from 30
to 140
N and 330
to 480E.
Ethiopia has a
total area of 1,100,000 square kilometers and with over
110 million population and this makes it the second populous
country in Africa. Ethiopia is a nation with around
80 ethnic groups. From this, the four largest are Oromo,
Amhara, Somali, and Tigrayans. Regarding climatic conditions,
Ethiopia is an ecologically diverse country ranging
from desert in the eastern part to tropical rainforest
to south and south-west. Figure 1 shows map of Ethiopia
where the study has been conducted.
Sample size and sampling technique
EDHS 2016 used two stages stratified cluster sampling
technique where each region was stratified into urban
and rural areas, yielding 21 sampling strata. In the first
stage, a total of 645 Enumeration Areas (EAs) were
selected with probability proportional to EA size and
with independent selection in each sampling stratum
[7]. In the second stage, a fixed number of 28 households
per cluster were selected and only one woman per
household was randomly selected for interview. Finally,
a total of 5860 women aged 15–49 were asked questions
about domestic violence against women. All women aged
15–49 and who are the usual members of selected households
and who stayed in the household the night before
the survey were eligible to be interviewed [7].
Data collection procedures
In the 2016 EDHS, questionnaires from the standard
Demographic and Health Survey were adapted to reflect
the population and health issues relevant to Ethiopia.
The questionnaire was translated into local languages
(Amharic, Tigrigna, and Oromiffa) to appropriately collect
the information needed.
Information about IPV was obtained by asking ever
married woman a 13 item question; of which, 7 measures
physical IPV, 3 emotional IPV, and 3 sexual IPV. Table 1
contains questions used to measure emotional, physical,
and sexual violence committed by their partners.
Variables of the study
The dependent variable of the study is the experience of
domestic violence by women aged 15–49. A woman is
said to be experienced domestic violence if she ever faced
either emotional, physical, or sexual violence or a combination
of the three committed by her partner.
The independent variables are categorized into individual-
level, household/relationship level, and communitylevel
factors. Table 2 lists variables used in the study with
their measurements.
Data processing and analysis
Statistical analysis of the data was performed on SPSS
version 25. Cross-tabulations and summary statistics
have been carried out to describe populations by age,
level of education, place of residence, and region. Binary
logistic regression and a two-level generalized linear
mixed model were employed to identify predictors of
domestic violence. Finally, a model comparison between
the models was performed based upon the Log-likelihood
ratio test to choose the best-fitted model.
Spatial analysis of domestic violence
ArcGIS 10.7 software was used for spatial analysis of the
data. Spatial autocorrelation (Global Moran’s I) statistics
and Anselin local cluster analysis was performed to
show the spatial distribution of domestic violence
among woman aged 15–49 in Ethiopia. Global Moran’s
I measure was used to verify whether domestic violence
among women aged 15–49 is clustered, dispersed, or
randomly distributed in Ethiopia.
Global Moran’s I calculates Moran’s I Index value,
Z score & P value. Moran’s I index close to -1 means
domestic violence cases are dispersed whereas, close to
1 indicates that domestic violence cases are clustered.
Statistically significant Z-score and P value ≤ 0.05 lead to
rejection of the null hypothesis showing the existence of
clusters of domestic violence. Statistically non-significant
Moran’s I value (if P value > 0.05) will indicate domestic
violence cases are randomly distributed throughout the
country [12].
Anselin local Moran’s I was used to identify local level
clusters of domestic violence. A positive Local Moran’s I
indicate that the feature is surrounded by features with
similar values and, such types of cases are called clusters.
Whereas, a negative value for I indicates that the feature
is surrounded by features with dissimilar values, and this
was called an outlier [12].
Kuldorff’s Sat Scan version 9.4 software was used to
identify the geographical locations of statistically significant
clusters of domestic violence. Scan statistics use
a scanning window that moves across the study area.
Bernoulli’s model was fitted to identify statistically significant
locations of domestic violence clusters. The Bernoulli
model was selected because the structure of the
data shows the binomial [0/1] distribution. Women who
have experienced domestic violence were considered as
case and labeled1 whereas, those who do not experience
as control and labeled 0. The default 50% of the population
was used as an upper limit for cluster size; because
it allows the detection of both small and large clusters of
domestic violence. Statistically significant clusters were
identified by P value and likelihood ratio tests.
Multi‑level logistic regression analysis
A two-level generalized linear mixed model was fitted
by considering 4322 women aged 15–49 at level 1
nested within 645 clusters (communities) at level two. A
multilevel analysis of the data takes three steps. The first
step was fitting the null (intercept only) model without
including predictor variables and the second step was
a random intercept fixed coefficient model (model 2)
by including individual and relationship level variables.
The last was fitting a random intercept and fixed coefficient
model (model 3) by incorporating community-level
predictors.
Model Comparison
Model comparison between the nested (null model and
random intercept fixed coefficient model) and the logistic
regression model was done to select the best-fitted
model. The commonly used parameter for evaluation of
model fitness is the Log-likelihood ratio test that compares
the deviance (-log likelihood) of the models by
subtracting the smaller deviance from the larger one.
Deviance is an indicator that shows how well the model
fits the data. A model with the lowest deviance is considered
as the best-fitted model than with large deviance. In
addition to the log-likelihood ratio test, Akaike’s information
criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information criterion
(BIC) were also used as measures of model fitness
to select the best one. Similar to the log-likelihood ratio
test, the model with a small AIC and BIC value is considered
as the better model.
Result
Socio‑demographic characteristics of respondents
A total of 3846 (weighted) women aged 15–49 were
included for analysis. The majority 3219 (83.7%) of the
respondents were from the rural part of the country and
1532 (39.8%) of them were from the Oromia region. The
mean age of the respondents was 27.76 ± 9.1SD years
and the majority, 2361 (61.1%) of the respondents do not
attend formal education. Most of the respondents, 1526
(39.7.1%), were Orthodox by religion and 817 (21.2%)
of them were from the richest family. Table 3 shows a
cross-tabulation of the socio-demographic characteristics
of the respondents with their experience of domestic
violence.
Domestic violence
From women included in the analysis, 24% (95% CI
22.9%, 25.4%) of them have experienced emotional violence,
23.7% (95% CI 22.5%, 25%) physical violence and
10.1% (95% CI 9.3%, 11.1%) sexual violence by their intimate
partner. In addition, 34% 95% CI (32.6%, 35.4%)
women have experienced either type of violence by their
intimate partner.
Spatial distribution of domestic violence in Ethiopia
The result of this study shows that the spatial distribution
of domestic violence among women aged 15–49 in
Ethiopia was non-random with Global Moran’s I 0.26 (P
value < 0.01). The z score value of 8.29 indicating less than
1% likelihood that the observed clustering of domestic
violence among women in Ethiopia is the result of random
chance. The result from Anselin Local Moran’s I
indicate the existence of hot spots, cold spots, and outlier
clusters in the study area. Hot spot clusters are observed
in Amhara regions (East Gojam and West Gojam zones),
in the Oromia region (West Arsi, Guji, Bale, and Jimma
zones), and in SNNP (Sidama, Gedio, Dawro, and Gamo
Gofa zones). Cold spots have been observed in Benishangul
Gumuz, Tigray (eastern, central, and southern
areas), and the eastern part of the Somali region. Figure 2
shows Output from Anselin Local cluster analysis of
domestic violence in Ethiopia.
Sat scan analysis of domestic violence in Ethiopia
A total of 3 significant clusters was identified. Of these,
one was considered the most likely (primary) cluster,
while the remaining as a secondary cluster. The
primary cluster was located in Oromia, Somalia, and
some parts of SNNP regional states. In the region of
Oromia, particularly in Guji, Borena, and Bale zones, in
the region of Somalia, Liben, and Afder zones, and in the
SNNP, Sidama zone were included. The primary cluster
spatial window was centered at 5.203234 N, 40.0197322
E with18783 Km radius, LLRR of 39.55, and P—values
< 0.0011. The relative risk tells us that women who
live in this cluster have a 2.18 times higher risk of IPV
than those who live outside the cluster. The P value is sufficient
to reject the null hypothesis, indicating that this
cluster is an actual and not randomly created cluster.
The secondary cluster was located in the Amhara
region (in the Eastern Gojam zone) and, in the Oromia
region (Jimma zone). The spatial window of secondary
cluster detected by Sat Scan analysis centered at
10.984556 N, 38.044450 E with 29.42 km radius with a
relative risk (RR) of 2.96 and log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of
28.56 with a P value of < 0.001. The bright red ring shown
in Fig. 3 shows the primary significant cluster and the
green ring shows the secondary cluster.
Result of logistic regression
A binary logistic regression analysis was used to examine
the association of predictive variables with domestic
violence. According to the output from this, age, education,
region, wealth index, partner’s education, partner
alcohol use, respondent’s father ever beat mother,
respondent afraid of her partner, marital controlling
behaviors, and community acceptance of wife-beating
shows a significant association with domestic violence.
The experience of domestic violence was increased
with increasing in woman’s age. The Odds of experiencing
domestic violence were 2 times higher for women
aged 20–24 with (AOR = 2.09, 95% CI: 1.36, 3.17) and 3
times higher for women aged 45–49 with (AOR = 395%
CI: 1.84, 5.15) when compared with those women aged
15–19.
Women from the richest family were 48% and those
from richer families were 42% less likely to experience
domestic violence when compared with those
women from the poorest household with (AOR = 0.52,
95% CI 0.36, 0.75) and (AOR = 0.58, 95% CI 0.45, 0.77),
respectively.
Partner education was also significantly associated with
domestic violence. Women whose partner’s education
is a secondary school were 42% and those with primary
education were 19% less likely to experience domestic
violence when compared to those with no education with
(AOR = 0.58, 95% CI: 0.41, 0.82) and (AOR = 0.81, 95%
CI: 0.66, 0.97), respectively.
Women whose partner drink alcohol were 2.6 times
more likely to experience domestic violence when compared
to those whose husband/partner does not drink
alcohol (AOR = 2.62, 95% CI 2.09, 3.29).
The Odds of experiencing domestic violence among
women who witnessed family violence during childhood
were 2.2 times higher than those who do not saw family
violence (AOR = 2.24, 95% CI 1.81, 2.58).
Women whose partners exhibit at least one type of
marital controlling behavior were 4.3 times more likely
to experience domestic violence when compared to those
whose who don’t exhibit any kind of marital controlling
behavior with (AOR = 4.26, 95% CI: 3.55, 5.11).
The Odds of domestic violence was 4.4 times higher
among women who were afraid of their partner most
of the time and 2.3 times higher among those who were
sometimes afraid of their partner when compared to
those who don’t afraid of their partner (AOR = 4, 95%
CI: 3.45, 5.61) and (AOR = 3.21, 95% CI 1.83, 2.81),
respectively.
Women who live in communities where wife beating
is highly acceptable were 1.4 times more likely to experience
domestic violence when compared to those who
live in communities where wife beating is less acceptable
(AOR = 1.39, 95% CI: 1.16, 1.66). Table 4 displays the output
from the binary logistic regression analysis.
Result of multilevel logistic regression analysis
The null model is the first model in multilevel regression
analysis in which only the intercept randomly
varies across level two units without adjusting for predictor
variables. The intercept-only model intends to
verify the heterogeneity of communities experiencing
domestic violence. The result from the null model
shows that the variance of random factor is 0.716 with
its calculated Z statistics of 7.35 and P value of 0.000.
This shows that experiencing domestic violence among
women aged 15–49 randomly varies across clusters.
The ICC value shows that 21.4% of the variation in the
outcome variable was explained by the grouping variable
and the rest was by predictor variables.
The second model is a random intercept model that
has a random intercept component and a fixed coefficient
of individual and relationship level factors. The
third model (full model) was developed by including
community-level variables in model two. The output
from this model shows that the experience of domestic
violence was increased with an increase in women’s
age. The odds of experiencing domestic violence were
2.8 times higher among women whose age group was
30–34 and 4.2 times higher for those aged 45–49 when
compared to women age 15–19 with (AOR = 2.8, 95%
CI 1.05, 4.54) and (AOR = 4.2, 95% CI 1.82, 9.82),
respectively.
Women from the richest family were 59% and those
from richer families were 45% less likely to experience
domestic violence when compared to those women from
the poorest household with (AOR = 0.41, 95% CI 0.22,
0.77), (AOR = 0.55, 95% CI 0.36, 0.84), respectively.
Women whose partners drink alcohol were 2.7 times
more likely to experience domestic violence when compared
to those whose partners do not drink alcohol with
(AOR = 2.7, 95% CI 1.84, 4.01).
The Odds of experiencing domestic violence among
women who witnessed family violence during childhood
were 2.5 times higher than those who do not saw family
violence (AOR = 2.5, 95% CI 1.86, 3.37).
Women whose partners exhibit at least one type of
marital controlling behavior were 4.2 times more likely
to experience domestic violence when compared to those
whose partners don’t exhibit any kind of marital controlling
behavior with (AOR = 4.2, 95% CI 3.09, 5.63).
The Odds of domestic violence was 5.4 times higher
among women who were afraid of their partner most of
the time and 2.5 times higher among women who were
sometimes afraid of their partner when compared to
those who don’t afraid of their partner (AOR = 5.4, 95%
CI 3.560, 8.132) and (AOR = 2.5, 95% CI 1.652, 3.726),
respectively. Table 5 shows the output from multilevel
logistic regression.
Model comparison
The logistic regression model and the two-level generalized
mixed model were compared based upon their loglikelihood
ratio and the two criterion measures (AIC and
BIC). The model with a small AIC and BIC measure was
considered the best-fitted model.
The output from the analysis shows that employing a
two-level generalized mixed model could not improve
the model fitness. Rather logistic regression analysis is
considered as the best-fitted model since it has significantly
lower AIC and BIC values. Table 6 shows AIC and
BIC values for logistic regression and generalized mixed
model.
Discussion
A nationally representative sample of EDHS 2016 data
was used to determine the spatial distribution and determinants
of spousal violence in Ethiopia. Almost one-third
(34%) of women aged 15–49 have experienced domestic
violence in their lifetime. And 24%, 23.5%, and 10.1% of
women were emotionally, physically, and sexually abused
by their partners, respectively. This finding is in line with
WHO prevalence estimates of intimate partner violence
for African countries [6], a study conducted in Ghana
[2], and almost similar to the 2016 DHS national report
[7]. This high prevalence suggests that domestic violence
continues to be the main social and public health problem
in the country.
The study also reveals that the spatial pattern of IPV
was not random in Ethiopia. The Global Moran I value
of 0.26 and the Z value of 8.29 with a P value < 0.0001
indicate that there has been a significant clustering of
domestic violence in the country. This means that the
distribution of IPV violence cases varies from one part
of the country to the other. The Anselin Local hot spot
analysis identifies hot spots, cold spots, and outlier clusters
of IPV. Local Anselin hot spot analysis identifies hot
spots, cold spots, and outlying clusters of IPV. Hotspot
clusters are zones where high values are surrounded by
high values and cold spots are zones where low values are
surrounded by similar values. On the other hand, clusters
are called outliers when high values are enclosed with low
values or vice versa. In this study, hot spot clusters of IPV
were observed in Amhara, Oromia, and SNNP regional
states. Of the Amhara region, particularly in the East and
West Gojam areas, the North and South Gondar areas,
and the South Wollo area. In the Oromia region (West
Arsi, Guji, Bale, and Jimma areas), and in the SNNP (Sidama,
Gedio, Dawro, and Gamo Gofa areas) were the
principals. In these regions, groups of women who have
experienced IPV have been observed. This suggests that
the magnitude of the problem is high and requires the
attention of the responsible agencies.
The majority of respondents from the Amhara region
reported that their husbands drunk alcohol. And, those
from Oromia and SNNP regions accept wife-beating as
justified action for the husband. This shows that Individual
and community-level factors such as high level of
alcohol consumption and community norm that encourage
VAW may be responsible for spatial variation in the
distribution of IPV. The spatial clustering of domestic
violence cases was also reported from a study conducted
in Brazil [13], a spatial epidemiologic study conducted in
Spain [11], and from a study conducted in Rwanda [14].
The result from Sat Scan analysis of the data identifies
primary and secondary most likely clusters. The
primary significant cluster was located in Oromia (Guji
and Borena zones), Somali (Liben and Afder zones), and
SNNP (Sidama zone) regions of the country. The secondary
cluster was located in the Amhara region east Gojam
Zone and in Oromia in the Jimma zone. Women living
in these clusters have a high risk of experiencing domestic
violence when compared to those who reside outside
these clusters. The identified clusters of IPV from Sat
scan analysis were similar to the output from the anseline
local cluster analysis indicating the identified locations of
clusters were real. The results from previous studies conducted
in foreign countries show that spatial variation in
the distribution of intimate partner violence clusters was
mainly attributed to neighborhood-level characteristics
[9, 10, 15]. A high risk of intimate partner violence was
observed among socio-economically disadvantaged communities,
high immigrant concentration, and a high level
of the public disorder [11]. In the current study, sufficient
community-level variables (neighborhood level) were
not included. Therefore, future studies may incorporate
community-level predictors when conducting similar
studies.
The result from logistic regression analysis shows that
woman’s age is significantly associated with domestic
violence. As a woman’s age increases, the likelihood of
experiencing domestic violence was also increased. The
reason why older age women have a high risk of experiencing
domestic violence when compared to younger
ones may be because older women are more likely to be
in a union for a longer time and this may increase their
risk for violence. This result is consistent with an ecological
study conducted in Brazil [16] and Nigeria [17].
The socio-economic status of women shows a significant
association with domestic violence. Women from
the richest family were 48% and those from richer 42%
lower risk of domestic violence than those from the
poorest households. This finding suggests that living in
poverty plays a significant role in experiencing domestic
violence. The finding from this study is supported by
studies from Brazil [18], Zambia [4], Rwanda [14], and
Ethiopia [8]. The relationship between low economic status
and domestic violence may be explained by a partner
with low income might not be able to support the household
expense properly and, this might also be one cause
for disputes.
This study also finds out that a partner’s alcohol use is
significantly associated with experiencing domestic violence.
A woman whose partner drink alcohol was 2.6
times more likely to experience domestic violence when
compared to those whose partner doesn’t drink alcohol.
This finding is in line with a previous study conducted on
14 sub-Saharan countries [19], with a study conducted
in Ghana [2], Nigeria [17], Zambia [4], a systematic
review in Ethiopia [8], and a study conducted in Southeast
Ethiopia [20]. The result of this study is lower than a
study conducted in southeast Oromia [21] and northwest
Ethiopia [22]. This difference may be due to differences
in the study population (because the previous studies are
conducted mainly among pregnant women) and sample
size differences (the current study was employed on large
sample size). Despite this difference, harmful alcohol
consumption by a partner is still considered the main risk
factor for IPV. The main reason why women whose partners
drink alcohol have a higher risk of domestic violence
could be because excessive alcohol drinking may affect
the cognitive function of the mind, reducing self-control
and makes individuals incapable of a peaceful resolution
to conflicts [23].
Respondent witnessing family violence as a child was
also show significant association with experiencing
domestic violence. A woman who saw family violence
as childhood was 2.2 times more likely to experience
domestic violence. This finding was consistent with a
previous study conducted in Nigeria [17], southeast Oromia
[21], and North West Ethiopia [24] but, lower than a
study conducted in Ghana [2]. The difference in results
between the current study and the study in Ghana may be
due to population differences. The relationship between
observing family violence and experience of domestic
violence may be explained as a child who witnesses family
violence may develop a behavioral or emotional problem
in letter life and this could make him/her incapable
to maintain stable relationship.
Marital controlling behaviors by partners also show
significant association with experiencing domestic violence.
Women whose partners exhibit at least one type
of marital controlling behaviors were 4 times more likely
to experience domestic violence when compared to those
whose partners do not exhibit any type of marital controlling
behaviors. The relationship between marital controlling
behaviors and experience of domestic violence
can be explained as: if one partner exhibits repetitive
marital controlling behaviors, good feeling and effective
communication will vanish between them and, this
could lead to disputes and the occurrence of violence.
The result of this study is in line with studies conducted
in Brazil [25], Nigeria [26], and southwest Ethiopia [27].
Afraid of a partner was also strongly associated with
experiencing domestic violence. Women who were occasionally
afraid of their partners’ were 2 times and those
who were frequently afraid were 6 times more likely to
experience domestic violence when compared to those
who do not afraid of their partners’. This finding is consistent
with a study from Nepal [28] and Uganda [29].
Afraid of partner was considered as the result of many
hostile behaviors and, it is mostly associated with many
violent activities [29].
Social norms are community-level factors identified
by previous studies to have a strong association with
domestic violence. The analysis of social factors by different
scholars shows that social norms can be manifested
in two ways the first one is through gender norms
and the second one is through gender norms perpetuating
violence against women. Gender norms are informal
social rules and expectations that distinguish males from
females whereas gender norms perpetuating violence
against women are norms that normalize violence within
a specified community [30]. The current study focus on
the second type of social norm; community acceptance
of wife-beating that shows a strong association with a
woman’s experience of domestic violence. Women who
live in a community where wife-beating for husband is
highly acceptable were 3.6 times more likely to experience
domestic violence when compared to those who do
not accept wife-beating. This result shows that the existence
of a permissive social norm in the community plays
a significant role in facing domestic violence by a woman.
This finding is consistent with two previous studies from
Nigeria [17, 31] and a study from Ethiopia [32].
This study has some limitations. The first one is sufficient
community-level predictors of IPV were not
included in this study. Therefore, it may not answer the
reason why the distribution of IPV varies across communities
properly. This may be one direction for future
studies. The other limitation is to protect the confidentiality
of respondents, location data in EDHS 2016 was
displaced by 2 KM for urban areas and, 5 KM for rural.
Thus, the study may not display the actual locations of
IPV clusters.
Conclusion
The output from the spatial analysis shows significant
clustering of domestic violence cases in Ethiopia. Primary
clusters were observed in southern Oromia, Somali, and
some parts of SNNP whereas, secondary clusters were
observed in Amhara and Oromia regional states.
In this study, a strong association of domestic violence
with an individual, relationship, and communitylevel
predictors were observed. The output from logistic
regression shows that partner’s alcohol use, witnessing
family violence as a child, marital controlling behaviors,
fear of partner, and community acceptance of wife-beating
were predictors of domestic violence.
Prevention and control of IPV is the shared responsibility
of everyone. All parties including governmental
organizations, non-government organizations, the scientific
community, community leaders, and every individual
should be involved. Based upon the findings, we
forward the following recommendations:
• The government should give prior concern for controlling
factors such as high level of alcohol consumption
and social norms that encourage violence
against women that were responsible for experiencing
IPV in the identified hot spot areas when employing
any interventional activities.
• Training on how to maintain stable relationships
should be given to couples before getting into marriage.
• The scientific community needs to expose the hidden
reality behind closed doors by conducting scientific
researches.