Background
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the main
causes of female infertility, with an incidence of about
6–12% in women of childbearing age [1, 2]. In recent
years, with the improvement of living conditions, and
the changes in the living environment of human beings,
the onset of PCOS has increased significantly [3]. PCOS
mainly manifests as imbalance of hypothalamic pituitary
ovarian axis and metabolic disorders throughout the
body. Its typical clinical features are irregular menstruation,
chronic anovulation, obesity, hairiness, androgenemia,
and some patients may be accompanied by
metabolic abnormalities [4]. The tissue-specific Myo-inositol
(MI) and D-chiro-inositol (DCI) ratio is modulated
by insulin through aromatase and is altered in insulin
resistance (IR), with reduced epimerization of MI to DCI
in insulin-sensitive tissues [5]. It’s been reported that it
has been dramatically reduced by insulin-stimulated
epimerase in hyperinsulinemic women with PCOS, yet
the potential mechanisms remain unclear [6, 7]. Therefore,
in-depth research on the pathogenesis of PCOS is of
great significance for improving the prognosis and quality
of life of these patients.
Although the pathogenesis of PCOS is still not completely
clear, IR and its compensatory hyperinsulinemia
are one of its pathogenesis, and it’s been reported
that 70% PCOS patients have the symptoms of IR [8,
9]. β-trophin, which is secreted by the liver and adipose
tissue, has been found that plays a dual role in regulating
lipid metabolism and improving glucose tolerance
[10]. Previous studies [11, 12] have shown that serum
β-trophin levels are higher in patients with IR-related
metabolic diseases (diabetes, obesity, etc.), yet the role of
β-trophin in PCOS needs further investigation. In recent
years, studies [13, 14] have shown that ovarian angiogenesis
and interstitial blood flow increase in patients with
PCOS, so angiogenesis disorders may be one of the main
reasons for the occurrence and development of PCOS.
Endostatin (ES) is an angiogenesis inhibitor, which can
inhibit the proliferation of new blood vessels [15]. Previous
studies [16, 17] have shown that the levels of ES in
patients with PCOS are abnormally elevated, but the specific
mechanism needs further research. Therefore, we
aimed to analyze the role of β-trophin and ES in patients
with PCOS, to provide the insights and evidences into
the treatment of PCOS.
Methods
Ethical consideration
The ethical approvals had been obtained from the ethical
committee of The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University (2018120609-1c), and the
written informed consents had been obtained from all
the included participants. All the subjects were fully
informed and volunteered to participate in the study. We
aimed to conduct and report this study in comply with
the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies
in Epidemiology (STROBE) Statement.
Participants
Newly diagnosed PCOS patients treated in our hospital
during December 2018 to February 2020 were selected
as the study subjects. The diagnosis of PCOS was made
according to the Rotterdam’s criteria [18, 19]. The inclusion
criteria for included patients were: (1) the age was
≥ 18 years and ≤ 35 years; (2) thin ovulation or anovulation;
(3) clinical and biochemical manifestations of
high androgens (including facial, prothoracic, and back
area etc. for three consecutive months with multiple
acne, hairy, seborrheic dermatitis, Total testosterone
or androstenedione is higher than the normal reference
value in the laboratory test); (4) polycystic changes in the
ovaries are detected by ultrasound (the number of follicles
with a diameter of 2–9 mm in one or both ovaries
≥ 12 and/or ovarian volume ≥ 10 mL). The exclusion
criteria were as following: exclusion criteria: (1) patient
complicated other diseases that cause elevated androgens,
such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing
syndrome. And other diseases that cause ovulation disorders,
such as hyperprolactinemia, abnormal thyroid
function, premature ovarian failure, and pituitary or
hypothalamic amenorrhea; (2) presence of moderate and
severe hepatorenal dysfunction, or autoimmune disease;
(3) presence of acute and chronic infectious diseases; (4)
those who took hormones and other drugs that affect
glucose and lipid metabolism in nearly three months.
Meanwhile, we selected healthy women who took physical
examination in our hospital during the same period
as healthy controls. The inclusion criteria were: (1) the
menstrual cycle was regular and normal (28–35 days);
(2) no clinical and biochemical manifestations of high
androgen; (3) no polycystic ovarian changes were found
under ultrasound detection.
Data collection
The personal information such as the date of birth,
menarche age, menstrual cycle, the time of menstruation
disorder began, and the beginning time of hair change. At
the same time, we measured the height (m), body weight
(kg), and waist and hip circumference (cm). We calculated
the body mass index (BMI) and waist to hip (WHR),
and WHR = waist/hip circumference.
Biochemical analysis
We collected 5 ml blood from the elbow vein on an
empty stomach in the early morning (at least 8 h of fasting)
from all participants. All blood samples were kept
at room temperature for 30 min, and then centrifuged
at 4000 r/min for 10 min. Then the serum was collected
and stored in a refrigerator at − 80 °C. Following indicators
were analyzed in our laboratory: fasting blood glucose
(FBG), fasting insulin (FINS), luteinizing hormone
(LH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), total testostrone
(TT), androstendion (AND), sex hormone-binding
globulin (SHBG), total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride
(TG), high-density lipoprotein (high-ddensity lipoprotein
(HDL), low-density lipoprotein (HDL). Besides, we
calculated the homeostatic model assessment insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR): HOMA-IR = (FBG × FINS)/22.5.
Free testosterone index (FAI) = total testosterone (TT)/
SHBG × 100.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) kits
(Shengmin, Hangzhou) were used to determine the
serum β-trophin and ES level. All the operating procedures
were performed strictly in accordance with the
instructions.
Statistical methods
This present study used SPSS 23. 0 statistical software for
data analysis. The data conforms to the normal distribution
and the variance is expressed by  ± s , otherwise it
was expressed by M (P25, P75) and compared by log conversion
to a normal distribution. T tests were conducted
for comparing two independent samples. The relationship
between variables was analyzed by Pearson correlation,
and the influencing factors of β-trophin and ES were
analyzed by logistic regression. The differences were considered
as statistically significant if the p < 0.05.
Results
The characteristics of included participants
A total of 62 PCOS patients and 65 healthy controls were
included in this present study. As Table 1 presented,
there wasn’t any significant difference on the age between
PCOS patients and healthy controls (p = 0.189). The BMI,
WHI, LH, FSH, TT, FAI, FBG, FINS, HOMA-IR, TC,
TG, LDL, ES in PCOS patients were significantly higher
than that of healthy controls, while the SHBG and HDL
in PCOS patients were significantly lower than that of
healthy controls (all p < 0.05).
The correlation analysis
As Table 2 presented, β-trophin was closely associated
with BMI (r = 0.427), WHR (r = 0.504), FBG (r = 0.385),
TG (r = 0.405) and LDL (r = 0.302, all p < 0.05), and
ES was closely associated with BMI (r = 0.358), WHR
(r = 0.421), FBG (r = 0.343), TC (r = 0.319), TG (r = 0.404,
all p < 0.05).
Logistic regression analysis
Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed
with serum β-trophin as the dependent variable and
BMI, WHR, FBG, TG and LDL as independent variables.
The results showed that TG, BMI, WHR and FBG
were the main factors affecting the serum β-trophin
levels (all p < 0.05, Table 3).
Multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed
with ES as the dependent variable and BMI,
WHR, FBG, TC and TG as independent variables.
The results showed that FBG, TC and BMI were the
main factors affecting the serum ES levels (all p < 0.05,
Table 4).
The comparison on the indicators of PCOS patients
with and without IR
According to the HOMA-IR, the PCOS patients were
divided into IR group (n = 38, HOMA-IR ≥ 2.69) and
a non-IR group (n = 28, HOMA-IR < 2.69), we have
checked and adjusted the BMI and WHR for IR comparison.
As Table 5 presented, the TG, β-trophin, ES level
in PCOS patients with IR were significantly higher than
that of those without IR (all p < 0.05); There were no significant
differences in age, BMI, WHI, LH, FSH,TT,FAI,
SHBG, AND, FBG,FINS, HOMA-IR,TC,HDL, LDL
between two groups (all p > 0.05, Table 5).
Discussion
Previous studies [20, 21] have pointed out that the incidence
of PCOS in women of childbearing age ranges
from 10 to 15%, and it remains an increasing trend. Angiogenesis
is the basis for the growth of various tissues and
organs in the body, but abnormal proliferation of blood
vessels can cause diseases such as tumors and cysts in the
body [22]. The main motive force and nutrients of vascular
hyperplasia come from the blood supply [23]. When
the blood supply increases, the nutrients absorbed by the
new blood vessels will increase, which will accelerate the
proliferation of new blood vessels. β-trophin is one of
the most critical factors regulating angiogenesis, which
can promote the proliferation of vascular endothelial
cells and regulate vascular permeability [24]. Studies [25,
26] have shown that the abnormal expression, secretion
and release of β-trophin in the ovaries may be one of the
pathogenesis of PCOS. ES can selectively affect the vascular
endothelial cells to inhibit the growth of endothelial
cells and inhibit the formation of new blood vessels [27].
Related studies [28–30] have shown that in the serum of
patients with ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer, breast
cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and other tumors, the
β-trophin and ES concentrations have increased significantly.
However, there are very few systematic reports to
date on the correlation between β-trophin, ES and PCOS.
In this context, we conducted this present study to identify
the role of serum β-trophin, ES expression levels in
the development of PCOS, the results have indicated that
both serum β-trophin, ES are closely associated with the
progress of PCOS, and they are highly involved in the
process of IR, both β-trophin and ES may be sensitive
indicators for the development of PCOS, and they may
be the effective targets for the treatment of PCOS.
The cross-talk between altered metabolic and hormonal
homeostasis in PCOS women must be considered. MI
and DCI have been classified as insulin-sensitizers and
seem to adequately counteract several InsR-related metabolic
alterations with a safe nutraceutical profile [31]. It’s
been reported that DCI-phosphoglycan and MI-phosphoglycan
control key enzymes were involved in glucose
and lipid metabolism [32, 33]. β-trophin is a highly
effective and specific pro-angiogenic factor, which acts
through tyrosine kinase receptors to promote increased
vascular permeability, extracellular matrix degeneration,
and vascular endothelial cell migration [34, 35]. In addition,
elevated levels of androgen in patients with PCOS
also lead to increased levels of β-trophin secreted by
ovarian cells, which in turn exacerbates vascular proliferation
in these patients [36]. ES is a highly effective
and specific angiogenesis inhibitor. It mainly inhibits the
proliferation of vascular endothelium in PCOS patients
by promoting apoptosis of endothelial cells, thereby
effectively inhibiting the formation of new blood vessels
in PCOS patients [37]. Interesting, this present study has
also found that the levels of β-trophin and ES in the IR
group were higher than those in the non-IR group, suggesting
that changes in serum β-trophin and ES levels
are closely related to insulin resistance in patients with
PCOS. It can be explained that the insulin can aggravate
the activity of vascular endothelial cells and activate
the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, resulting in
elevated serum β-trophin and ES levels in patients with
PCOS.
Previous studies [38, 39] have shown that β-trophin is
mainly expressed by liver and adipose tissue in mice and
is mainly secreted by liver in humans. Animal experiments
[40, 41] have confirmed that in mice with betatrophin
overexpression, the blood TG levels have increased
significantly. While in β-trophin knockout mice, the
blood TG level is decreased accordingly, and lipase activity
increased. It is reported that β-trophin may regulate
lipid metabolism by inhibiting lipase activity [42]. It is
speculated that it may be involved in lipid metabolism
disorders in patients with PCOS. The results of this study
have showed that the serum β-trophin of PCOS patients
is positively correlated with TG, and TG is an independent
influencing factor of β-trophin, which is consistent
with previous findings [43, 44].
Several limitations in this present study should be
concerned. Firstly, we selected newly diagnosed PCOS
patients treated in our hospital during December 2018
to February 2020 as targeted population, we did not perform
sample size calculation, the sample size was rather
small, it might fail to power enough to detect the potential
associations. Secondly, we only detected the related
indicators in newly diagnosed patients at the very first
begning, and the dynamic changes of serum β-trophin
and ES cannot be reflected. Besides, the molecular ratio
of ES vs. β-trophin may be more helpful to show that if
this parallel rise is comparable with controls or higher in
either PCOS group, due to limited data, we cannot perform
analysis on this issue. In the future, the molecular
ratio of ES vs. β-trophin patients at different stages of the
disease should be detected to further explore its relationship
with PCOS. However, the advantage of this study
is that the included PCOS patients are all newly diagnosed
patients without serious glucose and lipid metabolism
disorders, which may avoid the effect of drugs on
β-trophin and EG, so it may more accurately reflect the
related indicators of PCOS patients.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the serum β-trophin and EG level in
PCOS patients are higher than that of healthy people,
both β-trophin and EG are closely related to PCOS.
Furthermore, the role of β-trophin and EG may be highly
associated with the glucose and lipid metabolism. Therefore,
the detection of β-trophin and EG in patients’ serum
can be used to make the diagnostic and prognostic evaluation
of PCOS. Further investigations in the future are
needed to elucidate the potential mechanisms.