Background
The term women’s empowerment emerged in the 1970s
in response to the need for social justice and gender
equality [1, 2]. As the term evolved in the 1990s, it was
increasingly applied to women who were oppressed and
lacking the freedom of choice and action to shape their
lives, as well as to discuss women’s participation across
multiple sectors in society. More recently it has been
used as an outcome and a goal to be achieved is to balance
the scales of gender equality and equity. For this
research, the definition used regarding women’s empowerment
is a process by which women who have experienced
oppression acquire the ability to make autonomous
and strategic life choices based on their personal priorities.
Empowerment is achieved when a woman has the
resources, agency, and capabilities to execute decisions
on matters of importance [3, 4].
Globally women are more likely to experience less
favourable social determinants of health (such as overrepresentation
of women in low-paying, insecure
employment; lower education and literacy levels amongst
rural and immigrant women) than their male counterparts.
Women carry the bulk of responsibility for raising
children and meeting household obligations, which,
globally, contribute to this continued disadvantage [5–7].
Due to a lack of affordable and quality daycare, women
are over-represented in part-time work force, and often
remain within low-income bracket [5–8]. Gender, as a
social determinant of health, is influenced by the “gendered”
norms of the roles, personality traits, attitudes,
relative power, and influence that society ascribes to it
[9, 10]. The transition from the Millennium Development
Goals to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
in 2015 saw the emergence of Target 5 which aims to
“Achieve gender equality and empower all women and
girls” (p. 20) [11]. A major SDG indicator supporting
attainment of women’s empowerment is “enhancing the
use of enabling technology by increasing the proportion
of women and girls who have access” (p. 20) [11].
Information and communication technologies (ICTs)
have catalyzed communication and networking between
and among people on a global scale. However, as ICTs
have become ubiquitous and grown in both type and
access, a digital divide has emerged. This divide parallels
gaps in social contexts, such as income and education, as
those who use and benefit from access to technologies
often have other resources more readily available [12].
This divide widens the inequity and inequality gaps based
on gender, age, disability, or socioeconomic status [13,
14].
Women’s empowerment and ICTs have been the subject
of global goals, discussions, and debates for many
decades [15, 16]. Global discussions, such as the 1995
World Conference on Women: Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, deliberated and advocated for the
inclusion of women in the information society in order to
fully achieve women’s empowerment in connection with
ICT. In 2013, 200 million more men had access to the
internet than women [17]. Women use ICTs much less
frequently and intensely than men [18–21] In 2016, the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) stated
that the percentage of women gaining access to ICT is
actually decreasing—with women utilizing ICTs 11% less
than men in 2013 and 12% less than men in 2016 [19].
The most recent 2018 report indicated that the overall
proportion of internet usage for women was 12% lower
than men [19].
The extant evidence lacks sufficient depth and detail
as to exactly how ICTs are being used by women and
why they use it less frequently. An important aspect of
empowerment in the context of ICTs is gaining a clearer
picture as to the type of technologies and technological
interventions being used by women. Many authors agree
that improved access to ICTs can assist in providing
women with employment resources and opportunities
that could narrow the gender wage gap, assist in making
education and health information more accessible, contribute
to the end of violence against women, and lead to
women’s empowerment and leadership [15, 22–24].
The objectives of this research were to: determine
how the concept of empowerment is defined, utilized,
and measured in research studies; explore existing evidence
regarding the use of ICTs as interventions towards
achieving women’s empowerment; and explore the gaps
in knowledge and research on this topic from an individual,
community, and global perspective.
Methods
This research involved a scoping review, which is methodologically
similar to a systematic review, to provide
a rigourous synthesis of existing evidence [25, 26] For
the purpose of this study, the scoping review framework
used was described by Arksey and O’Malley [27]
as a five-step process with an optional sixth step. These
steps include: (1) identifying the research question, as the
starting point to guide the search strategy; (2) identifying
relevant studies, which involved the development of
a comprehensive search strategy to ensure accurate and
complete results; (3) selecting studies, which involved
developing a-priori inclusion and exclusion criteria that
were revised throughout the review process, as familiarity
with the evidence increased; (4) charting the data,
which involved charting and sorting key material from
the results into themes and trends; (5) collating, summarizing,
and reporting the results, which involved presenting
the results as a narrative; and (6) consulting with
relevant stakeholders, which is contingent upon time
and resource considerations. For the purposes of this
research, the sixth step was not performed.
Review protocol, team, and management
To ensure transparency, rigour, reproducibility, and consistency,
protocols were developed prior to the start of
the research, for the inclusion criteria, search strategy,
and data characterization. This helped to ensure an unbiased
approach to the search protocol and to enhance
rigour [27]. These are available upon request. The scoping
review was conducted by a team of individuals with
multi-disciplinary capabilities in nursing, knowledge
synthesis methodologies, and ICTs. The primary reviewers
included the lead and co-authors, as well as one
research assistant. In addition, a University librarian was
consulted throughout the search term selection process
to ensure completeness and accuracy of search terms as
well as a comprehensive and complete search strategy.
Any and all potentially relevant citations identified
throughout all stages were imported into EndNote™, a
reference management software, where duplicates were
removed by the program and then double checked, and
manually removed by the lead author; the list of citations
was then imported into a web-based electronic systematic
review management platform, DistillerSR™. The
screening for article relevance, up to the data extraction
stages, were conducted using this software. Two reviewers
(i.e., lead author and research assistant) were involved
throughout the selection and analysis process to ensure
consistency, adherence to the inclusion/exclusion criteria,
relevance to the research question, as well as the categorization
of data into themes and patterns. As part of
this process, all articles were screened by the lead author
and research assistant. Any discrepancies were brought
forward to the co-author who made an independent decision
whether to include or exclude the article.
Review intent and scope
This was part of a broader study aimed at addressing the
following question: What is the global impact of ICTs
on women’s empowerment? The current review aimed
to examine the concept of empowerment, while exploring
the evidence on ICTs as interventions for achieving
women’s empowerment at the individual, community,
and global levels.
Search strategy
The authors ensured identification of relevant and suitable
publications by creating a search strategy protocol
prior to retrieving evidence from a variety of sources.
As per Arksey and O’Malley [27], the following avenues
were reviewed as part of the search strategy: searching
relevant electronic databases, reviewing reference lists
of pertinent articles to identify additional sources, and
manually searching key journals.
To ensure the search was comprehensive, the following
databases, available through the University of Saskatchewan
library, were searched on November 30, 2016
and updated on January 1, 2018: Scopus, Embase, ABI
Inform, Soc Index, Sociological Abstracts, Gender Studies,
Springer Link, PsychInfo, Science Direct, and Academic
Search Complete. The COCHRANE Library was
also searched for any relevant trials in the trial registry.
Limits placed on the search included: English only, no
book reviews, publications dated 2012–2017, and the
protocol was pretested in Scopus and Soc Index using
select key words including “women” and “empowerment”
and “technology.” An illustration of the search term strategy
is presented in Table 1.
Search terms were drawn from the research question,
as well as from lengthy discussions with the university
librarian and expanded upon based on a cursory
search of two databases. To determine the range and
breadth of key terms, an initial limited search of two
databases was conducted yielding several papers. These
databases were determined in consultation with the
university librarian and included Scopus and Gender
Studies. These papers were then analyzed for similar
keywords, definitions, analogies, and index terms that
were relevant synonyms to the initial search words [28,
29]. These additional terms were added to a master list
that informed the final search strategy. Specifically, for
the term empowerment, keywords were chosen that
could provide results that included a lack of empowerment
as well, thus the inclusion of “barrier” and “disempower”.
The other search terms came directly from
key articles and databases and were demonstrated to be
the most common variations on the term “empower”.
An additional term that was used interchangeably with
“empower” was “agency”, however, as this term is used
more frequently in conjunction with organizations and
not empowerment, it was removed from the search
term list.
The ability of the electronic database search to identify
all relevant primary research was verified by hand
searching the reference lists of eight key peer reviewed
articles and nine key electronic journals that were flagged
through the initial test search as well as the main search.
The journals were chosen based on their relevance to the
research question as well as their scholarly nature. The
initial three identified journals were: Community Informatics,
Gender and Development, and Journal of Women
in Culture and Society. Subsequent journals were identified
and selected for a hand-search once the initial search
was completed. These were: Gender, Technology & Development,
Computers in Human Behaviour, American
Journal of Health Behaviour, American Journal of Public
Health, and Women’s Health Issues. These journals were
then reviewed for additional articles potentially not identified
through the database search; this included entering
the general search into journal databases.
Additional grey literature was identified by handsearching
the websites of the Association for Computing
Machinery Digital Library Journals and Conference Proceedings,
the UN Women, Status of Women Canada, the
United Nations Development Program, the International
Center for the Research of Women, the Girls Action
Foundation, the Information and Communications Technology
Council, the ITU, and the International Development
Research Center for primary research reports,
guidelines, situation reports, and referenced publications
that were not already included.
Study selection: relevance screening and inclusion criteria
The focus of the study selection was locating published
and unpublished academic articles, which may have any
type of study design, including qualitative, quantitative,
or mixed methods. The initial pool of results included
a total of 4481 citations. An initial set of inclusion and
exclusion criteria were developed a-priori to screen
abstracts and titles of citations which were refined during
each review of the pool of articles. Research articles
were initially considered relevant if they included women’s
empowerment and/or information and communication
technology concepts in the title or abstract of the
publication. Synonyms for these concepts were created in
consultation with the librarian to ensure a robust search
strategy for maximum location and inclusion of studies.
Given the evolving nature of ICTs and their role in
interventions, the authors wanted the articles to reflect a
recent knowledge base, therefore the timeframe of 2012–
2016 was chosen, which was later expanded to December
31, 2017 as the review progressed. The results were also
filtered to include English only content.
First screen: inclusion criteria
The inclusion criteria created for the first level of study
selection were driven by the review topics, specifically,
women, empowerment, and ICTs. According to the
Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) (2015), the inclusion criteria
should be based on three themes, also known by the
acronym of PCC: (a) participant description, (b) concept,
which is likened to the phenomena of interest, and (c)
context. The inclusion criteria used in the first level of
selection were country of publication, date of publication
(2012–2017), and the use of both of the following concepts
in the title or abstract of the publication: women’s
empowerment and/or information and communication
technology. At this stage, the lead author looked for the
presence of the key words in the title and/or abstract. The
use of these keywords as inclusion criteria was designed
to be intentionally broad to provide a sense of what publications
linked the two concepts (i.e., women’s empowerment
and ICTs).
First screen: study selection
On first review, the initial pool of articles was subjected
to a staged process to ensure studies were selected that
were relevant to the research question and met the
inclusion criteria. Articles were first excluded based on
duplication within the initial search results. This exclusion
was conducted using the search tools feature within
the electronic database, but also within the reference
management program Endnote™ and then manually by
the lead author. The inclusion criteria were applied to the
title and abstract of the publication. Any title or abstract
that did not meet the inclusion criteria was removed from
further review and consideration. All articles excluded
by the criteria were sent to the research assistant who
confirmed the exclusion. Any disagreements or contradictions
between the primary author and the research
assistant were thoroughly discussed, with both parties
having to agree to the inclusion before the publication
could be added back into the pool of articles to move on
to the next stage. Additionally, if an article could not be
excluded based solely on the title or the abstract, the full
article was reviewed for relevance to the research question
and inclusion criteria. These latter two points did
not prove to be an issue as there were no disagreements.
Second screen
The remaining pool of articles was then reviewed a second
time by applying a second level of inclusion criteria
to the title as well as the abstract. It is common and
encouraged as part of the scoping review process to generate
increased cumulative familiarity with how concepts
are presented within the evidence. This, in turn, informed
the decisions that were made regarding the inclusion or
exclusion criteria in the subsequent stage. Much of the
articles after the first level of elimination included technology
as a passive aspect of the study and not one that
women actively participated in. It was important for the
authors that the technological aspect of each study be an
intervention that women could engage in towards building
self-efficacy and capacity. This informs current gaps
within the evidence that speak to how women are using
technologies to support their empowerment. As such,
this set of inclusion criteria focused on technology as
an intervention and women as active participants in the
study instead of just the word “women” found throughout
the first set of criteria.
Final screen
For the final review of the full text articles, based on the
content and findings in the scoping review process, an
additional criterion was included. The authors wanted to
explore how the social determinants of health informed
and supported the concepts of women, empowerment,
and ICTs. At this stage, it was noted which social determinants
of health, if any, were present in each article.
The list of social determinants based on the Government
of Canada (2019) criterion was utilized as a reference
for this portion of the process, such as employment
and working conditions; income and social status; social
supports and coping skills. The remaining 59 articles all
had social determinants of health. A subsequent review
resulted in 14 of the 59 articles being eliminated from
consideration as they did not meet the inclusion/exclusion
criteria. Rather than focus on a range of these determinants,
the authors decided to include all 45 articles
and to then review the implications of this finding in the
analysis (Fig. 1).
Re‑run searches
Due to the extended time to conduct the review, the
authors included re-run searches for each database up
to January 1, 2018. A total of 573 articles were found in
all 10 of the main electronic databases. Using the inclusion
and exclusion criteria previously described all but
six articles were eliminated through the first and second
stages in the review process. The final total number of
articles included in the analysis was 51.
Study characteristics, extraction, and charting
The final step in the Arksey and O’Malley’s [27] scoping
review framework was to collate and summarize the
results for presentation and discussion. Each selected
article was summarized in a customized data characterization
utility form to guide data extraction. The goal
of this step was to determine and chart factors to be
extracted from each article to help answer the research
question [26, 27, 30]. The charting of data was an iterative
and exploratory process in which the data charts were
continuously updated to ensure completeness and accuracy
[26, 30]. Data extracted from the charts included
year of publication, country of study, implications for
policy and practice, types of ICT interventions, demographics,
empowerment (definition, as a design consideration,
and measures), and social determinants of health
(presence and description within in the study). All data
were then analyzed using thematic analysis and the main
ideas refined over several iterations. The data were then
mapped using tabular and visual presentations of the
main conceptual categories followed by a narrative summary
describing how the results related to the research
question and objectives.
Results
Demographics and study characteristics
The geographic range of the included evidence was
global; however, 41.1% (21/51) described research conducted
in the USA. Seven studies were conducted in
India, three in Australia, three in Sweden, and two in
Canada. One study was conducted in each of the following
countries: Finland, Ghana, Italy, Japan, Nepal, Netherlands,
Nigeria, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka,
Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda, and United Kingdom.
Collation and comparison of demographics was difficult
due to a lack of consistency in reporting. However,
all articles described the demographics of women who
were the primary focus of the study. Seventy eight percent
of the articles (40/51) reported on some or all of the
descriptive study characteristics. The age of participants
was frequently reported although there were inconsistent
age groupings across the studies. Some articles only
reported the mean age of participants, while others provided
only an age range. The lowest mean age reported
was 24 years while the highest was 59.6 years; the categories
ranged from less than 16 years to 64 years and older.
It is difficult to compare these age ranges as the categories
varied in the included articles, and it was unclear as
to whether age was simply a descriptive statistic designed
to describe the sample or whether it was reflected upon
consistently in terms of the overall implications to the
study.
Missing from the studies were the perspectives and
participation of women who could not access, afford,
and/or purchase an ICT device as well as effectively and
fully utilize it to support their empowerment. Exclusion
criteria used in the individual 51 studies illustrate that
women not already owning a mobile device, computer, or
tablet were eliminated from participating in the research.
Empowerment definition
In the included studies, the concept of empowerment
was used incongruously with terms like self-concept,
self-esteem, and self-worth, sometimes by the same
author in the same study, which further limited our ability
to achieve a uniform definition for the purposes of
this research. Less than one quarter (12/51) of the studies
used the term “empower(ment)” in their definition of the
concept of interest. These studies defined empowerment
as a process but with different foci: as individuals having
choice or control over their decisions [31–38], as being
multi-dimensional and influencing a variety of areas [34,
37, 39, 40] or with a focus on building individuals’ capacities,
including internal and external resources [39–42].
The remaining studies described empowerment in a
more indirect way, never including the term “empower”
or “disempower.” Instead, the term empowerment was
described in synonymous terms, for instance, half (28/51)
described the concept of empowerment as the process of
enabling a sense of self-efficacy or self-worth in the ability
to overcome barriers to resources, as well as the barriers
to decision-making control [43–70]. One fifth (11/51)
described empowerment as the process enabling a sense
of self-efficacy or self-worth in the ability to overcome
barriers to control over resources [71–81].
Measures of empowerment
All studies considered the concept of empowerment
in their design; 80% (41/51) of the articles considered
empowerment as a primary outcome of the study. No
measures of empowerment were specifically cited in any
of the articles, beyond the measures of the behaviour
being studied. Several studies included various measures
of self-efficacy (i.e., childbirth [74], physical activity
[56, 67, 71, 74, 80, 81], intimate partner violence [72],
caregiving [75], barrier [55, 56], health [78], and chronic
disease management [77]). The authors of the articles did
not compare the different types of self-efficacy scales for
validity of empowerment. The diversity of the scales illustrates
a focus on improving efficacy of individual behaviors
rather than the holistic empowerment of women.
ICT interventions to support women’s capacity and tools
The articles described a range of supportive ICT interventions,
though with inconsistent and overlapping classification.
The specific types of interventions covered in
the 51 articles included web-based devices (17), the internet
(19), particular websites (3), blogs (1), text messaging
(4), telemedicine (1), video (1), apps (5), social media (2),
computers (6), email (1) and Fitbit™ (1). Our categorization
of ICTs focused on how the specific interventions
were utilized in the day to day lives of women and were
obtained from a thematic analysis of the types of ICTs
used by women in the studies. The themes included (1)
Outreach; (2) Education; (3) Lifestyle (4) Health Challenges;
(5) Prevention; and (6) Perception of Barriers.
Outreach
Ten of the 51 articles reviewed described supportive ICT
interventions as a means of outreach or connecting with
clients in the community. Common themes in this section
included supporting women where they are at in the
community, in terms of their social position, to enhance
positive health behaviours with technological assistance,
as well as overall enhanced accessibility to ICTs. This
was accomplished through Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
using computers [46], and web-based decision aid
for understanding fetal anomalies [47]. Educational text
messages were sent to encourage breastfeeding [79], and
general health promotion interventions were delivered as
well [43, 44, 56, 65, 73, 75, 80].
Education
Six articles described supportive ICT interventions that
delivered various health information, through smartphones
or other web-based devices. These included Facebook
™ virtual learning systems [34], psychoeducation for
breast cancer patients [35], as well as interactive voice
response as a tool for improving access to healthcare in
remote areas [59]. Other interventions included English
language programs [70], antenatal perineal massage
support groups [76], as well as support for enhancing
doctor-patient relationships. [64].
Lifestyle
Twelve articles described supportive ICT interventions
that focused on behavioural outcomes related to general
lifestyle areas, using web-based devices. Commonly,
the interventions provided some form of external support
for women to improve their overall way of being
healthy. These included improving nutrition knowledge
and behaviours [67, 69], promoting healthy food planning,
shopping, and eating behaviours [54], interventions
for weight loss behaviours, [45] and engagement
with physical activity coaching [55, 71, 74]. Many of the
interventions focused on social networks [9, 48], for
example, peer support for building social capital [52], and
promoting social behaviours through an iPad book club
[81].
Health challenges
Eleven articles described ICT interventions that focused
on using web-based devices to address specific health
challenges. The health challenges largely focusing on
ways to enhance maintenance of women’s health, for
example, self-paced education programs for those who
experience intimate partner, as well as dating violence
[33, 41, 72], and educational training to enhance understanding
and management of chronic illness [77]. The
interventions addressing health challenges were concentrated
on those that affect women only, for example
educational training for patients with breast cancer [38,
61], health modules for those with breast cancer [78] and
stress incontinence [63] and advanced care planning for
women with ovarian cancer [49].
Prevention
A few articles (3/51) described ICT interventions that
focused on preventing specific health challenges using
web-based devices. One intervention focused on the prevention
of sexual and reproductive illness using education
information [57]. Another encouraged vaccination
behaviors and immunization with educational information
[58] as well as the prevention of pre-eclampsia in
rural developing countries using diagnostic tools [51].
One study focused on utilizing mobile phones to manage
money transfers to support transport of women with fistula
to urban hospitals [60] and another examined electronic
health records to improve breast cancer screening
[53].
Perceptions of barriers
Nine articles described ICT interventions that focused
on the perception of barriers to ICTs that assist women
in advancing their understanding and use of ICTs. These
studies focused on the perceived barriers and understanding
of the role of mobile phones, [42, 66] the awareness
of gender-based barriers in telemedicine [68],
the development of women through mobile phones [32,
40], as well as the connection with women in the community
apps [50].
Discussion
Concept of empowerment
Empowerment is a multi-dimensional and contextual
concept that is internal by nature, varies in meaning, and
reflects how women self-ascribe it to themselves. From
the outset of the review, search terms had to include
words beyond simply “empower[ment]” as much of
the initial searching revealed synonyms including selfefficacy,
self-worth, self-concept, and/or capacity. This
inconsistency in the use of the term empowerment yields
a lack of consensus on how empowerment is understood
which impacts how research studies and interventions
are structured and delivered to ensure maximum effectiveness
and generalizability. While none of the studies
included in the review indicated the broader negative
outcomes related to the use of ICT, the literature supports
a flip side to using technology to empower women.
For example, technological advances are disproportionately
accompanied by female-directed cyber abuse [82,
83].
Evidence that women of poor socio-economic status
are being left out of research studies and programs that
aim to support women’s empowerment, highlights that
targeted access and funding for at risk populations (such
as sub-populations of women) are essential considerations
in policy and program development across individual,
community, and global contexts. This also reflects
biases in terms of the population sub-groups in research
studies that aim to advance empowerment. Opportunities
exist for further evaluation of how empowerment
is being measured and used in conjunction with ICTs,
as well as which frameworks are being used to guide
research in this area. The lack of specific measures of
empowerment reflects a barrier, not only regarding how
strategies for empowerment are understood and implemented,
but how researchers know whether empowerment
has been achieved. The finding underscores a need
for a standardized tool for measuring the level of women’s
empowerment.
ICTs to improve empowerment
Empowerment through ICTs has the potential to cross
multiple sectors, both private and public. The complexity
of empowerment and ICTs, as they relate to the root
issues of inequities, suggests the need for collaborative,
multi-sectoral involvement. These partnerships consider
the contextual factors that act as facilitators and barriers
for women in all types of communities. Interagency
partnerships are uniquely suited to develop interventions
aimed at enabling women to make better use of ICTs.
These interventions should include information on access
to education, facilities for education regarding entrepreneurship,
employment opportunities, and health and
other government health resources. Governments partnering
with private telecommunication agencies through
subsidization could provide discounted or refurbished
devices for women who are deemed disadvantaged.
Funding may also benefit those who experience difficulty
in obtaining mobile devices as well as in accessing interventions
aimed at enhancing the use of ICT. For example,
funding is needed to support the cost of accessing
services, low-cost devices, or the provision of Subscriber
Identity Module (SIM) cards. Alternatively, governments
should support and encourage private mobile operators
through tax exemptions and other benefits to facilitate
better mobile services and infrastructure in rural,
remote, and urban areas. Providing accessible computer
sites within communities or in schools is another way to
bridge the gap in access to and use of ICT. These strategies
not only help in improving the overall status of girls
and women but also influence overall empowerment and
development of the community.
Though ICT is not the only factor that can support
women’s empowerment through capacity building,
women who do not have access to or who cannot afford
ICTs, are potentially disempowered due to a lack of voice
and participation within the information sphere. Exclusion
of such women from research limits the measurement
of the true impact of ICTs on empowerment and
generalizability of findings. Continued research regarding
empowerment involving more advantaged sub-groups of
women does not address the inherent issues of oppression
of women within society and further disempowers
those under-represented groups. Local policies (such as
affordable internet as a basic need; basic digital literacy
education embedded in local curricula) have the greatest
potential of improving the uptake of ICTs, as this process
occurs initially at the individual level.
Individual, community, and global knowledge
Local and national governments need to invest in information
gathering tools that inquire how and why women
are using technology to support their lives and families.
Equally important is the inquiry of women’s perceptions
regarding how they prefer to use ICTs to improve their
lives or the barriers they experience in the process. A
global survey undertaken by the UN Statistics Division in
2011 indicated that only 30 percent of countries regularly
produce sex-disaggregated statistics (such as male:female
access to ICT; digital literacy by gender) and existing
data collection approaches do not incorporate qualitative
components that highlight the voices of women [84].
Future data should be translated into gender sensitive
policies that support equal access and use of ICTs.
The development and implementation of such policies
should involve representation of women from all socioeconomic
backgrounds and ages to ensure maximum
impact. Examples include policies that allow women to
effectively access and participate in ICTs within society,
the delivery of ICTs at a reasonable cost for all, as well
as policies that regulate the cost and provision of services
linked to ICTs such as availability of cell phone, easily
accessible WiFi sites, and cost-effective internet plans.
Limitations
While scoping reviews examine the breadth of evidence
available on a topic, they do not factor in the depth or
quality of that evidence [25–27, 30]. Some authors have
argued that scoping reviews should include an assessment
of quality; however, Armstrong et al. [25] contend
that this decision should depend on the resources available
for the review as well as the purpose of the scoping
review itself. The quantity of data that is generated in a
scoping review can be significant and so it is important
to find a balance between providing an overview of all
types of evidence found and providing detailed data and
assessment of a smaller number of studies [25]. Scoping
studies also lack a thorough evaluation of the quality of
results, instead producing a narrative account of all available
evidence [26, 27]. This approach serves to ensure
that all resulting evidence is included in the review and
does not limit the end number of articles, as in a systematic
review.
Conclusions
The diversity of technological interventions utilized to
support empowerment is infinite and there is no limit to
how ICTs can be implemented in daily lives. This study is
novel and essential as it comprehensively describes efforts
to use ICTs to empower women, and the imperative for
collaborations between researchers, program implementers
and policy makers to address the persistent gender
disparities in the access to and use of technologies. This
research provides a foundation for future research on the
concept of empowerment with ICTs in critical areas of
outreach, education, lifestyle, health challenge, prevention,
and perception of barriers. Outreach was linked
to positive health behaviours such as health promotion
and decision-making applications. Education interventions
varied from learning systems to health relationships
for knowledge sharing. Lifestyle ICT interventions
were related to external supports, often peer based, for
improving healthful choices such as coaching and planning
tools. Health challenges and prevention were
relevant to specific challenges (e.g., intimate partner violence;
chronic diseases) and health literacy issues (e.g.,
vaccine awareness; screening programs), respectively.
The final theme of perceptions of barriers reflected experiences
by participants respecting uptake, utilization, and
ubiquity of ICTs. Each of these areas is well situated for
future intervention research and each area brings focal
points and imperatives to this emerging research agenda.