Background
Whole body vibration (WBV) has been common among
scientific studies in the last decade. WBV has emerged
as a new type of neuromuscular training method that
can effect muscle strength and power [1], electromyographic
activity [2], neuromuscular reflex [3], and postural
control [4].
WBV training has a wide range of vibration parameters,
including vibration types (alternating and vertical
vibrations), frequency, amplitude, time and body posture.
Several clinical experiments have investigated the influence
of different WBVs on lower limb muscle activation;
the results indicated that different exercises induced varying
degrees of leg muscle activity [2, 5, 6]. Low-intensity
WBV training is more suitable for muscle activation than
high-intensity WBV [2]. Muscle activation also depends
on the interaction between frequency and body position
[7]. According to these studies, different parameters exert
different effects on muscle performance.
As for lumbar–abdominal muscles, combining routine
lumbar and abdominal exercises, WBV training in
healthy adults showed that static trunk muscle exercises
could induce a low-to-moderate muscle activation [8].
Different parameters of WBV training could affect lumbar-
abdominal muscle activities in healthy adults [9, 10].
Richard, et al., reported that they found significantly more
average and peak-to-peak estimated torque at almost all
frequencies for vibration vs staticiitting [11].High vibration
frequencies can lead to enhanced exercise benefits within
an appropriate frequency range for lumbar-abdominal
muscle in healthy adults [10]. Muscle activity during Stochastic
resonance whole body vibrations (SR-WBV) is reasonably
low and comparable to core strength stability
exercises, sensorimotor training and “abdominal hollowing”
in water [12]. In addition, flexor muscle weakening and imbalance
of muscle strength are important cause of chronic
low back pain (CLBP) [13, 14]. Strengthening lumbar muscles
is an important objective of CLBP treatment [15].
Muscle activation is one of the main indicators to evaluate
muscle performance [10]. Therefore, lumbar–abdominal
muscle activation is also closely related to chronic low back
pain (CLBP). Several clinical intervention studies reported
that WBV training as an intervention method can reduce
CLBP effectively and improve quality of life [16–18]. To our
knowledge, no study researched the influence of WBV
training on patients with CLBP by lumbar–abdominal
muscle activity. Furthermore, no standard clinical guidelines
are available for WBV training in relation to curing CLBP.
Several clinical experiments have reported the effect of
WBV on muscle activation [2, 19], and most of the
results indicated that surface electromyography (sEMG)
amplitude increases by adding vibration to multiple
exercises [20]. sEMG of lumbar–abdominal muscle
represents a kind of bioelectrical signal, that is the sum
of applicable signal in time and space. To a certain
extent, sEMG can reflect neuromuscular activity. One of
the sEMG indicators is root mean square (RMS) amplitude,
which is the instantaneous RMS amplitude of EMG
over a period of time [21]. RMS can be used to evaluate
the level of lumbar-abdominal muscle activity under
different movements, loads and frequencies [22, 23].
To solve these knowledge gaps, this study observed
how different WBV conditions affected the lumbar–abdominal
muscle activation in patients with CLBP. The
study hypothesised the following: (1) WBV training with
exercises can increase muscle activation compared with
the same exercise without WBV; (2) different frequencies
cause varying effects on muscles, with higher frequencies
inducing higher neuromuscular activity than lower WBV
frequencies; (3) different exercises exert various effects on
specific lumbar–abdominal muscles; (4) a significant interaction
occurs between exercise and vibration frequency in
lumbar–abdominal muscle activation.
Methods
Participants
This study designed an clinical research with repeated
measures [2, 24]. Twenty-one participants were recruited
from the Shangti orthopaedic hospital and the second
rehabilitation hospital in Shanghai. All the subjects were
20 years old or over and had CLBP. The inclusion criteria
were:(1) Ages from18 to 60 years old, (2) persistent pain
for 3 months at least or intermittent pain for 3 times a
week over a period of 3 months, (3) there were no anaesthesia
and abnormal lower limb reflexes. Exclusion criteria
were: (1) undergone previous surgery, dislocation, fracture,
rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and disc
pathology (2) organic diseases, metabolic diseases, cardiovascular
diseases, progressive neurological deficits or sever
osteoporosis, (3) pregnant or lactating, (4) sever hypertension,
(5) Numerical Pain Scale (NPS, from 1 to 10) over 8,
(6) did WBV exercise in last 3 months, (7) other diseases,
advisable to participate this study based on the judgment
of patients or physicians, (8) individuals who had any of
the following situations will be excluded.
Prior to inclusion, we asked for all the participants to
inform consent. Before attending the study, all participants
would do a questionnaire about the following details:
basic information, NPS, oswestry disability index
(ODI) and daily exercise habits.
Experimental protocol
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of
Shanghai University of Sport. We carried out all the experimental
programs in the same laboratory and collect
complete data of each subjects in one single experiment
session.
A WBV machine generating vertical vibrations was
used (AV-009; BODYGREEN, Taiwan, China) at a vibration
frequency range of 5-35 Hz and amplitude of 2 mm.
The three frequencies (5 Hz, 10 Hz and 15 Hz) and one
amplitude (2 mm) were selected in this study. Also, a
control condition without WBV was also tested. All participants
were demanded to practice 4 kinds of exercises,
producing 16 testing conditions in all. These exercises
were as follows (Fig. 1). For single bridge, the participants
lay on the platform, with one leg bent over the vibration
platform and the other leg lifted straight off the
platform. The patients extended their hip joint and back
off the platform. For planking, both elbows were placed
on the vibration platform, whereas the back, hip and
both legs stay straight off the platform. For the side stay,
the participants lay on their side on the platform, with a
single elbow placed on the vibration platform. For V
crunching, the patients rolled up their abdomen, pushed
their shoulders towards the pelvis, and situated their
upper hip on the vibration platform. The participants
were randomly subjected to 16 testing conditions. Before
data collection, all the participants must be familiarized
with all the target exercises. Participants were instructed
to perform each exercise under three vibration frequencies
and no vibration. In total, each exercise was
performed for 130 s (each exercise condition lasted for
10 s, with a 30 s break between two frequencies); the
patients rested for 5 min between two exercises. During
the exercises, the experimenter recorded the lumbar–abdominal
muscle sEMG signals of the participants. Each
participant practiced the sequence of the vibration
frequency and exercises randomly.
EMG data were collected by MyoResearch XP Master
Software Version 1.07.17(Noraxon Inc., Scottsdale, USA)
with sampling frequency of 1500 Hz. After we use medical
alcohol and razor to reduce skin impedance. The electrodes
(Silver chloride, Shangqiankang medical equipment
co. LTD) were put in place referring to the updated introduction
for sEMG [25].We choose the lumbar and
abdominal muscles on the side of severe pain were multifidus
(MF), erector spinae (ES), rectus abdominis (RA)
and abdominis oblique externus (AOE) respectively. The
placement of the electrode is as follows: (1) MF: 2–3 cm
from the midline at the level of L5, putted on and aligned
with a line from caudal tip posterior spina iliaca superior
to the interspace between L1 and L2; (2) ES: An electrode
was placed 2 cm apart from the midpoint of the bilateral
iliac ridge connection; (3) RA: 2–3 cm lateral from the
midline on the second segment of the muscle; (4) AOE: at
half of the line from the anterior spina iliaca superior and
the tip of the 11th rib [26].
Data analysis
All original data were performed by MyoResearch XP
Master Software Version 1.07.17 (Noraxon Inc., Scottsdale,
USA). First, the original EMG signals were processed with
a 10 and 500 Hz noise by utilizing Mat Lab [9]. For the four
exercises, the middle 5 s of the data was used to calculate
the EMG root mean square (EMGrms), which represents
the magnitude of muscle activity. A higher RMS value
indicates more muscle activity. For the standardization of
sEMG data, the value of RMS under WBV was compared
with that under no-WBV, which was considered as the
degree of muscle activity during WBV training [2].
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were conducted with SPSS 17.0 and
Microsoft Excel 2007. Two-way ANOVA with repeated
measures was used to explore the effect of different WBV
conditions for each muscle. If the sphericity assumption
(Mauchly’s test) was violated, we would use the Greenhouse–
Geisser epsilon adjustment. The Shapiro-Wilk test
was used to assess the normality of the descriptive data.
Statistical analyses were conducted as follows: (1) the main
effect of frequency was determined by any conspicuous difference
in muscle activation observed amidst the three different
frequencies measured; (2) the main effect of exercise
was determined by any conspicuous difference in muscle
activation observed amidst the 4 different exercises measured;
(3) and the frequencies × interaction effect: whether
any the interaction effect of WBV frequencies and exercise
forms. F-ratio (F) represents the each of main effects, and
then it is relative to a critical F-value to evaluate its significance.
We determined the muscle activation that was
deeply influenced by WBV and used post-hoc analysis
(paired t-test) with Bonferroni adjustment for evaluation.
The statistical significance level was set at p<0.05.
Results
Demographics
Twenty-one patients with CLBP attended in the study (11
men, mean age, 22.4 ± 2.62 years). All the patients were
recorded demographics by the same physical therapist
(Table 1), and all the statistics expresses by mean and standard
deviation (SD). Table 2 showed the muscle activities
during different exercises with no-WBV/WBV training.
Muscle activity of Multifidus
The value of RMS of MF increased compared with that
under the same exercise without WBV (total average,
208.7%). The significant differences were detected at
WBV frequency (P = 0.002,F = 10.736), exercise (P < 0.001,
F = 10.799) and the exercise * frequency interaction (P =
0.044,F = 3.328). It showed that the effect of WBV frequency
on the value of RMS of MF was related to exercise.
Then, the RMS of MF was highest when the WBV condition
was in plank exercise with 15 Hz (Fig. 2).
Muscle activity of erector Spinae
The value of RMS of ES increased compared with that
under the same exercises without WBV (The total average,
190%). The significant differences were detected at
WBV frequency (P < 0.001, F = 12.958), exercise (P <
0.001, F = 5.967). The interaction effect of exercise and
frequency (P = 0.225, F = 1.388) on ES was no significant,
indicating that the effect of WBV on ES was not related
these factors. Then, using paired comparisons between
exercises, the result found that there were significant
among single bridge, plank and the V crunch. The highest
muscle activation was induced by plank exercise. In
the same way, 15 Hz was the best frequency for muscle
activation (Fig. 3).
Muscle activity of rectus Abdominis
The value of RMS of RA increased compared with that
under the same exercises without WBV (The total average,
247.1%). The significant difference was detected at
WBV frequency (F = 6.555, P = 0.018). The effect of exercise
(F = 0.513, P = 0.590) and the exercise * frequency
interaction (F = 0.525, P = 0.572) were no significant, expressing
that effect of WBV frequencies on RA was not
relate with exercises. Then, we found 15 Hz can induce
highest degree of muscle activation by paired comparisons
(Fig. 4). Among the exercises, there was significance
between V crunch and plank, V crunch can induce highest
degree of muscle activation.
Muscle activity of abdominal oblique Externus
The value of RMS of AOE increased compared with that
under the same exercises without WBV (The total average,
206.8%). The significant difference was detected at
WBV frequency (F = 15.294, P < 0.001). The effect of
exercise (F = 2.010, P = 0.152) and the exercise * frequency
interaction (F = 0.975, P = 0.380) were no significant,
it showed that effect of WBV frequencies on RA
was not relate with exercises. Then, we found 15 Hz can
induce highest degree of muscle activation by paired
comparisons (Fig. 5). Among the exercises, there was
significance between single bridge and plank. Single
bridge can induce highest degree of muscle activation.
Discussion
This study aimed to identify the effect of WBV on lumbar
abdominal muscle activities in patients with CLBP.
Using different combinations of vibration parameters,
this study could provide important ideas for clinical
treatment or research to attention on the interaction
effects of exercise and frequencies.
Effect of WBV on lumbar-abdominal muscle activation
Results of our study powerfully supported the first hypothesis
that adding WBV to exercises could increase
muscle activation in MF (the total average, 208.7%), ES
(the total average, 190%), AOE (the total average,
206.8%) and RA (the total average, 247.1%). In general,
our study showed that muscle activation of patients with
CLBP was similar to that of previous studies on healthy
adults [9, 26]. For example, the authors evaluated the
trunk muscle activation in different static exercises on
the vibrating platform, and their results revealed that
WBV led to increased muscle activation by 1.6% ± 1.4%
maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) in MF and
46.4% ± 14.9% MVC in RA [26]. These data showed that
WBV could induce lumbar–abdominal muscle activity.
Other factors would affect the degree of muscle activation
[9]. For example, healthy individuals performed
single bridge exercise with WBV training, resulting in
higher degree of ES activation than MF activation [26].
This result differed from the findings of our study, in
which CLBP patients conducting single bridge exercise
induced the highest AOE activation.
Considering all the evidence gathered from these findings
and previous studies, WBV training could be popular
among individuals with poor muscle strength, and
long-term training would result in more gains [27].
Second, the effect of WBV on muscle activation depends
on the body position, types of participants and vibration
frequency [2]. Third, we should be rigorous on comparing
different populations. The EMG presents individual
differences, such as skin interference, body posture and
electrode position. Given these uncontrollable factors,
we should conduct data standardisation according to
certain reference values, such as the value of sEMG in
no-WBV condition or MVC. This design uses the value
of sEMG in no-WBV condition as reference to ensure
reliable conclusions [2].
Effect of different frequencies on lumbar-abdominal
muscle activation
The results of this study revealed that a higher frequency
(15 Hz) induces higher neuromuscular activity than
lower WBV frequencies (5 and 10 Hz), thus supporting
the second hypothesis.
During WBV, the body of an individual is stimulated by
appropriate mechanical stimuli. The related mechanism
possibly utilises mechanical vibration and external resistance
loads to stimulate muscle spindles; this training
method improves neuromuscular function by inducing
elevated muscle contractile activities and central nervous
system adaptation [28]. These study findings were similar
to those of several previous studies. For example, Brigitte
et al. reported that vibration led to increased RMS value
of MF by 26% when compared with that under no vibration
[26]. Xueqiang et al. performed a clinical study about
the effect of different platforms on lumbar–abdominal
muscle activation. They reported that unstable platforms
could induce higher activation than stable ones when
healthy subjects performed various kinds of exercise [23].
Desai et al. studied the rate of lumbar–abdominal muscle
activation (RMS% MVC) in patients with CLBP and
healthy people; the results demonstrated that the unstable
platform is a good choice for inducing muscle activation
[29]. The above evidence all suggest that stimulation of
unstable planes or vibration platform increases muscle
activity. The practical significance of RMS is as a statistical
characteristic of EMG showing muscle activities [21].
When the body is on the vibration platform, the muscle
induces more muscle spindles to resist external loads and
maintain body balance. To a certain extent, a higher RMS
value indicates more muscle activity. Our results showed
that high vibration frequency is better for lumbar–abdominal
muscle in patients with CLBP than low vibration
frequency.
Study have shown the effect of different vibration
frequencies on the activation of lumbar and abdominal
muscles, revealing no significant differences between
different vibration frequencies during bridge exercise
[30]. The effect of WBV training (less than 20 Hz) on
lumbar and abdominal muscles could increase the
muscle strength of the extensor muscle, whereas 40
Hz would decrease the extensor muscle endurance [8].
Moreover, the Iα inhibitory neurons in the drafting
state could be activated by WBV (Less than or equal
to 5 Hz), which could promote the reduction of single
synaptic reflexes and relax tensed muscles [31]. Highintensity
vibration would forcefully expose the muscle
spindles to vibration stimulation, producing an inhibitory
reflex, blocking muscle spindle transmitters,
reducing the sensitivity of muscle spindle and causing
muscle fatigue [32, 33]. The vibration frequency of
lumbar abdomen is mostly below 20 Hz, and the
results showed that such value could relieve pain in
patients with CLBP and reduce the dysfunction index
[16, 34]. In current studies, 15 Hz induces higher
neuromuscular activity compared with 5 Hz and 10
Hz. Considering the overall evidence, 15 Hz vibration
frequencies can lead to enhanced exercise benefits.
Effect of different exercises on lumbar-abdominal muscle
activation
Among the various exercises selected in this study, the
optimum routines included plank for MF and ES, single
bridge for AOE and V crunch for RA. Different muscles
perform differently during exercises considering their
own anatomical characteristics.
MF and ES are kinds of back muscles that maintain
the spinal stability and balance. During plank exercise,
the muscles are in static equal-length contraction, which
would activate as many muscles, especially the deep stabilizing
muscles such as the MF, as possible to maintain
the stability of the spine [26]. MF contains rich proprioceptive
receptors that enable the performance of delicate
movements. When the spine suddenly becomes imbalanced,
the MF would contract before the larger muscle
groups adjust the displacement of individual vertebral
segments. MF is a fundamental part to maintaining the
normal biometric lines of the spine and enhancing lumbar
stability [35, 36]. ES covers the lumbar and thoracic
region; it is a large muscle group that maintains the stability
of the spine. ES is a primary muscle for plank; both
sides of ES contract to resist body gravity and keep the
spine in a stable condition [36]. Previous studies showed
that side stay and bridge exercises are good for back
muscles, such as MF and ES, in WBV condition [26].
The most possible explanation for the conflicting results
of this experiment could be the interaction effects
between vibration frequencies and exercises on muscles.
In general, WBV induced the greatest back muscle activation
during plank training.
RA and AOE are both lumbar–abdominal muscles.
During V crunch exercise, both ends of the body leave
the ground, and all the gravity is concentrated on the abdominal
muscles. These muscles require more muscle
spindles to resist the load. On the other hand, the action
of the V crunch is a centripetal contraction, whereas the
RA is an active muscle requiring more strength. Atsushi
et al. observed the effects of different platforms on trunk
muscles during core stability training. The results
showed that V crunch induced the highest RA activities
on an unstable platform [37]. Vera-Garcia et al. observed
that the degree of RA activation reached more than 10%
of that of AOE under the V crunch exercise with unstable
conditions [38]. Our findings were similar to those
of previous studies. AOE is a large, thin and irregularly
quadrilateral muscle located on the side of abdomen.
During single bridge, one side of the upper limb and
lower limb was off the ground; the AOE would then
undertake more tasks to prevent the body from tilting.
Furthermore, single bridge exercise induces more activities
on AOE when compared with other exercises [39].
Therefore, in the case of WBV training, RA in the action
of V crunch and AOE in the action of single bridge
showed the highest value of RMS, implying that the V
crunch and single bridge could better activate abdominal
muscles.
Clinical implications
Some clinical implications were provided in our study.
First, WBV can effectively induce muscle activation in
patients with CLBP, indicating that it could be an effective
assisted intervention to improve muscle performance,
such as muscle strength, proprioception and flexibility
[40, 41]. Second, the different WBV parameters have different
effects on the lumbar-abdominal sEMG. Exercise,
frequency and their interactions should be considered
during WBV training of CLBP patients. We determined
the best combination of WBV intensity at 15 Hz and 2
mm and plank or single bridge or V crunch exercises. If
you want to improve back muscle performance, Plank or
single bridge should be the more preferred choice for
these individuals. If you want to improve abdominal
muscle performance, V crunch would be a good choice.
Limitations
First, the results of this study could only be generalised
to younger CLBP patients and could not represent all
age groups with CLBP. Second, the selection of exercise
featured certain limitations. Future research can expand
the range of movements and observe the effect of different
frequencies on the muscles in the case of dynamic movements.
Third, amplitudes and frequencies are important
factors for the effect of WBV training. Thus, future
studies should include different amplitudes and additional
frequencies.
Conclusion
Adding WBV to exercise could increase muscle activation
of lumbar–abdominal muscle in patients with
CLBP. High vibration frequencies can lead to enhanced
exercise benefits within an appropriate frequency range,
and different exercises have diverse effects on various
muscles. Our results revealed that 15 Hz induces higher
neuromuscular activity than lower WBV frequencies (5
and 10 Hz). As for all lumbar–abdominal muscles, plank
is suitable for the back muscles, single bridge for AOE
and V crunch for RA.