Background
Cancer is a major human health problem and remains
the second leading cause of death worldwide, after cardiovascular disease [1]. In the year 2018 alone, there
were 18.1 million new cancer incidences worldwide, with
more than half of all cases being lethal [2]. Tumor heterogeneity and cancer cell polymorphism and differentiation in various developmental stages in the same tumor
make it very difficult to choose the most efficient and
suitable therapy. While significant efforts have already
been made to characterize cancer cell population within
untreated tumors, cancerous cell population after applied chemotherapy has not been understood. Buiķis and
colleagues have previously shown that human sarcoma
cell cultures treated with thiophosphamide (ThioTEPA), a chemotherapeutic agent used to treat breast,
ovarian and bladder cancers [3, 4] exhibit the development of unusual small-sized cells, called microcells.
These cells are round or oval, with a small amount of
cytoplasm, and are intensively stained by bromo-2-
deoxyuridine (BrdU) that is thymidine analog and it incorporates into DNA and shows cells in S-phase and
methyl green-pyronine that stains nucleic acids both in
DNA and RNA [4–6]. A population of microcells has
also been observed in triple-negative breast cancer histological samples obtained from patients [7]. Microcells
from patient histological samples stained with Feulgen
assay are characterized by a small nucleus and a high
average optical density, which is proportional to the
amount of DNA in a cell [7]. Microcells have been described as a natural tumor component, but interestingly
their relative numbers increase after cancer therapy has
been initiated. Buiķis et al. [8] have proposed a hypothesis explaining the process of microcell development by
sporosis, which is a process of microcell formation from
a damaged tumor macrocell [8]. Indeed, it has been
shown that the number of viable microcells rapidly increases in tumor tissues after anticancer therapy has
been initiated. One defective macrocell may produce one
or several microcells [4, 8].
Microcells are viable and appear to resist cancer treatment. Thus, it is of a great importance to characterize
this cell subpopulation, in order to develop new treatment strategies and improve therapy efficiency. In this
work, we have identified and morphologically characterized microcells and their formation after initiation of
anti-cancer treatment with doxorubicin and paclitaxel.
Doxorubicin (DOX) and paclitaxel (PTX) are the most
effective drugs currently used in anticancer therapy of
various types of cancers, for example breast, ovarian,
lung cancers and melanoma [9–11]. DOX is a widely
used anticancer drug that intercalates within DNA base
pairs, causing damage to DNA strands, inhibiting both
DNA and RNA synthesis and thereby arresting cell
proliferation [11, 12]. PTX, on the other hand, is an antimicrotubular agent. PTX causes abnormal stabilization
of dynamic microtubule polymerization, leading to the
failure of mitosis, proliferation, invasion, and cancer cell
colony formation [10, 13, 14]. In this study we have
identified microcell formation in three different cell
lines: human melanoma (SK-Mel-28), human skin fibroblast (HS-68) and cervical carcinoma (HeLa) cells. Furthermore, using 8-anilinonaphthalene-1-sulfonic acid
(ANS)- Ethidium bromide (EtBr), nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide hydrogen phosphate NADPH assay, and
time-lapse experiments with green fluorescent protein
(GFP) transfection, we have shown that the microcells
are viable and metabolically active. Several studies report
observation of cells which from after chemotherapy;
these cells are metabolically active cells, with high proliferation activity and increasing NADPH, which improves
cell viability and aging escape [15–17]. Various studies
focus on drug-resistant cell populations in aggressive
types of cancer [18–20], but without morphological
characterization of these cells. Melanoma is the most aggressive skin cancer, with poor response to treatment,
with a melanoma cell line study showing DOX chemoresistance ability [21]. SK-MEL-28 is a DOX- and PTXresistant human melanoma cell line [6, 22, 23].
Methods
Cell lines
Human cervical carcinoma (HeLa), SK-MEL-28 melanoma, and HS-68 (human skin fibroblast) cell lines were
acquired from the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC) and maintained in a culture medium consisting
of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM;
Thermo Scientific, IL, USA) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS). All cell lines were seeded as
monolayer on cover glass into 24-well plates with an initial density of ~ 1 × 105 cells per well and grown in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37 °C.
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 10 mg/mL of a
penicillin/streptomycin solution (all from Sigma-Aldrich,
MO, USA).
To our knowledge, the microcells were so far only observed in human sarcoma (HT-1080) and human cervical carcinoma (HeLa) cell lines and Djungarian
hamster fibroblastomas cell line 4/21 [4, 8, 24]. Therefore, we used three cell lines to determine if microcells
could be forming in other cancer (HeLa, SK-MEL-28)
and non-cancer (HS-68) cell lines. In this study we used
the HeLa cell line, to which is known that microcells
formation is initiated by applied stress factors. The second used cell line is a human fibroblast cell line (HS-68)
described as normal cells, and the third cell line is melanoma cells which are quite aggressive skin cancer.
Stress factors
Stress factors were applied to cancer microcell formation. Cell lines HeLa, HS-68, and SK-MEL-28 were
treated for 24 h with doxorubicin (DOX; 50 mg; TEVA)
at a final concentration of 2.5 μM or with paclitaxel
(PTX; 6 mg/mL; TEVA) at a final concentration of
0.7 μM at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. The DOX and
PTX were not used together. After treatment, the
DMEM was replaced with fresh medium, and the cells
were cultivated for another 24 and 48 h at 37 °C in a 5%
CO2 atmosphere.
The HeLa cell line was treated with methanol (Sigma
Aldrich, USA) at final concentration 7.5% for 1 h at
37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere. After the treatment, cells
were cultivated in fresh DMEM medium for 6 h. The
cultivated cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde solution for 10 min at room temperature.
NADPH test for cell metabolic activity
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide hydrogen phosphatediaphorase (NADPH-d) is an enzyme that can reduce nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) dye to the visible reaction
product formazan [25]; the reaction involves hydrogen
transfer from the substrate at presence of NADPH, to a
hydrogen acceptor. Initially, SK-MEL-28 cells were cultivated for 24 h with 0.7 μM of PTX, then the medium
was changed and the cells were cultivated for another
24 h. The NADPH test started with pre-fixation for 1
min with a 4% formaldehyde solution (Sigma-Aldrich,
MO, USA), then cells were carefully washed two times
with 1.5 M TRIS buffer saline and incubated for 30 min
in the incubation medium (2.5 mL of 1.5 M TRIS buffer
saline, 1.5 g of sucrose, 0.5 mL of nitro blue tetrazolium
(Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA), and 0.9% NaCl to 10 mL).
NADPH substrate (β-Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate reduced sodium salt hydrate; SERVA,
Germany) was administered to the solution shortly before incubation. The reaction was stopped with a 4% formaldehyde solution fixation for 10 min at room
temperature, washed with distilled H2O and covered
with coverslips using CV ultra-mounting medium (Leica
Biosystems, Nussloch, Germany). NADPH diaphorase
activity was seen as dark blue or black spots in the cell
cytoplasm. The NADPH activity was scored semiquantitatively by two independent observers using ZEISS
microscopy Camera Axiocam 202 mono, where 0
points- activity was not detected; 1 point- low activity; 2
points- activity was detected in average level; 3 points
high activity, but not in a whole cell or sample; 4 points
strong activity in the entire cell or sample.
ANS-ethidium bromide staining
The 8-anilinonaphthalene-1-sulfonic acid (ANS) –
ethidium bromide (EtBr) staining technique was used
to detect presence of proteins and nucleic acids in
cells. ANS is a staining protein at hydrophobic site of
a protein, it fluoresces in a blue light [26, 27], while
EtBr fluoresces in a red light, thereby revealing DNA
and RNA [28].
HeLa cells were seeded in monolayers on a coverslip
at a density of ~ 1 × 105 cells per well and grown in a humidified atmosphere 1containing 5% CO2 at 37 °C.
DMEM growth medium was supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum and 10 mg/mL of a penicillin/streptomycin solution (all from Sigma Aldrich, USA). When
cell density was 80–100% on the monolayer, a final concentration of 7.5% methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA)
was added. Cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in a 5%
CO2 atmosphere. After treatment, the cells were cultivated in fresh DMEM for 6 h. The cultivated cells were
fixed with a 4% formaldehyde solution for 10 min at
room temperature, then stained with 5 μg/mL of ANS
(Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA). The dye solution was kept
in the dark, poured the cover slide with cells, incubated
for 10 min at room temperature, before being drained
without washing. EtBr (3 μg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich, MO,
USA) was poured on the cover slide with the cells, incubated for 10 min at room temperature, kept in the dark,
and then drained without washing. The cells were dried
in the air, and covered with coverslips using CV ultramounting medium (Leica Biosystems, Nussloch,
Germany). ANS–EtBr fluorescence was visualized using
a three-band blue, red, and green (Leica BRG) optical filter and a Leica DM1000B microscope qualitatively
scored blinded by two independent observers as negative
or positive staining.
The neutral red uptake assay (NRU)
Neutral red uptake assay is used for cytotoxicity detection. The principle of this assay is based on the detection
of viable cells via the uptake of the dye neutral red [29].
SK-MEL-28 cells were seeded into the 24-well plate on
the coverslips at the concentration of ~ 1 × 105 cells per
well and grown in a humidified atmosphere containing
5% CO2 at 37 °C. Reaching 80% of confluency cells were
treated with paclitaxel (PTX; 6 mg/mL; TEVA) at a final
concentration of 0.7 μM at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere for 24 h. After the treatment, the DMEM was replaced with fresh medium, and the cells were cultivated
for another 24 at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Sequentially neutral red (NR, Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen,
Germany) was added to control and treated cells for 3 h
incubation. After 3 h the staining solution was removed,
cells were rinsed three times with PBS. Then cells were
fixed with 4% formaldehyde solution for 10 min in room
temperature and rinsed three times with PBS. Coverslips
were removed from the 24-well plate coated with CV

ultra-mounting medium and analyzed under a
microscope.
Cell transfection and GFP expression time lapse
Initially, SK-MEL-28 cells were seeded on glass-bottom
24-well plates (Cellvis, CA, USA) at a concentration of
~ 1 × 105 cells per well and grown in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37 °C. DMEM cultivation medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum and 10 mg/mL of a penicillin/streptomycin solution (all from Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA). When the SKMEL-28 -melanoma cells reached 70–80% confluence,
the medium was replaced with fresh growth medium
containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA).
A transfection mix for one sample was prepared using
1 μg of plasmid pcDI-EGFP (6837 bp) containing GFP
gene diluted in 100 μL of serum-free DMEM with an
additional 2 μL of TurboFect™ reagent (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol
[30]. A plasmid pcDI-EGFP allows GFP expression in viable cells. The plasmid and TurboFect™ complex were
incubated for 15 min at room temperature. Then, 100 μL
of the TurboFect™/plasmid mixture drop was used to
transfect each well of the plate. The cells were grown for
24 h in the presence of the plasmid; after the incubation
period, the growth medium was replaced with DOX (50
mg; TEVA) at a final concentration of 2.5 μM into each
well, and cultivated for 24 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2, normoxia, using a confocal laser microscope (Leica SP8
Confocal, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) cell cultivation
chamber. Then the medium was changed for a fresh
medium without DOX.
The confocal laser microscope transmitted light and
the fluorescent light detectors were equipped at the
argon laser line of 488 nm, the time lapse function was
used for time lapse imaging. Images were taken every
120 min after doxorubicin administration and examined
for 72 h. GFP was excited by 488 nm laser line and the
emission was detected at 510 nm.
TSG101 antigen expression detection
SK-MEL-28 cells were cultivated on coverslips at the
concentration of ~ 1 × 105 cells per well and grown in a
humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37 °C.
Reaching 80% of confluency cells were treated and
microcell formation induced with PTX at a final concentration of 0.7 μM at 37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere for 24
h. After the treatment, the DMEM was replaced with
fresh medium, and the cells were cultivated for another
24 at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Then cells were
fixed with 4% formaldehyde solution for 10 min in room
temperature and rinsed with PBS two times for 5 min
and antigen retrieval was done with 0.2% Triton X-100.
After that samples were rinsed with PBS three times for
5 min and one time with PBS/Tween 20 for 5 min. Sequentially samples were blocked with 2% BSA/PBS for 1
h in room temperature. Blocking solution was decanted
without washing and added TSG101 (GTX635396; GenTex, NordicBioSite, Finland) monoclonal rabbit antihuman primary antibody diluted 1:50 in 1% BSA/PBS,
and incubated overnight at 4 °C in a humidified chamber. Samples were then washed trice with PBS for 5 min
and once with PBS/Tween 20 for 5 min and covered
with Alexa fluor 488 (ab150077, Abcam, CA, USA) goat
anti-rabbit secondary antibody diluted 1:200 in 1% BSA/
PBS, and incubated for 1 h in a humidified chamber in
the dark. Samples were washed trice with PBS for 5 min
and once with PBS/Tween 20 for 5 min. Cell nuclei were
counterstained with 1 μg/mL DAPI for 1 min and finally
coated with CV ultra-mounting medium and analyzed
under a microscope.
Determination of cells number
The cells count was determined using a Leica DM1000B
microscope (Leica Microsystems) with a 40× objective
(dry, plan apochromatic, with a numeric aperture of
0.85). The microcell count and the whole number of
HeLa, HS-68, and SK-MEL-28 cells in the three experiments in at least ten fields of view were obtained. The
total number of counted cells was 1060 cells at each
time point: 24, 48, and 72 h after applied therapy.
Microscopy and image analysis
A Leica DM1000B microscope (Leica Microsystems,
Wetzlar, Germany) with 63× objective (oil, plan apochromatic, with a numeric aperture of 1.40) equipped
with a Leica DFC400 (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar,
Germany) digital camera and ZEISS Axiolab 5 microscope with 63×/0.85 objective (oil, N-Achroplan, Ph3
M27; ZEISS, Jena, Germany) with ZEISS Microscopy
Camera Axiocam 202 mono (ZEISS, Jena, Germany)
were used for microscopy of the samples. For image analysis and processing, Image-Pro® plus the Proven Solution™ software, version 4.0, and LAS X lite (Leica
Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) and ZEN 3.0 Blue lite
(ZEISS, Jena, Germany) were used.
Transmission Electron microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy was done in previous
pilot experiments inducing microcells by stress factors.
In our study we decided to use the archive materials of
TEM. The cell line 4/21 was seeded in 24 cm2 Karell
flasks with a density of ~ 3 × 105 cells per well and
grown in Eagle medium supplemented (Sigma-Aldrich,
MO, USA) with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(growth medium) in a humidified atmosphere containing
5% CO2 at 37 °C. Cells were treated with Thio-TEPA at
a final concentration 20 μg/mL for the 24 h. After
treatment, the medium was removed and washed with
medium without serum, and fresh growth medium was
added and incubated in for the 24 h. The incubation
medium was removed and 4 °C 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution prepared in PBS at 4 °C was added for the cell
sample preparation for electron microscopy. The cells
were fixed for 15 min in the 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution. Sequentially the cell monolayer was detached gently using a cell scraper and collected in a test tube, and
centrifugated for 10 min at 200 g. Then cells were
washed twice with PBS at 4 °C and postfixed with 2% osmium acid solution prepared in PBS for 10 min. The pellet was dehydrated in 70% ethanol and embedded in
Epon (Epoxy embedding medium; Sigma-Aldrich,MO,
USA). Ultrathin sections were contrasted by uranylacetate and lead citrate, and examined using an electron
microscope JEM-100B (TEM, Japan).
Statistical analysis
The number of microcells in the control (untreated) and
treated cells was compared using two-tailed Student’s ttest for unpaired samples was used. Statistical
significance of difference of means were calculated
where appropriate. The differences were considered significant at p ≤ 0.05. The percentages were counted, assuming a total cell count of 1060 being 100%.
Results
Initiation of microcell formation using paclitaxel and
doxorubicin
The microcells were previously observed in human sarcoma (HT-1080) and human cervical carcinoma (HeLa)
cell lines [4, 8]. The HeLa cell line was chosen as cell
line to which is known that microcells formation is initiated by applied stress factors, such as chemotherapeutic
drugs Thio-TEPA [4]. Therefore, to prove that microcells development is not specific to one cell line type, we
used three different cell lines were used to determine if
the microcells formed in other cancer and non-cancer
cell lines.
In this study, we used the HeLa cell line, and microcells were initiated by applying DOX, PTX or methanol
as stress factor. Additionally, the human fibroblast cell
line HS-68, described as normal cells, and the melanoma
cell line, which is quite an aggressive skin cancer, were
used [23].
After the SK-MEL-28 cell cultivation for 48 h following chemotherapy (in this case, treatment with PTX),
the cell samples were examined (Fig. 1). The control
sample (untreated) cells were spindle-shaped with a
round and elongated nucleus (Fig. 1A). We observed
small, round, and intensively stained cells, which formed
after PTX therapy in the SK-MEL-28 cell line (Fig. 1B).
In contrast, when therapy was not used, microcells were
not seen at all (Fig. 1A). The increasing number of
microcells shows the cell’s ability to survive the impact
and effects of medication.
The 1060 cells were counted in this study in each of
the used cell lines— HeLa, HS-68, and SK-MEL-28 cells.
In the used HeLa and SK-MEL-28 cell lines under investigation, the microcells (shown as blue dots in Fig. 2)
were mostly observed after anticancer treatment with
PTX and DOX (72 h; Fig. 2). The microcells showed an
increasing tendency in the cell population of the HeLa
cell line. The highest number of microcells was observed
72 h after DOX treatment (18 microcells out of 1060
cells) in the HeLa cell line (Fig. 2): 1.57% from all
counted cells, and the percentage increase was statistically significant (Table 1). Interestingly, the number of
HeLa microcells after PTX treatment decreased, as compared to 48 h post-treatment. SK-MEL-28, the human
skin melanoma cells, were treated with PTX. The largest
number of microcells in SK-MEL-28 (nine microcells
out of 1060 cells) was observed after 48 h after PTX
treatment (Fig. 2), which is up to 1% (p < 0.016) of the
total cell count (Table 1). In the fibroblast cell line (HS68), no microcells were observed as expected. After applied treatment with DOX or PTX, the increase in the
number of microcells in non-cancerous HS-68 cell line
was small: One of the total counted cells. Results of this
experiment indicate that microcells are natural components of a tumor, as these cells were detectable in untreated cancer cells and the number of microcells
increase in both cervical carcinoma and melanoma cells,
following DOX or PTX treatment. However, it appears
that microcell formation in cancerous cell lines is stimulated by applied chemotherapy, as microcell count increases significantly after treatment with DOX or PTX,
compared to non-cancerous HS-68 cell line.
Proteins and nucleic acids in early formed microcells
ANS-EtBr staining method was used to identify proteins
and nucleic acids in the microcell. ANS stains proteins –
shown in blue and EtBr stains nucleic acids – stains red.
Methanol stimulates apoptosis, and it was used to compare if the microcell formation observed as well as after
chemotherapeutic drugs in HeLa cell line (known that
microcells formatting). At first, microcells were observed
after 6 h of exposure to 7.5% methanol (Fig. 3), which
had a toxic effect on HeLa cell viability. ANS dye and
ethidium bromide (EtBr) were used to identify presence
of the proteins and nucleic acids in the microcells
(Figs. 3). As shown in Fig. 3A, macrocells contain a
smaller number of proteins compared to microcells. This
indicates that the protein synthesis in macrocells is
weak. When the microcells segregated from the macrocells, the microcells contained proteins (Fig. 3A, C, white
arrow) and a small amount of nucleic acid (Fig. 3B, C).
Although the microcells contained both proteins and
nucleic acid, this is not yet indicated that the cells are viable. Therefore, it is important to research therapy surviving cells, determining the functional properties and
markers characterizing microcells.
Microcell formation and GFP expression after doxorubicin
therapy: time lapse experiment
ANS-EtBr staining experiment has shown that the
microcells contained both proteins and nucleic acids,
however it was not clear if these cells are viable and can
proliferate. Therefore, we set to determine if microcells
are alive and able to express proteins. We have used
GFP expression as a marker for cell viability. For following experiments, we used the SK-MEL-28 cell line to
looking forward microcell formation in the one of the
most aggressive skin cancers, melanoma.
The 72 h time lapse experiment (see Materials and
Methods for details) showed that 24 h after chemotherapy, the cancer cell morphologically behaved
similar to apoptotic cells. Specifically, cell was
rounded (Fig. 4), their cytoplasm produced blebs (10
h; Fig. 4), and the cell formed apoptotic-like bodies
(12–14 h; Fig. 4). However, every 2 h in time lapse
images following this, we observed that a microcell
categorized as an apoptotic cell was capable of selfregeneration. This process appears to be visually
similar to active endocytosis, when a cell is hosting
particles from the extracellular space and regenerates
(transforms) into a microcell. Herein, the microcells
displayed the following morphological features:
roundish and small-sized cells (approximately 3–
5 μm) with endocytic ability and, finally, GFP expression (16–20 h; Fig. 4; see Supplementary file 1), indicating viability and activity. The results of this
experiment showed that only a part of total cell
population expresses GFP, however microcells are
also capable of GFP expression, which indicates that
these cells have retained the necessary machinery for
protein expression and thus are viable and metabolically active.
Detection of the microcell metabolic activity using NADP
H test
To assess the viability of cells after anticancer treatment,
we used an NADPH test in vivo. PTX, as an anticancer
compound, and the SK-Mel-28 cell line were chosen for
this experiment. NADPH test shows the metabolic activity of the cell. Cell’s oxidation processes related to biosynthesis take place in two systems from mitochondria
to the endoplasmic reticulum. Hydrogen ion is transferred through the cytochrome system (cytochrome 450)
and cell viability is shown [31]. In this experiment,
NADPH activity was detected. NADPH is an enzyme
that can reduce nitro blue tetrazolium (NBT) dye to the
visible reaction product formazan —the reaction involves hydrogen transfer from the substrate, NADPH, to
the hydrogen acceptor [25, 32]. The untreated SK-MEL28 cells exhibited metabolic activity, as expected
(Fig. 5A). However, the PTX-treated macrocells had decreased metabolic activity, except for the microcells,
which exhibited high NADPH activity (Fig. 5B). Microcells are able to breathe, meaning these cells are not
apoptotic and thus cannot die. Consequently, microcellular protein expression is not excluded; this metabolic
activity indicates that microcells cells resist the
treatment.
Cell viability detection using NRU
Neutral red uptake (NRU) assay is used for cytotoxicity
detection. The principle of this assay is based on the detection of viable cells via the uptake of the NRU [33, 34].
The untreated SK-MEL-28 cells (Fig. 6A) presented NR
up take via active transport – endocytoses, meaning
these cells are viable. Otherwise, PTX treated SK-MEL28 (Fig. 6B) cell presented lack or no NRU at all, that
means cells are non-viable. In turn, the microcell (Fig.
6B, red arrow) presented intensively NR uptake. As it is
seen in phase contrast (Fig. 6B, PhC) around the microcell is empty area that indicates to rise endocytosis and
cell viability [35].
Microcells are not expressing TSG101 antigen
TSG101is a biogenesis factor associated with extracellular vesicles [36]. In this studyTSG101 expression is
evaluated in microcells to differentiate microcells
from extracellular vesicles. Untreated SK-MEL-28 cells
(Fig. 7A) expressed TSG101.The expression of
TSG101 is seen as a collection of small green dots
(Fig. 7A, TSG101). Antigen is expressed in cell cytoplasm (Fig. 7A, PhC) near the nucleus (Fig. 7A,
DAPI/TSG101/PhC). In turn, PTX treatment induced
microcell formation in the SK-MEL-28cell line (Fig.
7B, DAPI). Nevertheless TSG101 (Fig. 7B, TSG101) is
not expressed in microcells but in the cell cytoplasm
(Fig. 7B, PhC) is localized near the nuclei (Fig. 7A,
DAPI/TSG101/PhC). This experiment showed that
the microcells are not extracellular vesicles which expressing TSG101.
TEM microcell morphology
From our pilot experiments at the ultrastructural level
microcell example after Thio-TEPA induction in the
Djungarian hamster cell line 4/21 is shown in Fig. 8. It is
seen that a microcell is a small cell with an electrondense cell nucleus, nuclear envelop, cell membranes, cell
cytoplasm, and organoids. In the cell cytoplasm are ribosomes, visible as dark spots in the cell cytoplasm. Figure 8A shows a newly formed microcell. It is
characterized by the increased relationship between the
cell nucleus and the cytoplasm. In the cell cytoplasm are
ribosomes, seen as dark spots. The chromatin where heterochromatin, known as inactive chromatin, is part of
the cell nucleus is in sufficient quantity suggesting to
partly differentiated cell.
In contrast, microcell is shown in Fig. 8B shows increased ratio of the cell nucleus to cytoplasm. Microcell
is characterized by the nucleoli and euchromatin, which
occupy most of the cell nucleus suggesting to young cell
with acquired stem cell properties.
Discussion
In this work we induced microcells in human cancer
cell (SK-MEL-28 and HeLa) lines and human fibroblasts (HS-68) used chemotherapeutic drugs DOX
and PTX acting to cells 24 h. We observed that
microcells also occur HeLa cells after 6 h 7.5% methanol treatment.
We have showed that microcells develop come into
being from apoptotic macrocells, evolving from apoptotic bodies. The microcell formation in this work was
observed after cancer cell exposure to chemotherapy or,
described by cell morphological changes. Our findings
are in agreement with results reported by Buiķis et al.
[8] who showed that microcells can form successfully
from damaged or fatally damaged macrocells via the
sporosis mechanism. Newly developed microcells are independent and mobile, with endocytosis activity. Microcells with a diameter from 2.5 to 5 μm, developed via the
sporosis mechanism, could possibly avoid anticancer
therapy [37].
Similarly to microcells, Raju cells, nucleolar aggresomes (NoAs), and Bonghan microcells (BH-MCs) have
also been observed in cancer cell lines after anticancer
treatment. Sundaram et al. have observed the cell formation of mitotic colonies on the monolayer in a cell culture after treatment with etoposide (VP-16) or X-rays
[38]. On day 14 after treatment initiation, from the
mother cell in a process called neosis, the number of
Raju cells raised to approximately 10, with a diameter of
6–10 μM; however, only 8% of them were unable to survive [38]. Raju cells are able to live for 8 weeks after mitotic crisis, after new Raju cell formation from polyploid
cells [38]. Another study showed that after treatment
with VP-16, NoAs are formed on day five; these NoA
cells were shown to contain fibrillarin, rDNA, and pericentric heterochromatin [39]. Unlike microcells and Raju
cells, BH-MCs have observed in normal tissues, such as
the small intestines and blood cell leukocytes of rats
[40]. A BH-MC is a small-sized cell with the ability to
divide and pluripotent differencing features, similar to
adult stem cells [40]. The differences between microcells
and BH-MCs are that microcells are generated from
cancer cells, whereas BH-MCs form from micronucleation during normal physiological processes [4, 40].
The differences between microcells, Raju cells, and
NoAs are that microcells develop from macrocells 24–
48 h after antitumor treatment [4], whereas Raju cells
and NoAs develop from the polyploid cell tree up to 7
days after anticancer treatment [8, 38, 39]. Elevated
microcell phagocytic ability has observed using carmine
red and Indian ink, suggesting their metabolic activity
[24]. Microcell formation is a rare process that occurs in
less than 1 % of cases [24]. The number of microcells in
the population of cell lines considered was small, approximately 1%. Drug-tolerant persister (DTP) cancer
cell populations that constitute approximately 0.3–5% of
the initial cell population after erlotinib drug are described in other studies [20, 41]. DTP cells are characterized as non-genetic anticancer drug-resistant cells,
especially against chemotherapy [20, 41]. Numerous anticancer drugs, such as paclitaxel and doxorubicin, which
were used in this study, as well as methanol, cause cell
stress, which creates DNA damage and damage to cellular membranes, interrupting cell homeostasis, and inducing apoptosis [42–44]. The cell membrane after
treatment with UV radiation and DOX or PTX becomes
permeable [43, 45], and it becomes easier to transfect a
plasmid DNA into the cells. To avoid damage, cells
transform their architecture to a spherical shape during
mitosis; this process is controlled by changes in the actin
cytoskeleton. However, repairing DNA damage during
mitosis is dangerous to cells and could incorrectly affect
the results with chromatids separated in anaphases, thus
promoting genome instability and cancer genesis [46].
The development and homeostasis in an organism enable apoptosis, a fundamental and complex biological
process that destroys unwanted damaged cells [47]. A
typical apoptosis scene shows blebbing of the plasma
membrane, nuclear fragmentation, chromatin condensation, which includes chromatin parts on the nuclear
membrane, and formation of apoptotic bodies [33]. Although an enormous amount of data indicate that cytotoxic drugs induce and activate apoptosis initiation
machinery and the cellular stress response, many questions remain unanswered. For instance, the opinion that
apoptosis represents the principle of the mechanism by
which tumor cells are killed as a result of cancer therapy
may not be universally true, as previously proposed by
Herr and Debatin [48]. Microcells are small-sized, round
or oval cells with small cytoplasm. Microcells increase in
count after 24 h of treatment with anticancer drugs; the
highest number of microcells was observed 48 h after applying chemotherapy, with the microcells tending to increase in number after chemotherapy, irradiation, or
immunotherapy [4, 8]. There is a hypothesis that a
microcell forms from a perished macrocell [8]. We
showed that in the early stages of microcell formation,
cells mainly contain proteins (Fig. 2). ANS solution is a
universal and widely used compound for the study of
proteins [49]. When microcells are completely formed,
nucleic acid is detectable as well (Fig. 3B). The microcell
formation under applied therapy is observed in the other
research, where is shown that the microcell contain ribosome like particles, nucleus with pronounced functional
activity [50]. As it is seen in electron microscopy image
(Fig. 8), the microcell has specific organelles characteristic to viable cell. DNA damage, which is caused by oxidative stress, promotes tumorigenesis [51]. The
metabolic activity of these cells can be demonstrated by
a NADPH test. NADPH performs duties as an antioxidant substrate for the thioredoxin and glutathione antioxidant systems, thereby reducing the level of hypoxia in
a cell [18, 52]. Paclitaxel, as an anticancer drug, is not
only involved in the hyper-stabilization of microtubules
[54, 55]. Moreover, this indicates that microcells are
metabolically active after PTX treatment. For the NADP
H test we used 1 min pre-fixation with 4% formaldehyde
solution to reduce activity of NADPH diaphorase activity
as NADPH activity in the microcell is very strong. This
indicates the rising metabolism of the mircocell after the
applied stress. Abid et al. described NADPH oxidase requirement for endothelial cell proliferation and migration activity [56]. NADPH has an essential role in
reducing ribonucleotides into deoxyribonucleotides by
ribonucleotide reductase; accordingly, it is involved in
DNA synthesis by implication [15]. Newly formed
microcells are easier to transfect, as they show EGFP expression similarly to other cells. In some research, cancer cells uptake DNA molecules from the cultivation
medium to which they are added, more so than noncancer cells [57, 58]. As described by Kong et al., cancer
cell molecule uptake occurs through endocytosis, and
this process does not occur in normal cells [57]. In other
research, it has been proven that nanoparticles accumulate in cancer microcells, and that microcells have higher
endocytosis capability [9]. There are drug-tolerant cancer cells without phenotypic mutation, and these cells
are able to proliferate after applying therapy. However,
there is a subpopulation that could be a rare mutation
causing drug resistance, and these cells can proliferate
during anticancer drug effects [19, 59]. In our research,
we observed microcell induction, and the number of
microcells increased 48 h after applying chemotherapy.
In further research, it is important to pay attention to
this cell type as a feature of the mechanism of drug resistance or drug-tolerant cells.
Conclusions
Herein, we characterized microcells morphologically.
The number of microcells increased following the application of therapy, and these cells were natural components of tumors. Microcells are a subpopulation of
cancer characterized by anticancer drug resistance.
Therefore, analysis of the microcell population in a
tumor undergoing anticancer treatment could be a
strong prognostic factor for a patient’s survival, and
could be a potential regenerator of cancer cells after the
death of the tumor itself.