Background
The last three decades have seen clinical guidelines, defined
as “systematically developed statements informed by a systematic review of evidence and an assessment of the benefits
and harms of care options designed to optimize patient care”
[1], become a cornerstone of evidence-based practice. Production of guidelines is based on well-established methodologies, including synthesis of scientific evidence, expert
opinion, and stakeholder consultation, and is supported by
an infrastructure of national and international bodies (e.g.
government agencies and professional associations) [2]. Clinical guidelines are not, of course, self-implementing. Getting
clinical guidance into practice is typically complex, requiring
multi-modal approaches, and is the subject of a burgeoning
science and associated literature [3, 4]. It is now clear, however, that the implementation of evidence-based practices
(what should be done) depends crucially on process improvement – changes to how things are done [5, 6]. For this
reason, the specification of process improvements (i.e. identifying and defining the changes in processes that need to be
made to deliver good care) is a key task. In this article, we
offer an approach for developing specifications for process
improvements using rapid, remote, consensus-building
methods, and we illustrate it using a case study conducted
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
We start by noting that there is no consensual definition
of process improvement, but it is distinguished by its focus
on how to improve the underlying processes (such as workflows, task design, role allocations, communication techniques, resources required, and so on) for delivering care –
rather than, as in the case of clinical guidelines, defining ideal
clinical standards. Process improvement has a particular role
in ensuring that work systems are optimised, for example by
helping to define the activities from beginning to end of a
clinical process or pathway; to explain how these activities
can most effectively be undertaken; to clarify tasks, roles, and
skills needed; to characterise the decisions to be made and
the support needed to make and implement those decisions;
and to identify the equipment, resources and other tools required [7, 8].
The various methods for process improvement are often
gathered together under the rubric of quality improvement
[9, 10]. Some, such as the Model for Improvement, Lean and
Six Sigma, amongst others [11], have been adapted from industry techniques [12]. Other approaches have been
developed from the design and engineering disciplines and
draw on socio-technical systems principles. For example, human factors and systems engineering use structured methods
to change existing work systems based on the analysis of the
interactions between people, tasks, tools, technology and the
environment [13–15].
Common to most of these approaches is the need to specify process improvements. Specification requires identifying
and defining the changes that need to be made (for example,
an amendment to task or role design, or use of a new piece
of equipment) to bring about improvement. A major challenge, however, is that the large-scale infrastructure for developing specifications for process improvement in healthcare
has, in contrast with clinical guideline development,
remained under-developed. The work of process improvement specification has instead remained largely locally-led,
conducted within individual organisations.
Local leadership of process improvement has, of
course, many advantages, including the potential to customise a solution to local circumstances and to imbue a
sense of local ownership, but it is also associated with
some disadvantages. One is that each individual organisation facing circumstances requiring change may develop their own process improvement specification in
isolation [16, 17], but a multiplicity of approaches to the
same area of practice may cause problems of its own.
First, it may be wasteful, with each organisation reinventing the wheel [17, 18]. Second, it may be suboptimal: reaching the best possible solution requires inputs from multiple disciplines, but individual organisations may lack access to the fullest range of expertise,
particularly when it is rare (e.g. specialist human factors
knowledge) [19–21]. Third, destandardisation creates
learning overheads and new risks, for example when
personnel moving between institutions have to learn
new ways of doing things while unlearning previous
ones. But while exclusively bottom-up development of
ways of working may not be ideal, top-down imposition
of particular practices can generate other pathologies
[22], including failures of implementation, truculent and
dysfunctional compliance, inadequate customisation to
local circumstances, and creation of perverse incentives.
The deficiencies in some of the current infrastructure
for process improvement have been vividly surfaced by
the COVID-19 pandemic, which has caused massiv
disruption in the organisation and delivery of healthcare
[23, 24]. Rapid innovation has been a feature of the response, prompted by the need to make adaptations to
established clinical processes to address the infection
risks and other challenges associated with the virus, as
well as many other changes to clinical pathways and
practices [25–35]. While the scale and speed of response
to the pandemic has been impressive, an important risk
is that some efforts may unhelpfully reproduce some of
the challenges previously identified in the field of quality
improvement [17, 36], including those discussed above
of duplication of effort, waste, de-standardisation, and
inability to engage sufficiently diverse expertise.
Given the challenges of both top-down and bottom-up
quality improvement, a more collaborative alternative is
likely to be of value. In this article, we address this need.
We propose a methodological approach designed to enable large-scale remote engagement and mobilisation of
multiple forms of expertise to build rapid consensus on
specifications of process improvements, and we describe
a case study of its application.
Methods
In developing our approach, we built on a participatory
ethos, principles of crowd-sourcing, and consensusbuilding methods.
Participatory ethos
A participatory ethos – an approach that values the perspectives of the full range of groups of people affected
by an issue – is an important guiding value in healthcare
improvement [37]. But it is also of practical significance:
securing participation may be more likely to result in solutions that are satisfying, workable, informed by professional values and clinical expertise, capable of being
customised for specific situations, and capable of being
implemented through collective effort rather than harsh,
externally-imposed sanctions [38, 39]. Participatory approaches may also be more likely to lead to sustainable
impacts by generating a sense of local ownership and
commitment [40, 41]. Participatory approaches may be
especially useful in encouraging practitioners to engage
with evidence and its creation [42], as well as generating
findings that have impact on practice [43].
Crowdsourcing
By drawing on the collective intelligence of many individuals, crowdsourcing can enable data to be collated on
a much greater scale than would otherwise be possible
[44], creating potential to solve problems by drawing on
a wider range of perspectives and diverse experiences
and knowledge [45]. Recent advances such as online engagement platforms [46–48] are now facilitating engagement of large, diverse and geographically dispersed
stakeholders remotely as collaborators in coconstructing solutions [44, 49–51].
Consensus-building methods
Consensus-building methods are well established as ways of
promoting deliberation, inclusion, and participation in situations where there may be multiple perspectives, interests and
communities [52–56]. Methods widely used in developing
guidance in healthcare include the nominal group technique
[57, 58], the consensus development conference [59, 60], the
RAND/UCLA appropriateness method [61, 62], and the
Delphi method [63, 64]. These approaches are commonly
recommended and used for developing clinical guidelines
[55, 65] and reporting guidelines [66, 67], but application of
consensus-building in process improvement has remained
much more limited, not least because of the tendency (discussed above) to see process improvement as the domain of
local teams. Yet consensus-building is potentially of value for
process improvement in helping to build shared understanding, to include diverse forms of expertise, and to produce
agreements about process improvement that might otherwise remain elusive.
The Delphi method offers considerable promise in this
respect, as one of the best known and most widely used
approaches for consensus-building in healthcare contexts [52, 54]. Using group communication that brings
together and synthesises knowledge, participants are typically involved in a number of rounds of rating or voting
on a set of propositions, and may then adjust their initial
ratings based on feedback from the group in a number
of subsequent iterations [68, 69]. Though Delphi can include a large number of individuals across diverse locations and areas of expertise [54], many Delphi exercises
for healthcare have only involved relatively small and
homogeneous panels of approximately 10 to 30 participants [70]. There is evident scope for including larger
and diverse groups of participants [54, 70]. New methodological approaches are needed to use the method effectively for large-scale remote consensus-building to
specify process improvements, while adhering to a participatory ethos and minimising time and effort required
of participants.
A proposed methodological approach for developing
specifications for process improvements using rapid,
remote, consensus-building methods
The approach we propose for rapid consensus-building of
process improvement specifications involves five steps, which
we have organised into a framework (Table 1). The steps are:
(1) define scope and objective of the process improvement;
(2) produce a draft or prototype of the proposed process improvement specification; (3) identify participant recruitment
strategy; (4) design and conduct a remote consensus
building exercise; (5) produce a final specification of the
process improvements in light of learning from the exercise.
(1) Define scope and objective of the process improvement
A first step is to identify and characterise the problem to
be solved and the goal to be achieved so that an assessment can be made of whether consensus-building is an
appropriate method [71]. If consensus-building is selected, the next step is to define the scope and objective
of the process improvement, similar to current practices
for developing clinical practice guidelines [72] and Core
Outcome Sets [54]. These activities require close collaboration with key stakeholders, in accordance with the
participatory principle [37, 73, 74].
(2) Produce a draft or prototype of the proposed process
improvement specification
Rapid consensus-building on the specification of process
improvements can be facilitated by producing a draft or
prototype version, which might be informed by rapid literature reviews, existing guidelines or practices, ideas
sourced from specialist groups, or stakeholder surveys,
interviews and focus groups [70, 75]. Feedback can then
be sought on this draft/prototype, informing subsequent
rounds of Delphi consensus-building. The draft/prototype may take a range of forms [75], for example a conceptual framework, an existing standard operating
procedure, a video-based simulated scenario, or an artefact (e.g. equipment or software). The most appropriate
form can be selected based on the technical aspects of
the healthcare process, alignment with the goals of the
final product, expectations of participants’ available time,
questions of how to maximise participant engagement,
and possibilities and limitations of (mobile) devices and
platforms on which the draft/prototype will be presented
[76, 77].
(3) Identify participant recruitment strategy
Eligibility Determining participant eligibility criteria requires consideration of the need for triangulation and
bringing together the views of different types of stakeholders [54, 55, 78–80]. Seeking diversity can reduce risk
of bias and provide a richer variety of views [78, 81–83].
Eligibility criteria might include specialists working in
the selected field of clinical practice (e.g. maternity staff)
or those with specialist expertise (e.g. infection prevention, human factors). Importantly, for many process improvement activities, patients and the public are key
stakeholders whose expertise and perspectives should be
included [42, 84].
Sample size The current literature provides no set standards for required sample sizes for Delphi exercises,
meaning that pragmatic choices have to be made [54,
85]. One approach is to estimate the sample size based
on the number that would likely result in stable ratings
across the Delphi rounds, accommodating for dropout
[85, 86]. This may require establishing a minimal sample
size for each stakeholder group included.
Sampling and recruitment Sampling strategies for
consensus-building exercises are generally informed by
available time and resources, and include convenience,
purposive or criterion sampling [71, 85]. Recruitment
strategies can, for example, be grounded in the voluntary
contribution of willing individuals who wish to contribute to the production of scientific knowledge [87–89].
The principles of participatory research may inform successful strategies for increasing participation of minority
groups [89, 90].
Retention Measures to support retention across the different phases of the consensus-building exercise may involve strategies such as e-mail reminders [91] that
include reference to the importance of the participant’s
contributions [87]. This could be enhanced by the use of
online engagement platforms [46–48], which may help
encourage feelings of being part of a research
community.
(4) Design and conduct a remote consensus-building
exercise
Ethics The ethical principles for participatory consensusbuilding exercises have much in common with any other
quality improvement activity [92, 93], or indeed guideline development, in that they may often be classified as service improvement activities not requiring specific ethical review.
Where these exercises are conducted as research studies rather than improvement activities, different considerations
may apply, such as the requirement for oversight and/or approval by an Institutional Review Board or Research Ethics
Committee [92, 93].
Idea generation Delphi rounds are typically informed
by an exercise to generate ideas [63, 64]. This might be
done by inviting participant feedback on the draft/prototype of the process improvement specification, which
can then be synthesised in a set of propositions to be
rated in the subsequent Delphi rounds. If this approach
is taken, using open-ended, short-answer options may
work best for a rapid response with minimal burden for
participants and analysts [94]. The synthesis method depends on the type of feedback generated, and needs to
be clearly documented [75]. Synthesis might involve, for
example, removal of duplicates and merging of responses with similar wording [95]; using thematic analysis to create concepts, categories or themes [96]; or
coding individual responses to themes and triangulating
the coding among multiple researchers [95, 97]. The aim
is to balance the consolidation of responses (i.e. creating
a list that is reasonable for experts to navigate in subsequent rounds, e.g. about 20 items [94, 95]) while avoiding excessive abstraction [97].
Delphi rounds The propositions derived from the idea
generation phase can be used in two or more subsequent
Delphi rounds of iterative surveys in which participants
state their level of agreement with propositions on a numeric scale. Responses are aggregated and participants
have the opportunity to revise their judgments in the
light of feedback that includes their own and the group’s
judgment, with the aim of exploring or reaching group
consensus [98]. Two rounds is often sufficient to reach
consensus and may reduce burden for participants [70,
75], though more rounds may sometimes be used. Use
of visually appealing forms of feedback, such as interactive graphs that show the distributions of ratings
across one or more stakeholder groups, can facilitate response across rounds.
(5) Produce a final specification of the process
improvements in light of learning from the exercise
The aim of the Delphi exercise is to produce recommendations that can inform the specification of process improvements that can be implemented at scale. A plan should be in
place for developing and disseminating supporting resources
that reflect the specified process improvements. One advantage of the collaborative approach is that it is likely to facilitate engaged dissemination and implementation by those
who have participated [99].
Case study
We tested the proposed methodological framework
using an example from emergency maternity care. The
need for process improvement specification in maternity
care during the COVID-19 crisis was particularly urgent
given that, in contrast with some other areas of care, it
is not possible to defer or reschedule births [100, 101].
During the first few months of the pandemic [23, 24],
approximately 100 pregnant women with suspected or
confirmed COVID-19 were admitted each week to obstetric units across the UK [102]. This meant that many
existing areas of care where good clinical practice was
well-established (e.g. through clinical guidelines) required process improvement to adapt to the need for: infection control, the challenges of communication and
teamwork likely to be posed by use of personal protective equipment (PPE), and other demands of making clinical processes COVID-safe. It was important, for
example, that maternity staff were able to adapt quickly
to the new infection prevention requirements of donning
PPE to minimise any delays to providing prompt clinical
treatment.
The result was that maternity units were all, individually, urgently seeking COVID-19-specific resources and
training for obstetric emergencies. Responding to the
emerging but still limited guidance for dealing with
COVID-19 in maternity care (e.g. [103]), NHS maternity
professionals expressed a need for clearer e-learning resources relating to PPE skills, and more training on
COVID-19-specific emergency drills [104]. One priority
area concerned how to manage an obstetric emergency
such as post-partum haemorrhage (PPH) in a woman
with suspected or confirmed COVID-19. PPH is an
emergency that complicates 1.2% of births in highincome settings [105, 106]. It is one of the most frequent
and severe maternal complications after birth [107–109],
and a cause of intensive care admission in the UK [110].
It is a classic example of where the requirements for
managing situation clinically are well understood and
communicated through clinical guidelines (e.g. [111,
112]), but where process improvement was needed to
ensure that the underlying processes of delivering care
were adapted to deal with the challenges imposed by the
pandemic.
Addressing this problem required rapid, remote
consensus-building among multi-professional stakeholder
groups to specify process improvements for managing an obstetric emergency in a woman with suspected or confirmed
COVID-19. To employ a consensus-building exercise, we
used Thiscovery (https://www.thiscovery.org/about), an online research and development platform created and developed by THIS Institute at the University of Cambridge. One
of its founding goals is that of facilitating inclusive, multistakeholder involvement while offering maximum flexibility
and minimum burden.
Results
We applied the five steps of the framework to the case
study. We: (1) defined the scope and objective of the
project with key stakeholders; (2) produced a draft video
showing a simulation of processes for handling an obstetric emergency in a COVID scenario; (3) recruited
three expert groups (maternity care, infection prevention
and control, and human factors specialists); (4) designed
and conducted an exercise to reach consensus on recommendations to improve the processes illustrated in
the video; and (5) produced a final specification of the
process improvement, informed by the consensus-built
recommendations, and illustrated this specification in an
updated video and other resources .
(1) Scope and objective
The project had its origins early in the pandemic when
key stakeholder organisations, including the Royal
College of Midwives and Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists, identified that while clinical guidance on how to handle obstetric emergencies such as
PPH remained sound, the underlying processes required
adaptation for women with confirmed or suspected
COVID-19. Many maternal deaths related to PPH in
healthcare settings can be avoided through effective clinical management [106, 109], including prompt initiation
of several simultaneous actions such as uterine massage,
intravenous fluid resuscitation, and administration of
medication (tranexamic acid to treat major haemorrhage
and uterotonics to contract the uterus). Treatment delay
can result in poor outcomes [113, 114], so delivering
these clinical interventions requires highly optimised
underlying processes, including effective teamwork, coordination, communication, and access to appropriate
supplies. All of these processes require adaptation for a
COVID-19 scenario, which might demand, for example,
donning and doffing of personal protective equipment,
changes in the tasks undertaken and their sequencing,
and forms of communication suitable for a situation
where masks and visors may inhibit verbal and nonverbal exchange.
This problem appeared well-suited to consensusbuilding that could rapidly generate a consistent approach. The overall objective of our project was defined
as: to develop specifications for the process improvements needed to manage an obstetric emergency (such
as PPH) in a woman with suspected or confirmed
COVID-19, using rapid, remote consensus-building
among multi-professional stakeholder groups. Target audiences included healthcare professionals working in
maternity care in UK NHS trusts, including midwives,
obstetricians, and managers of maternity services.
(2) Draft of the proposed process improvement
specification
We started by producing Version 1 of a video that
showed a simulation of a maternity ward team managing
PPH in a woman with suspected or confirmed COVID19. The video illustrated processes that included: how
the team communicated with each other, the woman
and her partner; PPE donning and doffing procedures;
and use of obstetric-specific procedures (e.g. PPH ‘grab
bag’, treatment algorithms) in a COVID-19 context. The
processes illustrated were based on: the emerging national guidance on COVID-19 infection prevention and
control in a clinical setting (April 2020); clinical guidelines for managing obstetric emergencies such as PPH
[e.g. 111, 112]; and ways of working established in one
of the safest maternity units of the UK [115, 116].
Though the processes shown thus represented initial
reasonable specifications for process improvements to
facilitate handling of an obstetric emergency in a
COVID-19 scenario, it was also likely that these specifications could be further optimised.
The use of a video format to elicit suggestions for improvement was intended to enhance participant engagement [76, 77], minimise cognitive burden (e.g. not
having to study a written manual) [117], and align maternity professionals’ desire to have more COVIDspecific e-resources available [104]. The video format
was also expected to work well for the study participants
using a range of different technologies, including mobile
devices [76, 118].
(3) Participant recruitment strategy
Eligibility
We drew on the expertise of three expert groups: maternity teams to provide clinical and practical views; infection prevention and control staff for specialist
knowledge on infection guidance; and healthcare human
factors specialists for their perspective on the interaction
between people and work systems in healthcare settings
[21, 119]. The invitation asked potential participants to
provide their main professional background, including
an “other” option to avoid forcing people into categories
that did not suit them. Participants were not further
screened for expertise, in order to ensure a rapid response, minimal burden to participants, and maximal
inclusivity.
The consensus-building exercise consisted of a recommendation generation exercise followed by two Delphi rounds
(Fig. 1). For the first Delphi round, only those who had taken
part in the recommendation exercise and had stated that
they were happy to be contacted again were eligible, and for
the second Delphi round, only those who had taken part in
the first Delphi round were eligible.
Sampling and recruitment
We made use of convenience and snowball sampling to rapidly recruit a sample for the three expert groups [120].
Geographical representation was maximised using recruitment conducted through nationwide email networks of specialists in maternity care, infection prevention and control,
and healthcare human factors. We anticipated that most participants would engage in response to the email (convenience
sampling), while other participants might become involved
as a result of colleagues alerting them to the study (snowball
sampling). To maximise response rates and minimise attrition bias, reminders were sent through the email networks
and Thiscovery, referring to the importance of their (continued) engagement [87, 91].
Sample size
We expected that we would require three panels of
stakeholders with distinct areas of professional expertise
[85], with at least seven experts each, in accordance with
conventional recommendations on sample size of an expert panel [61]. In the design of our consensus-building
exercise (Fig. 1), we assumed that approximately half of
the participants of the initial recommendation exercise
would take part in the first Delphi round (50% response
rate), with an attrition rate of 20% for the second Delphi
round [54]. Accordingly, we aimed to recruit at least 20
stakeholders for each of the three expert groups for the
recommendation exercise.
(4) Remote consensus-building exercise
The recommendation generation exercise and Delphi rounds
were designed and then integrated into Thiscovery. All exercises were user tested to optimise participant experience on
computer, tablet and smartphone platforms. Data collection
and analysis for the consensus-building exercise (including
the recommendation generation exercise and Delphi rounds)
was completed in 6 weeks.
Ethics
Participants registered for an account on Thiscovery after
consenting to the platform’s privacy policy and terms of use
(https://www.thiscovery.org/register/). Participants confirmed
their consent before each new round of the consensusbuilding exercise. All data was captured and processed without any personal identifiable information. Review by an
institutional review board was not applicable, as the project
was a consultation and engagement exercise classified as a
quality improvement activity [92, 93], in which all of the participants were invited to join the authorship group and to be
acknowledged in the project’s outputs.
Recommendation exercise
We started with a recommendation generation exercise to
inform the subsequent Delphi consensus-building rounds
(Fig. 1). This initial exercise consisted of asking participants
for their feedback on a draft of good practice in undertaking
the process, as illustrated in a video. After seeing the video,
participants were asked, using open-ended questions, to draw
on their professional expertise to provide recommendations
to improve the practice illustrated in relation to: 1) donning
PPE; 2) management of the emergency in the context of
COVID-19, e.g. use of PPH “grab bag”; 3) doffing PPE; and
4) any other areas.
This first stage of the project – the recommendation exercise – was completed by 105 participants (Table 2). There
were 912 responses from 103 participants (two participants
did not provide recommendations). Of these 912 responses,
94 were coded as general comments (e.g. “The order of doffing is very important”) or supportive statements (e.g. “The
process shown appeared very proficient”) and were excluded
from further analysis. The remaining 818 responses were recommendations relating to improvement of practice illustrated
in the video, and were synthesised: three analysts worked in
parallel on an iterative analysis process of assigning recommendations to pre-defined categories, coding them, reassigning them to categories more closely fitting with the
codes, and merging similar recommendations (Supplement
1). This led to a total of nine categories including 74 synthesised recommendations. Of these, 26 recommendations were
identified as the most frequently raised across all participants
(Supplement 1).
A final clinical stakeholder review by authors TD and
CW identified two recommendations as only focusing
on the video format, rather than on improving the processes illustrated in the video, and were excluded from
the consensus-building exercise. This stakeholder review
also identified recommendations that could be further
combined due to sufficient overlap. We were therefore
able to classify the remaining 22 recommendations into
five categories (Table 3).
Delphi rounds
All but one of the 105 participants agreed to be contacted again for the Delphi rounds and all 104 were invited. About two-thirds (n = 71) of those invited took
part in the first Delphi round, of whom 57 took part in
the second Delphi round (Table 2). Retention from the
first to the second Delphi round was 80% for the total
group: 70% for maternity care, 71% for infection prevention and control, and 88% for human factors (Table 2).
The risk of attrition bias was low, as ratings in the first
Delphi from participants completing both Delphi rounds
and from participants who did not respond to the second round were similar.
In the Delphi rounds, the most frequently raised recommendations were presented to participants, with the option
to review the video at any point. Participants were asked to
rate each recommendation in response to the statement:
“This recommendation should be implemented.” A ninepoint scale was used with the anchors of “strongly disagree”
(rating = 1), “uncertain” (rating = 5), and “strongly agree” (rating = 9). Consensus to implement was defined as > 70% of
participants rating a recommendation with a 7, 8 or 9, and <
15% of participants rating it with a 1, 2 or 3, in accordance
with core outcome set methodology [54, 121]. An additional
criterion we used was an interquartile range ≤ 2, to further
validate consensus among the group [98].
Only recommendations that did not reach consensus
in the first Delphi round were taken forward to the second [75]. In the second round, the participant was presented with their original rating for each respective
recommendation, along with the distribution of ratings
from each stakeholder group [122, 123], as shown in an
interactive bar chart (see Supplement 2). The participant
was asked to consider the ratings of the others, and
whether they would like to change their rating or stay
with their original rating from the first round.
Of the 22 recommendations rated in the Delphi
rounds, 16 reached consensus that they should be implemented (Table 3), with consensus on 12 achieved in the
first round and a further four in the second round. The
other six recommendations received higher ratings in
the second round, but insufficient to reach consensus
(only 39 to 68% of participants rated them with a 7, 8 or
9, as shown in Table 3).
Risk of bias due to unequal stakeholder group size was
low: analysis showed that consensus across the whole
group was similar to that found within the three stakeholder groups, i.e. when each stakeholder group was
analysed independently, consensus was reached for an
almost identical set of recommendations. For example,
“Perform hand hygiene prior to donning PPE” was rated
with a 7, 8 or 9 by 74% of maternity care, 71% of infection prevention and control, and 72% of human factor
participants (see Supplement 2).
(5) Final specification of process improvements
The recommendations that reached consensus were
reviewed by the project team and used to inform the specification of process improvements for optimised management of obstetric emergencies during the COVID-19
pandemic. These specifications included the processes
shown in Version 1 of the video amended based on the
consensus-built recommendations (Table 3). A new video
(Version 2) to illustrate the specified process improvements was produced [124], along with an infographic
[125], and a brief overview of key points [126]. The video
and other resources were endorsed by leading organisations who had supported the project, including royal colleges, specialist societies, and quality improvement bodies,
and were widely shared. We also shared the resources directly with the participants. We acknowledged the participants’ contribution as collaborators [48].
Discussion
This article presents a proposed methodological approach aimed at realising a commitment to broad participation, collaboration and consensus-building in
process improvement in healthcare. Our case study
shows that it is possible to deploy the approach successfully to specify process improvements in an area of
pressing need during the COVID-19 pandemic. Subject
to further evaluation, this approach has potentially wide
application beyond the specific context in which it was
tested, and may enable forms of inclusion and collaboration and listening that are otherwise very difficult to do
remotely – and do so on a much greater scale. A particular strength of the approach is its ability to support
mobilisation of the expertise and ingenuity of people in
healthcare systems. This capability can help to enhance
the currently limited infrastructure for collaborative
building of specifications for process improvement in
quality and safety of healthcare. It thus may have potential to address many of the problems of duplication of effort, waste, de-standardisation, and inability
to engage sufficiently diverse expertise that currently
characterise many quality improvement efforts in
healthcare [17, 36].
Our case study showed that the proposed methodological approach can be used successfully to develop
specifications for the process improvements needed to
ensure high quality care, and may support the production of the kinds of high quality resources that professionals particularly value [104]. The systematic approach
to participatory consensus-building that we propose is
rich in potential for use in other areas that would benefit
from specifying process improvement for clinical scenarios. It may help prevent the characteristic dysfunctions
associated with exclusively bottom-up or top-down
innovation for quality improvement [16, 17, 22]. Including a large “crowd” of stakeholders can further help mobilise the ingenuity of people in the system (e.g. patients,
staff), strengthen the credibility of the consensus-built
solution, and enhance feelings of ownership. It may help
address lack of access to specific expertise common in
locally led, bottom-up approaches [19, 36], and reduce
the risks of the excessive focus on compliance associated
with top-down approaches [22].
The case study included a wide range of stakeholders as
collaborators, thus triangulating the perspectives and expertise of infection prevention and control experts, maternity professionals and healthcare human factors specialists
in a way that would not have been possible for a single
maternity unit. This blend of expertise was reflected in the
participants’ recommendations: many were not tied to the
specifics of PPH, but touched on important principles
established by infection prevention and human factors
specialists [15, 119, 127, 128]. These process improvement
specifications are likely to be useful and relevant to multiple clinical communities, particularly those handling
emergencies during the pandemic. Using this approach is
likely to reduce waste in process improvement, since it
not only produces a solution that can be used at scale
within the maternity care community, it also generates
many core elements of a solution that can be customised
for different clinical scenarios outside of maternity. For instance, the relevance of principles of non-technical skills
for teams, role assignment, leadership, and ergonomic
workspace design when responding to medical emergencies can be generally applicable [127, 129].
A further strength of the approach is that it was
possible to undertake this work relatively rapidly – in
less than 6 weeks, despite pandemic conditions – and
we anticipate that with the formalisation of our
framework and with gains in experience, it may be
possible for others to replicate the approach in other
contexts at an even more rapid pace. Further examples of use cases would help to refine the approach
and build a repository that could be used to evaluate
it. Over time, the approach may facilitate further
work to strengthen the infrastructure for participatory
approaches in process improvement, similar to efforts
over the last decades for building the infrastructure
for clinical guidelines and Core Outcome Set development [1, 2, 54, 72].
Building this infrastructure is critical, because there
is an ethical requirement to optimise approaches to
process improvement (including specification of improvements) to reduce the risk that people may be
avoidably exposed to poorer care associated with suboptimal processes [36, 130]. Yet results of quality improvement in healthcare are typically mixed [18], suggesting the need to improve how improvement is
done. Creating infrastructures for large-scale, collaborative improvement will, of course, require further
development, refinement and evaluation of the
approach we propose. The participatory ethos on
which our approach is built may increase acceptability, uptake and impact of process improvement, but
that remains to be tested. It will, for example, be
important to study participant experience of taking
part in these exercises (e.g. the degree of participation
intensity, motivation, engagement, sense of ownership
and empowerment [131, 132]), and to assess how far
it is possible to reach agreements that stakeholders
understand and accept. Evaluation might also examine
the potential of using real-time Delphi to avoid having sequential rounds [133–135]. This might improve
efficiency, reduce dropout, and minimise participant
time, potentially without comprising user experience,
inclusivity and robustness of consensus results [136]
– though the implications of such an approach for
the ability of different groups, such as patients and
carers, to participate would require careful evaluation.
Other innovations might include application of the
principles of gamification to further enhance user experience [137], and provide intuitive, low-burden ways
of gaining qualitative feedback on ratings in the Delphi rounds if required [138].
Given our positive experiences in using the approach in the case study, it has potential value in
optimising many processes, including, for example,
clinical tools and pathways. The approach may also
have a role in facilitating implementation of guidance
that is written at a high level of generality and requires customisation at local level for particular clinical scenarios, or in assembling relevant elements (e.g.
relating to infection control and teamwork) that may
be distributed across several guidelines but require integration to achieve patient care goals for specific scenarios [139–141].
In future work, it will important to identify the
kinds of applications the approach works best for and
where its limits lie. One issue, for example, is that
the approach is likely well suited for specifying
process improvements; locally, organisations will still
need to do the work of implementing the process improvements, for example through cycles of change
and monitoring implementation over time [9, 10]. Another issue concerns for what else the approach could
work well for: our case study has used it to specify
process improvements, but the broader consensusbuilding, participatory principles and methods may
also have wider potential in, for example, optimising
the design of equipment, forms, clinical pathways, and
other applications. Evaluation should also establish
when application of the approach has created sufficient learning for process improvements in one clinical area such that its learning can be applied to
other related clinical scenarios without having to conduct another consensus-building exercise [129, 142,
143]. Finally, there will be an ongoing need to evaluate the process improvements specified through our
proposed approach, for examining impacts on
implementability, efficiency, staff and service user experience, acceptability, sustainability of change, impact
on clinical outcomes, and any unintended consequences. Mixed-methods approaches are likely to be
particularly useful in this regard [144].
Strengths and limitations
The case study illustrated a number of the strengths of
our proposed approach. For example, it demonstrated
the approach’s effectiveness in engaging a relatively large
number of stakeholders as collaborators in a consensusbuilding exercise to specify process improvements. It
also showed the feasibility of rapidly gaining feedback
and reaching consensus on the process improvement (<
6 weeks), even during the first peak of the COVID-19
pandemic in the UK, with relatively little attrition (≤;
20%) between the Delphi rounds.
A limitation of the case study is that it did not involve
users of maternity services themselves. However, because the methodology facilitates engagement of multiple stakeholder groups [cf. 42, 84], it is potentially wellsuited to including service users, patients and carers in
future projects. A further limitation is that the three
stakeholder groups in our case study were not equal in
size. Notwithstanding, the risk of bias appeared to be
low: when each stakeholder group was analysed independently, consensus was reached for an almost identical
set of recommendations as that determined for the total
group. Due to the need to minimise participant burden,
we did not collect demographic information that could
be used to verify the representativeness of the stakeholders for the population working for or in the NHS.
We also had to rely on non-probability sampling techniques that could have created some representation bias.
We did, however, ensure that invitations were sent to
stakeholder networks across the UK, bolstering our confidence that a representative sample was included. Finally, the case study was conducted during a fastmoving situation where the science (e.g. on infection
control) was evolving very rapidly, posing the risk that
recommendations made by participants could have been
out of date by the time the exercise was completed. This
risk was managed by close involvement of clinical expertise from the project team, and by ensuring that
process improvements were specified such that they
could have enduring relevance (e.g. referring to principles and national guidance on donning and doffing procedures rather than rigidly specifying them).
We were not able to evaluate the implementation or
impact of the specified process improvements in the
time available or compare our approach with alternative
approaches to the specification of process improvements. Both are areas for future development.
Conclusion
We developed and tested a methodological approach to
specifying process improvements that employed a participatory ethos and remote consensus-building methods.
The approach was used successfully during pandemic
conditions to build consensus among different stakeholder
groups on specifying process improvements for managing
an obstetric emergency in women with suspected or confirmed COVID-19. The methodological approach has significant potential to support rapid and transparent
consensus-building for facilitating process improvement
in various healthcare settings using online methods that
can be standardised, replicated and scaled when needed,
but will require further evaluation.