Background
Maximal and high velocity forces are considered decisive
for human movement performance. In modern football,
the importance of performing rapid and high velocity
movements, such as sprints and jumps, has gradually increased
[1–5]. Maximal lower limb muscle strength is
associated with lower limb muscle power [6, 7], where
an increase in lower limb muscle strength is likely to result
in an increased sprint performance [8].
High power resistance exercise (RE) with high velocities
and low external loads is effective for improving rapid and
high velocity movements [8–11]. However, independent
of external loads, the intention of maximal velocity while
performing RE is likely the most prominent factor for increasing
the neural drive to the muscles, resulting in an
increased velocity in the mechanical response [8, 12–14].
This is likely explained by short time to peak tensions,
high rates of torque development, high motor unit discharge
rates and an early and fast motor unit recruitment
[15–18]. Consequently, RE with high external loads (HL:
≥85% of 1RM) and subsequently low velocity movement is
also likely effective, as long as the intended velocity during
the contractions is maximal [13]. In fact, HL RE is reported
to be effective in football players when it is combined with
performing high velocity movements (e.g. sprints and
jumps) in football practice [8, 19]. Additionally, although
the intensity in HL RE is high, the low number of repetitions
and sets allows the total RE volume to be low. Due to
the challenges of incorporating all important physical aspects
while also ensuring sufficient recovery time in football
players’ weekly exercise and competitive schedules [20], HL
RE can be considered a relevant and time-efficient exercise
modality for maintaining [21] and improving [22, 23] sprint
and jump performance in football.
As eccentric muscle contractions allows for higher force
production compared to the concentric contractions [24,
25], exercises with eccentric overload, such as inertia spinning
YoYo™ flywheel (FW) devices [26], have been suggested
as an alternative or supplement to the established
exercise modalities [24, 25]. In FW devices, a band is connected
to a pivoting shaft, where pulling the band unwinds
the band and kinetic energy is subsequently produced in
the shaft due to the inertia of the spinning FW. When the
band reaches its maximal length, the FW keeps spinning
and rewinds the band again and high muscle force is produced
during the eccentric phase if the individual is trying
to slow the spinning of the FW, where peak muscles
forces are produced if the individual is instructed to break
the eccentric movement towards the end of the rewound
band [26, 27].
Over the past two decades, a substantial number of
studies have assessed the utility of FW RE for improving
sports performance, with positive effects on maximal
strength, muscle power, jump height, sprint performance
and changes of direction movements [26, 27]. Although
the evidence for improved performance is compelling,
there are fewer studies comparing FW RE to other RE
modalities, which is necessary to determine whether FW
exercise could have similar effects compared with the
established RE modalities.
To our knowledge, no study has compared the effect of
FW RE versus free weight RE using the same motion path,
which consequently stimulates the same muscles. Additionally,
no study has compared the effect of FW exercise
and free weight using HL with maximal intended velocity
contraction (MIVC)s combined with football sessions,
which can be considered a relevant and time-efficient exercise
modality for improving high velocity movements in
football while also improving maximal strength [22, 23].
Such information can be highly applicable for coaches in
football clubs, who should use the best practice in relation
to total exercise load to optimize performance of the
players, at least in elite clubs. Thus, the objective of this
study was to compare the effect of FW RE versus free
weight HL RE on 10-m sprint time, countermovement
jump (CMJ), and 1RM partial 90° range of motion (ROM)
squat strength in football players. In this randomized controlled
trial, both the FW RE and the free weight RE were
carried out in a squat exercise with MIVCs and combined
with football sessions. We hypothesized 1) that RE using
FW and barbell free weight (BFW) combined with football
practices will equally improve sprint time and jump
height, and 2) that squats carried out in a BFW exercise
will result in superior improvements in 1RM partial squat
compared with FW squats.
Methods
Design
In this randomized controlled trial, we randomly allocated
49 players into three different groups using Research Randomizer
[28] (three sets, 17 numbers per set, ID-number
range 1–49, “every number unique”, “no sorted order” and
“no place marker”); 1) flywheel (FW) group (n = 16), 2)
barbell free weight (BFW) group (n = 16) and 3) control
group (n = 17). Due to drop out (22.5%), the final number
in the three groups were 13, 13 and 12 players in the FW,
BFW and control group, respectively. The FW and the
BFW group participated in an intervention where they
performed a squat exercise either with a FW device or
with BFWs twice a week over 6 weeks (in total 12 sessions)
as part of their preseason preparations. The control
group was instructed not to perform lower body RE and
only to perform their teams’ preseason preparations and
acted as controls. During the intervention period, all enrolled
players were instructed to avoid complementary
REs for their lower body, while no restrictions were given
regarding REs for their upper body. Our outcome measures
were 10-m sprint time, CMJ and 1RM partial squat,
which we measured pre- and post the 6 week long
intervention.
This study was carried out in accordance to the Declaration
of Helsinki; prior to pre-tests, all the players were informed
of the purpose of the study and its associated risks
and benefits, before providing oral and written informed
consent. The Norwegian Data Protection Service approved
the study and the storage of personal data (Approval
reference number: 374030), without further
Regional Ethical approval per applicable institutional and
national guidelines for sport and exercise science [29, 30].
Subjects
In the pre-season period in Norway, from January to March
2019, 49 recreationally active football players volunteered
to participate. Recruitment period was January 5th to January
31st, data collection was from February 1st to March
31st. The players played at the two highest regional levels
in the Norwegian national league system, which is the 5th
and 6th levels in Norway. After contacting multiple 5th and
6th level teams’ coaches, the included players were recruited
from teams with similar overall exercise load with
the following inclusion criteria; 1) two or three 60 min football
sessions and 2) one friendly football match a week. Exclusion
criteria was no injury or disease preventing from
participation in RE and football practice. The flow and random
allocation of participants are illustrated in Fig. 1. Four
of the 49 recruited players reported to be unfamiliar with
RE, while the remaining players reported to perform 1–6
weekly RE sessions beside their teams’ football sessions.
Four players withdrew from the study prior to study completion
due to illness and injuries not related to the study
interventions, and seven players did not show up for posttests.
As a result, 38 players completed the study. The descriptive
baseline test characteristics are shown in Table 1;
there were no differences in baseline characteristics between
the intervention groups (all p ≥ 0.20).
Test procedures
Prior to the interventions, the players underwent pre-tests
in the following order on the same test day: 1) 10-m sprint
time, 2) CMJ and 3) 1RM in a barbell free weight partial
squat, carried out as 90° ROM in the knee joint (standing
position = 180°). The players’ height was assessed on a
portable scale (Seca 217, Seca GmbH & Co., KG,
Germany) and body mass on a portable force platform
(Hurlab FP4, HUR Labs Oy, Kokkola, Finland), which was
connected to a portable laptop (ThinkPad, Lenovo Group
Ltd., Beijing, China) through a USB cable and monitored
with the manufacturer’s software (Force platform software
suite, HUR Labs Oy, Kokkola, Finland). Body mass index
(BMI) was calculated. Prior to testing, the players jogged
for 15 min at progressively increasing intensity (easy to
moderately paced jogging) with various exercises (e.g.
knee raises, heel kicks, lunges, and frontal vertical kicks to
their hands) on artificial grass, supervised by an instructor.
The subjects wore jogging shoes and light clothing. Following
the 15 min jog, the players performed two
progressive 15-m sprints instructed to be at 95% of selfdetermined
maximum acceleration.
10-m sprint test
The 10-m sprint test was performed on artificial grass indoors.
Single-beam photocells (ATU-X, IC Control AB,
Stockholm, Sweden), mounted to the floor and walls recorded
the sprint times, where the photocells at the starting
and the finishing line were placed 20 cm and 100 cm
above the ground, respectively. Within-subject coefficient
of variation of single-beam photocells is reported to be 2%
[31]. A marker was placed 30 cm behind the starting timing
gate, where the players chose their starting position
behind the marker. The players started the test on their
own initiative, and without verbal encouragement, by
breaking the laser beam at the starting timing gate and
sprinted to the finishing line as fast as they could. Each
player was given three attempts with 3 min recovery between
each sprint. The fastest sprint time was recorded.
Countermovement jump
Following ≥3 min rest from the sprint test, the players performed
the CMJ test on the portable force platform (Hurlab
FP4, HUR Labs Oy, Kokkola, Finland) following the
body mass measurement. Portable force platforms is
found to measure CMJ jump height within a 2% accuracy
compared to a laboratory floor mounted force platform
(Type 9281B Kistler, Instrumente AG, Winterthur,
Switzerland) [32] and with a 2.8% within-subject coefficient
of variation [33]. Starting from an upright standing
position with their feet shoulder-width apart and with
both hands placed on their hips, the players were
instructed to make a preliminary downward movement
(eccentric phase) by flexing their knees to approximately
90° (knee-flexion) before performing the concentric phase
of the vertical jump off the ground by extending the knees
and the hips, respectively. Each player was given three attempts
with 3 min recovery between each jump. If an incorrect
jump was performed (e.g. typical mistake was
lifting the heel prior to extending the knees), the player
was given a new attempt. The force platform measures
the vertical jump height in centimetres (cm) by calculating
the centre of mass displacement from force development
(take-off velocity) and body mass. The sampling rate was
set to 1200 Hz. The highest vertical jump was recorded.
One repetition maximum in partial squat
Following the CMJ test, the players performed a partial
ROM (approximately 90° knee joint angle) back squat test
using an Olympic barbell (Eleiko, Halmstad, Sweden) for
the assessment of 1RM. We used a slightly modified 1RM
protocol used by Helgerud et al. [34]. The players first
warmed up by lifting the Olympic barbell (20 kg) without
additional weights for 8–10 repetitions, and thereafter performing
two sets of progressively decreasing repetitions (6
and 3 repetitions, respectively) and increasing the weights
based on their perceived effort in the previous warm-up
set (Helgerud et al. [34] specified no 1RM warm up).
Thereafter, the players attempted their 1RM trials with increasing
weights (10 kg) until failure (Helgerud et al. [34]
used 5 kg increments). Failure was defined as inability to
lift the barbell to standing (starting) position (180° knee
joint angle). A mechanical goniometer was held to the lateral
part of their knee joint by an instructor to ensure that
the players reached 90° of knee flexion before they were
given a verbal “go” and they could start the concentric
phase of the lift. The kilograms (kg) lifted in the last approved
lift with one repetition was considered their 1RM
and recorded in kg. One repetition maximum was normally
reached between 3 and 6 sets, ≥3 min recovery was
given between each attempt. The coefficient of variation
for 1RM squat is reported to be 2.9% [35]. As 1RM
strength divided by body mass may be imprecise where a
heavier individual may be overestimated and a lighter individual
underestimated [34, 36], the kg lifted was also
allometrically scaled as kg lifted in the squat exercise
multiplied by body mass raised to the power of 0.67 (kg
lifted·kg body mass-0.67) [34, 36].
Exercise interventions
An overview of the exercise programs is presented in
Table 2. Over the course of the interventions, all players
in all three groups were instructed to adhere to their
two-three weekly football sessions and friendly matches
of their team. The players in the FW and BFW groups
started their RE interventions the week following pretests,
which did not coincide with their football sessions
(i.e. RE and football sessions was separate). Prior to both
intervention groups’ sessions, the players performed a
10 min self-selected low intensity aerobic warm-up on a
motorized treadmill (ELG 70, Woodway Inc., Waukesha,
Wisconsin, United States) or an ergometer
bike (Pro/Trainer, Wattbike Ltd., Nottingham,
United Kingdom). For both groups, the players were
instructed to perform their exercise with MIVCs and
were given verbal encouragement throughout the
sessions. All intervention sessions were performed in
the same laboratory and supervised by the same instructor.
The players in both intervention groups
were expected to experience a large increase in knee
extensor strength. Therefore, the players performed
the Nordic hamstring exercise to avoid a large
quadriceps-to-hamstring strength ratio and thereby
potentially reduce the risk for hamstring strains [37].
The Nordic hamstring exercise was performed at the
end of each exercise session (for both interventions) and
involved three sets of four repetitions (week 1) where
the number of repetitions were progressively increased
to five in week 2, six in week 3–4, eight in week 5, and
10 in the final week of the interventions. At the end of
the 6-week exercise interventions, the participants performed
post-tests in the same order as the pre-tests.
Flywheel squat group
The players allocated to the FW group was equipped
with a vest on their upper body connected with a band
to the FW device (#215 YoYo Squat Unlimited Pro,
nHance, YOYO Technology, Stockholm, Sweden). In the
FW device, different sized spinning inertia FWs can be
connected to the pivoting shaft (size #0.5: 0.0125 kg·m− 2,
#1: 0.025 kg·m− 2, 2#: 0.05 kg·m− 2, 4#: 0.1 kg·m− 2). The
first two sessions (week 1) were familiarization sessions,
which consisted of three sets with six repetitions. Thereafter,
from week 2, the players performed three sets with
six repetitions with MIVCs followed by 3 × 5, 4 × 5 and
4 × 4 repetitions in week 3, 4 and 5–6, respectively. Recovery
time between sets was set to ≥3 min. The players
started in a partial squat position (~ 90° knee angle) and
performed first a standardized warm-up set with six repetitions
using the #1 inertia FW (0.025 kg·m− 2). In all
exercise sets, the players started with three slow repetitions
to get into the flow of the squat exercise movement
before beginning their scheduled MIVC sets (6 × 3,
5 × 3, 4 × 5, 4 × 4 depending on exercise week), where
they were given a verbal “go” when starting to push with
MIVCs from starting position (~ 90° knee joint angle) to
standing position. The band connecting the vest and the
FW device was strapped tightly making the players stop
at approximately 175° knee joint angle in the standing
position when the FW band was unwound. When the
FW continued to rewind again, this immediately forced
the player to bend their knees and begin the eccentric
contraction phase of the next repetition. The players
were instructed to over-win the kinetic energy with the
highest possible mobilization of muscular force at the
end of the eccentric movement (~ 80° knee joint angle),
and immediately start a new concentric MIVC. During
the sets and sessions, the load (Watt) was monitored
using the manufacturer’s application (Bluebrain, Kuopio,
Finland) on a portable tablet (Samsung Galaxy S4, Samsung
Electronics, Daegu, South Korea) connected to the
FW device through Bluetooth. The starting inertia at
week 2 was set to #1 (0.025 kg·m− 2). If the players produced
on average > 4 watts·kg− 1 from each repetition of
one set, the FW size was increased, to #2 (0.05 kg·m− 2)
and later to “#3” (#1 + #2 = 0.075 kg·m− 2) and finally #4
(0.1 kg·m− 2).
Barbell free weight squat group
The players in the BFW group performed a specialized
warm-up with three sets of progressively increasing intensity
in the squat exercise; eight repetitions at 30%-,
six repetitions at 50%- and six repetitions at 70% of
1RM, respectively. The first two sessions (week 1) consisted
of three sets with eight repetitions at ~ 70% of
1RM. Thereafter, from the third session (week 2), the
players were instructed to perform four sets of four
repetitions at > 85% of 1RM throughout the remaining
sessions with progressively increasing the load with 5 kg
if they could perform five repetitions within one set (e.g.
if performing 5 repetitions, the load in the next set was
increased, which could be set 1, 2, 3 or 4 in the exercise
session). Recovery time between sets was set to ≥3 min.
Figure 2 illustrates the logged progression of the BFW
group.
Statistical analyses
The Shapiro Wilk test confirmed all data to not deviate
from normal distribution, both prior (all p ≥ 0.11) and
following randomization (all p ≥ 0.052), which were confirmed
by inspection of the Q-Q plots. We performed
paired sample t-tests to assess pre- to post-test changes
within groups. One-way univariate analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) with Bonferroni corrected post-hoc tests
were used to examine differences in baseline characteristics,
and in the change score (post-pre) from pre-to
post-test between the groups. Effect sizes were calculated
as Cohen’s d where determination of magnitude
was considered according to Rhea’s recommendation for
RE interventions of moderately fit individuals; trivial: <
0.35, small: 0.35–0.79, medium: 0.80–1.49, large: ≥1.50
[38]. For pre- to post effect size within groups, we divided
the mean change score by the standard deviation
(SD) of the change score. We calculated between groups
effect size by the pooled SD of the two groups of interest
(e.g. FW vs BFW, FW vs control, BFW vs control) divided
by the difference in mean change score of the two
groups of interest using the following formula:

ðn1 ¼ 1Þ  SD12 þ ðn2 − 1Þ  SD22
n1 þ n2 − 2
=
s
m1 − m2
Where n1 and n2 represents the groups’ n, SD1
2 and
SD2
2 represents the groups’ SD squared, m1 and m2 represents
the two groups’ mean change score, respectively.
We used Pearson’s correlations to assess the association
between the change in sprint time and jump height, respectively,
and the change in maximal partial squat
strength. We adopted linear regressions to assess
whether inclusion of changes in body mass could explain
more of the variation in the association than maximal
partial squat change alone. We performed a pilot study
where we observed a mean decrease of 0.0243 ± (SD)
0.0215 s in the 10-m sprint test following 6 weeks of partial
squat exercise at > 85% of 1RM characterized by 4 ×
4 repetitions. Sprinting 0.02 m·s− 1 faster over 10m
would result in a ~ 10 cm difference, which can be considered
a shoulder length ahead of an opponent and thus
a game changing and relevant difference [14]. With 80%
power and an alpha level of 0.05, we calculated to need
12 participants in each group. We assumed a 25%
dropout and thus aimed to recruit at least 45 participants
(15 in each group); following dropouts (22.5%), we
ended up with 13 (FW), 13 (BFW) and 12 (control) in
our three groups for the final analyses. Data are shown
as mean ± SD unless otherwise is stated. All statistical
analyses were performed using the Statistical Package
for Social Sciences (SPSS, Version 26, IBM, Armonk,
NY, United States).
Results
The pre- and post-test results are presented in Table 3.
There were differences in changes in the 10-m sprint
test between the groups (between subjects effect: p <
0.001), where the FW and the BFW group equally decreased
their 10-m sprinting time from pre- to post-test
by 2% (between groups: p = 1.00, Cohen’s d: 0.00, pre- to
post-test: FW group: p < 0.001, Cohen’s d: − 0.97; BFW
group: p = 0.005, Cohen’s d: − 0.96), while the control
group did not decrease their sprinting time (p = 0.39,
Cohen’s d: 0.26; difference between FW and BFW vs
control: both p < 0.001, both Cohen’s d: − 1.39) (Table 3).
The individual change in 10-m sprint time from pre- to
post-test and the association with 1RM partial squat
change is illustrated in Fig. 3. Two out of the 13 in the
FW group did not experience a game changing relevant
change in 10-m sprint performance (≥0.02 s decrease in
10-m sprint time; range FW group: 0.02 to − 0.08 s,
mean increase: − 0.03 ± 0.01 s). Four out of the 13 in the
BFW group (range: − 0.01 to − 0.04 s, mean increase: −
0.03 ± 0.03 s) and 11 out of the 12 players in the control
group (0.02 to − 0.02 s, mean increase: 0.003 ± 0.01 s)
did not experience a game changing relevant change in
10-m sprint time (Fig. 3).
There were differences in changes in the CMJ test between
the groups (between subjects effect: p < 0.001),
where the FW and the BFW group equally increased
their jump height in the CMJ test from pre- to post-test
by 9 and 8%, respectively (between groups: p = 1.00
Cohen’s d: − 0.16; pre-to post-test: FW: p < 0.001,
Cohen’s d: 1.70; BFW: p < 0.001, Cohen’s d: 1.54), while
the control group did not increase their jump height
(p = 0.75, Cohen’s d: 0.09; difference between FW and
BFW vs control: both p < 0.001, Cohen’s d: FW vs control:
2.15, BFW vs control: 1.94) (Table 3). The individual
CMJ change from pre-to post-test and the
association with 1RM partial squat change is illustrated
in Fig. 4. All players in FW group experienced an increase
in jump height (range 0.37–7.01 cm, mean increase:
3.07 ± 1.80 cm). In the BFW group, 11 out of
the 13 increased their jump height (range: − 0.43 to 6.10
cm, mean increase: 2.78 ± 1.80), while seven out of the 12
players in the control group experienced an increased
jump height from pre- to post-test (range: − 1.64-1.02
cm, mean increase: 0.07 ± 0.72 cm) (Fig. 4).
There were differences in changes in the 1RM partial
squat test between the groups (between subject effect:
p < 0.001), where the BFW group increased their 1RM
squat by 46%, which is more than the FW group’s increase
of 17% (difference between groups: p < 0.001,
Cohen’s d: 3.43, pre- to post-test: FW: p = 0.001, Cohen’s
d: 3.13, BFW: p < 0.001, Cohen’s d: 3.17), and the BFW
and the FW group increased their 1RM squat more than
the control group (difference between FW and BFW vs
control: both p < 0.001, Cohen´s d: FW vs control: 2.71,
BFW vs control: 4.93, pre-to post-test control group:
p = 0.10, Cohen’s d: 0.51). When scaling 1RM partial
squat strength to the power of 0.67, the results remained
unchanged (Table 3). For individual pre- to post 1RM
partial squat changes, all players in FW and BFW group
increased their 1RM (FW: range: 10–30 kg, mean increase:
21.5 ± 6.9 kg; BFW: 40–90 kg, mean increase:
62.3 ± 15.4), while three out of the 12 players in the control
group increased their 1RM (range: 0–20 kg, mean
increase: 0.07 ± 0.72 cm) (Figs. 3 and 4).
We observed a negative linear association between the
change in maximal partial squat strength and the change
in sprint time (1RM: r = 0.39, r2 = 0.15, p = 0.02) (Fig. 3).
We observed a positive linear association between
maximal partial squat strength and jump height (r =
0.52, r2 = 0.27, p = 0.001) (Fig. 4). These associations
were unchanged when including change in body mass as
independent variable, and when changing 1RM to scaled
1RM (data not shown).
Discussion
In this randomized controlled trial of recreationally active
football players, FW and BFW HL squats equally
improved 10-m sprinting time and CMJ height while
BFW HL squats was superior to FW squats in improving
maximal partial squat strength. Finally, we observed linear
associations between changes in maximal partial
squat strength and changes in 10-m sprinting time and
CMJ, respectively.
The equal improvement for both intervention groups
in 10-m sprint time and jump height is in line with the
latest systematic review assessing the effect of RE in
football players [8], and also with previous studies assessing
the effect of BFW HL partial squats combined with
football sessions [22, 34]. Although not always consistent
[39], sprint improvements following FW squats is reported
previously [40, 41], while improvements in jump
height following FW RE seem to be a consistent observation
[39–41].
Although we observed linear associations between improvements
in maximal squat strength and improvements
in sprint time and jump height, which is in line with the
latest review on the effect of RE in football players [8], the
explained variances are low (10-m sprint change: 15%
(r2 = 0.15), Fig. 3; CMJ change: 27% (r2 = 0.27), Fig. 4), indicating
that other factors than increased maximal squat
strength may explain the improved 10-m sprint and jump
performance. These similar improvements between the
BFW and FW groups are likely explained by neuromuscular
adaptations induced by MIVCs [12]. For example,
using novel high density surface electromyography recordings,
a recent study showed an increased motor unit discharge
rate accompanied by a decreased motor unit
recruitment threshold following 4 weeks of isometric
MIVCs [42]. Moreover, it seems that peak rate of force development
is associated with peak motor unit discharge
rate, which also seem to be generated prior to maximal
force development [16], which thus seem to explain the
underlying neural mechanisms for improvements of high
velocity movements following RE [12].
However, it is reported that neural adaptations preliminary
occurs within the first 1–2 weeks of RE [25, 43].
Thus, although the strength of the associations between
change in sprint time or jump height and change in
maximal squat strength were unchanged when including
body mass change as independent variable, we cannot
rule out whether our 6 week long intervention induced
morphological changes (e.g. increase in pennation angle,
fascicle length and cross-sectional area), which normally
occur as a result of longer exercise programs. For example,
a previous study assessing the effect of FW RE
revealed changes in muscle fascicle length and pennation
angle, which was paralleled with hypertrophy gains [44].
The BFW group experienced a more than two-fold larger
increase in 1RM squat (46%) than the FW group
(17%). The 17% increase in the FW group is in line with
previous reported increases following squat RE in football
players [8], while the 46% increase in the BFW
group is towards the highest reported increases in 1RM
partial squat in the literature for football players (52%)
[8, 34]. A meta-analysis reported that FW RE is not superior
to traditional RE for strength improvements [45],
which corroborate our findings. Nevertheless, the difference
in 1RM squat strength between the BFW and the
FW group in our study is likely an effect of test specificity
where the exercise performed by the BFW group
was isotonic to the test; this is shown previously for the
squat exercise [46]. Consequently, we urge for cautious
interpretation when comparing 1RM gains between the
BFW and FW group.
A previous meta-analysis comparing concentric and
eccentric RE reported superior gains in maximal
strength following eccentric RE [24]. However, their
stratified analysis of exercise intensity revealed no differences
between the two exercise modalities [24]. In fact,
in studies comparing solely concentric low intensity
(75% of 1RM) contractions with concentric and subsequent
eccentric overload contractions (> 100% of 1RM),
superior 1RM gains are reported from subsequent eccentric
overload [47, 48]. While studies comparing solely
concentric higher intensity (maximal 6- and 10RM and >
85% of 1RM) with subsequent eccentric overload reported
similar gains in 1RM [49, 50]. This may suggest
that as long as the concentric phase is performed with
heavy loads (~ ≥ 85% of 1RM), no extra maximal
strength gains can be derived from additional eccentric
overload [24]. This indicate that high external loads (>
85% of 1RM) should be applied to easily recruit the
higher threshold motor units [14], which is responsible
for the highest force productions [13].
Strengths
To our knowledge, this is the first randomized controlled
trial comparing FW RE to HL RE practices for
maintaining [21] and improving [22, 23] sprint and jump
height performance in football. Due to the comparison
in our study, one can assess the applicability of FW RE
in football. Such information is highly applicable for coaches
in football clubs, which should use the best practice
in relation to total exercise load to optimize performance
of the players, at least in elite clubs.
Limitations
Some limitations need to be addressed. First, football involves
multiple changes of direction at high velocities
[51]. As changes of direction involves decelerations and
subsequently accelerations in a different direction, the
ability to utilize the elastic energy stored in tissues from
deceleration during eccentric contractions into a subsequent
concentric acceleration phase can be decisive in
football [51]. Flywheel RE comprise of such decelerations
with high force production, and FW RE is found to improve
changes of directions [52]. We did not assess the
ability to perform changes of direction our study. Future
research investigating whether FW or HL BFW squat exercise
results in superior performance in changes of direction
tests is warranted.
Further, we did not match exercise intensity between
the two intervention groups, which introduce the possibility
of the external loads employed in the interventions
influencing our results (i.e. the exercise intensity per se,
not exercise modality). One study demonstrated that increasing
FW inertia increases coupling time (transition
from eccentric to concentric contraction during the
movement) and reduces power output [53]. Thus, increasing
FW inertia might have hindered maximal improvements
in high velocity movements (sprint and
jump height) for the players in the FW group. However,
force production increased by increasing inertia [53] and
the intended velocity per se (not actual movement velocity)
is responsible for improving high velocity movements
following RE [12]. As increasing force production
with increasing inertia can be considered higher load RE
than not increasing inertia, we increased inertia following
mean > 4 watts∙kg− 1 in one set to label both intervention
groups’ exercise intensity “HL RE” and make
exercise intensity between groups more comparable.
Thus, we tried to keep similar progression in exercise
load in both intervention groups, where reaching a certain
limit (FW: > 4 watts∙kg− 1, BFW: ≥ 5 repetitions) resulted
in an increased load in the next set. This also
ensured individualized progression, as highlighted as an
important factor for optimizing improvements in sprint
performance from FW RE [53].
Furthermore, by performing 4 × 4 repetitions and increasing
load when reaching five repetitions in the BFW,
without any mid-test 1RM to adjust relative load, there
could have been a possibility of some players in the
BFW group exercising at < 85% of their actual 1RM as
their actual 1RM increases during the intervention.
However, this protocol is proved highly effective in improving
maximal strength [21, 22, 34] and moreover, the
increase from week to week was high in this group
(Fig. 2), ultimately leading to a 46% increase in 1RM,
which is towards the highest reported increases in 1RM
in football players [8].
Hamstring muscle strength is associated with sprint
performance [54–56], and antagonist co-contraction
may have contributed to the increase in force production
by an exercise-induced increase in reciprocal inhibition
[57]. As both intervention groups performed the Nordic
Hamstring exercise, the control group should also have
performed this exercise allowing us to solely compare
the effects of FW and BFW squats. However, the potential
effects of Nordic Hamstring on sprint and jump
height performance in our two intervention groups
should influence our results in similar proportional
order. Nevertheless, it seems that antagonist cocontraction
plays a greater role in joint protection in RE,
suggesting that they may play a minor role in the actual
movement velocity [57]. Moreover, the effect on sprint
performance following Nordic hamstring exercise is usually
small [58, 59] or non-existing [60].
Finally, this study included recreationally active football
players. Elite football players are reported to sprint
faster than lower level players [1] and have a larger total
exercise load resulting in limited recovery time between
exercise sessions [20]. Whether differences in sprints,
jump height and maximal strength gains from FW and
BFW squats would be present in elite football players
are currently unknown. However, as the players in our
study experienced similar gains from BFW squats on
sprint, jump height and 1RM partial squat as previously
reported in elite football players [8, 22, 34], one may
consider our study’s findings generalizable to elite football
players, at least until proven otherwise by future
research.
Conclusion
Squats carried out with FWs or HL BFWs where both
are performed with MIVCs and combined with football
sessions, were equally effective in improving sprint time
and jump height in football players. The BFW group experienced
a more than two-fold larger increase in maximal
partial squat strength than the FW group. This
presents FW RE as an alternative to HL free weight RE
for improving high velocity movements in football
players.