Background
An increasing incidence of cardiovascular disease calls
for cost-effective, non-invasive point-of-care screening
methods to assess vascular risk profile, especially underlying
endothelial dysfunction. Brachial artery reactivity
testing (BART) allows such assessment by testing the
functional vasodilatory response of the endothelium to
shear stress of increased blood flow. Here the change in
vessel diameter is measured in the vasodilation (reactive
hyperemia that is endothelial dependent) that follows 3-
min of brachial artery occlusion (using suprasystolic cuff
pressure). It generates flow mediated dilation (FMD)
that is expressed as the percentage change in vessel
diameter relative to baseline vessel diameter (pre-ischaemic)
[1]. Impaired FMD has been found to correlate
with an increased risk for cardiovascular events [2–4]
and can predict progression of vascular disease [5]. Furthermore,
diabetic patients with low FMD identifies patients
with poor microvascular endothelial function and
associates with increased microalbuminuria [6].
Endothelial dysfunction may also contribute to perioperative
risk where impaired end-organ perfusion may
contribute to postoperative complications. In an early
stage, patients with endothelial dysfunction may present
with subclinical vascular impairment and it is important
to identify these patients preoperatively in order to
optimize the perioperative management. Several observational
studies have reported that impaired endothelial
function associates with postoperative complications [7–
10].
We sought to understand the impact of endothelial
dysfunction, as measured by BART derived FMD, on the
extended postoperative period using a more patientcentric
endpoint using Days at Home within 30 days
after surgery (DAH30). This parameter considers hospital
re-admission rates and has prognostic significance
towards survival [11]. DAH30 is a sensitive quality improvement
metric that contrasts the usual endpoints of
current FMD studies (postoperative complications,
length of ICU and hospital stay) that are affected by
many factors and require large sample sizes. Therefore,
we tested the hypothesis that low FMD values associate
with decreased DAH30.
Materials and methods
Subjects
This study was approved by the institutional ethics review
committee at the University of Cologne, Germany
(No. 13–112, Head: Prof. Dr. Drzezga) and conduted in
accordance with the ethical principles of the declaration
of Helsinki. The study was registered in the German
Clinical Trials Register (DRKS00005472) and executed
in accordance with the CONSORT statement. After
obtaining written informed consent, a total of 83
patients were enrolled in the study. FMD measurements
were performed during the pre-anesthetic consultation
at the University Hospital of Cologne. Eligibility included
adult patients scheduled for major abdominal surgery.
Exclusion criteria were inoperability, poor physical function
status (Metabolic equivalent of Task [MET] < 4) or
conditions making FMD measurement impossible (forearm
arteriovenous shunt, lymphatic oedema, open
wounds). General demographic data, general comorbidity
(Charlson Comorbidity Index), cardiovascular specific
comorbidity (revised Cardiac Risk Index; rCRI) and surgical
risk scores (Surgical Outcome Risk Tool; SORT)
were recorded preoperatively [12–14].
Study endpoints
The primary study endpoint explored the association of
FMD with DAH30, as measured by the quantity of postoperative
days at home within 30 days after surgery [11].
Secondary study endpoints included postoperative complications
and were assessed on postoperative days 3, 5,
8, 15 and 30 by Clavien-Dindo score and CCI. Specifically,
we investigated whether FMD provided additional
prognostic value alongside other perioperative risk
factors.
Flow mediated dilation
FMD analysis was performed according to the guidelines
for the ultrasound assessment of endothelial-dependent
flow-mediated vasodilation of the brachial artery [15].
Patients were positioned supine in a quiet room, with a
resting period preceding the test. FMD was measured
with the patient’s arm in a comfortable position for imaging
of the brachial artery and the positioning was the
same among all study patients.
All measurements were performed using a SonixGPS®
ultrasound device (Ultrasonix, Canada). FMD analysis
was conducted according to the technique described by
Corretti et al. [16], as follows:
 End-diastolic measurement of baseline brachial
artery diameter, using longitudinal sonographic
imaging above the antecubital fossa.
 Inflation of a cuff placed on the upper arm,
maintaining a pressure of at least 50 mmHg above
systolic blood pressure for 3 min.
 Measurement of the brachial artery diameter within
45 s after release of the blood pressure cuff, using
the same sonographic technique, to calculate
percentage increase in vessel diameter due to flow
mediated dilation.
FMD was regarded both as an absolute value and also
dichotomized within our analysis. We considered a
FMD < 10% as reduced, which was already presented as
a suitable threshold by Kuven et al. [17].
Assessement of postoperative outcome
The postoperative course of patients was observed using
a standardized questionnaire, by patient interview, as
well as by chart review. Complications were assessed according
to the Clavien-Dindo (CD) score [18] and the
Comprehensive Complication Index (CCI) [19]. Additionally,
complications were dichotomised into major
and minor complications based on the threshold of CD ≥
IIIa, which was defined a priori and distinguishes between
the requirement of non-invasive versus interventional/
surgical treatment. The highest complication
score during the 30 days postoperative follow-up period
was considered.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 25 (IBM
Corp. Armonk, NY, USA) and R version 4.0.3 in cooperation
with the Institute of Medical Statistics and Computational
Biology, University of Cologne. Statistical
power was calculated for a sample size of 71 patients
and 37% chance for major postoperative complications
and consequent lower DAH30, with a power of 80%, α
of 0.05 and a β of 0.2. This assumption was based on the
data from our pilot study, where a total of 63 patients
was sufficient to demonstrate a cutpoint of FMD <
11.5% associated with a higher incidence of postoperative
complications and longer ICU/hospital stays [10].
Normality of data was assessed by Shapiro-Wilk test.
Normally distributed variables are reported as mean
(standdard deviation (SD)), non-normally distributed
variables as median (interquartile range (IQR)), respectively.
Categorical data is represented as frequency (percentage).
Comparison of central tendencies between two
groups was made by the Wilcoxon rank sum test for
non-normally distributed data. For normally distributed
data, Welch’s t test was applied. Categorical variables
were tested by the χ2 test or by Fisher’s exact test for
small sample sizes.
To estimate the predictive impact of FMD on the postoperative
outcome, we performed multivariable regression
analyses for both the primary (linear regression)
and secondary endpoints (linear regression for CCI, ordinal
logistic regression for Clavien-Dindo score). ASA
status, surgery duration, and surgery type (oesophagectomy
versus non-oesophagectomy) were included as
covariates.
Results
Demographic and clinical characteristics
A total of 83 patients were enrolled in this study. In ten
patients, the planned surgery was cancelled
preoperatively and in one patient intraoperatively due to
inoperability, while one patient was lost to follow-up in
the postoperative period. Therefore, 71 patients completed
the study and were included in the data analysis.
The demographic and baseline clinical characteristics of
the enrolled patients, divided into two groups according
to the dichotomised FMD, are reported in Table 1. Patients
with reduced FMD were found to have a higher
mean BMI (normal FMD: 24.6 (4.1) kg/m2 (mean (SD)),
reduced FMD: 26.9 (3.8) kg/m2, P = 0.016). Moreover,
individuals exhibited a more frequent intake of AT1 antagonists,
when they had a reduced FMD (normal FMD:
2 (5.4%) (n(%)), reduced FMD: 8 (24%), P = 0.041). No
difference was observed between the central tendencies
among the remaining variables. In particular, preoperative
risk scores, comorbidities, duration of surgery and
type of surgery did not differ between individuals with
normal and reduced FMD.
FMD characteristics across the study population
For the entire study cohort the median FMD was 10.3%
(IQR = 8.4%). Patients were dichotomized according to
their individual FMD value as described above. Consequently,
34 patients were assigned to the reduced FMD
group, while 37 patients had a normal FMD. Following
dichotomisation, the median FMD differed significantly
between both groups (normal FMD: 15 (11)% (median
(IQR)), reduced FMD: 7 (4)%, P < 0.001), indicating an
appropriate threshold level. The demographic and clinical
characteristics of the patient subgroups according to
their FMD group are reported in Table 1.
Primary endpoint DAH30
DAH30 was the primary endpoint of our study as an
indicator of the postoperative outcome. Median
DAH30 within the study population was 14 (IQR =
6). After subdivision following dichotomisation by
FMD, median DAH30 did not differ between both
groups (Table 1). To evaluate whether absolute FMD
as an independent variable predicted DAH30, we explored
this relationship through linear regression
analysis. We additionally examined these relationships
after subgrouping by surgery type in view of
oesophagectomy as a high-risk operation and therefore
possible confounder. However, univariable linear
regression analysis for the entire cohort (R2 = 0.01,
P = 0.52) as well as following subgrouping (oesophagectomy:
R2 0.02, P = 0.44, non-oesophagectomy:
R2 = 0.02, P = 0.46) failed to confirm a significant role
of FMD as a predictor of DAH30 (Fig. 1). To account
for potential covariates affecting predictability
of DAH30, we also performed a multivariable linear
regression analysis adjusting for ASA status as well
as surgery duration and surgery type as clinically
likely predictors alongside FMD as independent variables.
Here, ASA status and surgery duration were
identified as significant predictors, each with negative
coefficients that are clinically plausible (ASA:
β = − 4.3, P = 0.005, surgery duration: β = − 0.02, P =
0.009). However, neither surgery type nor FMD contributed
to this regression model to any significant
extent (Table 2).
Secondary endpoints CCI and Clavien-Dindo score
The comparison of the central tendencies of the CCI
between the patients with a normal FMD score and
those with reduced FMD did not reveal a significant
difference (normal FMD: 21 (30) (median (IQR)), reduced
FMD: 26 (38), P = 0.4), as demonstrated in
Table 1. FMD did not predict CCI in either the univariable
regression model (Fig. 1) or the adjusted
multivariable regression model, whilst ASA status did
(Table 2).
As determined by Clavien-Dindo score, the number
of patients suffering no or minor postoperative complications
among the whole study cohort was 52
(73%), while 19 (27%) had major complications.
However, χ2 did not reveal significant indepenence
of the subgroups. This finding also emerged upon
comparison of the Clavien-Dindo score without
dichotomisation. FMD was evaluated as a predictor
of Clavien-Dindo score within a multivariable ordinal
logistic regression analysis. The resulting regression
model was able to predict the Clavien-Dindo score
including the independent variables ASA status
(OR = 3.78, P = 0.009) and surgery duration (OR =
1.01 per minute, P = 0.031), however, FMD was obsolete
and did not hold significance as a predictor
(Table 2).
Poor preoperative (or postoperative decline [8]) of endothelial
function may contribute to postoperative complications
[7, 20]. Early identification of underlying
endothelial dysfunction in the preoperative phase may
provide a window of opportunity for preoperative
optimization to improve postoperative outcomes. Noninvasive
techniques to assess endothelial function are
predominantly used for the surveillance of atherosclerosis
progression in patients with cardiovascular risk factors.
Whether preoperative assessment of non-invasive
parameters, e.g. flow mediated dilation,has perioperative
utility remains unclear.
In this study cohort, the median recorded FMD
value was similar to the values obtained in our pilot
study of thoracic surgery patients [10] indicating a
comparable measurement technique. However, FMD
ranges differ significantly between studies. Nosova
et al. [21] reported that 5 day bed rest reduced mean
FMD from 11 ± 3% to 9 ± 2%, whereas in a study by
Benjamin et al. [22] FMD values of 3.3 (±3.0)% for
women and 2.4 (±2.4)% for men were reported,
while Gokce et al. [23] reported mean FMD values
of 6.6 (±4,7)% in patients undergoing vascular surgery.
The differences between the studies show that
an individual value, without a reference or control,
does not favour prognostic assessment and that
FMD analysis is perhaps more valuable in the context
of clinical studies than in clinical practice [24].
However, we sought to investigate the impact of
both the absolute FMD value and the dichotomized
FMD (threshold 10%) on our study endpoints. This
threshold was proposed by Kuven et al. [17] and our
analyis revealed that applying this threshold leads to
a significant discrimination of the two groups regarding
their absolute FMD values. Despite the fact
that brachial artery reactivity has been associated
with the prognosis of cardiovascular events and
long-term outcome in previous studies [6, 25, 26],
we could not prove a predictive effect for DAH30 or
the occurrence of postoperative complications. However,
in our study, the population of patients with
non-cardiac surgery was different and the observation
period was relatively short (30 days). We previously
reported that low FMD correlated with longer
lengths of ICU and hospital stay in patients having
thoracic surgery, where the spectrum of operations
included major lung surgery besides oesophagectomies
[10]. Moreover, the comorbid burden was
higher within these patients, indicating that FMD
may not be suited for risk prediction in abdominal
surgery or patients with relatively low comorbid burden.
Lung surgery may be different in the context of
lung capillary endothelial function being crucial for
homeostasis, while its dysfunction can lead to highly
life-threatening pathologies such as lung embolism,
acute respiratory distress syndrome and pulmonal artery
hypertension, all of which have previously been
associated with reduced FMD [27–29].
Oesophagectomy was not found to be an independent
predictor of postoperative outcome, when ASA status
and duration of surgery were also regarded within the
regression model. However, as we could demonstrate
that established factors for impaired postoperative outcome
including ASA status and duration of surgery are
capable of predicting the primary and secondary endpoints,
our data appears to be plausible.
Limitations to our study, however, include the fact that
FMD measurements may be prone to a high variation
between measurements, as vascular function is physiologically
altered by many factors. Peretz et al. [30] have
noted a deviation of 2.4% in repeated measurements
using the upper arm occlusion technique compared to
1.2% using the forearm occlusion technique. Similar
consideration should be given to patient medications
that modulate vascular function. Corretti and Thijssen
[15, 31] draw attention to the importance of stopping
any medication with vascular influence for at least four
half-lifes, as supported by ACE inhibitiors and statins reported
to increase FMD values [32]. However, within
our study population there were no differences among
the intake of ACE inhibitors or statins between the
groups of patients with normal versus reduced FMD,
whilst AT1 antagonist intake was more frequent in individuals
with reduced FMD. Modulation with such medications
may explain the observed variability in
correlation between FMD and well-established preoperative
cardiovascular risk factors, but may highlight the potential
use of serial FMD measurements to monitor
response to such therapies. Consideration should also be
given to having patients fast before testing and to refrain
from smoking, caffeine or alcohol intake for at least 6 h.
Testing should ideally be performed at the same time of
day based on circadian rhythms. The challenge of ensuring
these testing conditions is possible within a research
context, but these factors renders the application of
FMD poorly suited to point-of-care testing in daily clinical
practice. Furthermore, ultrasound techniques may,
despite a standardised guideline, vary between patients.
Since the FMD analysis as part of the preoperative risk
assessment is facing substantial practical limits, it is unlikely
that it could be a helpful additional tool in routine
clinical practice. The biggest hurdle of this technique is
the fact that it is time consuming and therefore difficult
to include in the preoperative evaluation of patients who
are candidates for surgery. Furthermore, a validation of
this technique to be a true predictor of increased perioperative
risk has yet to be shown Conclusion
This study found no additional predictive value of the
FMD for DAH30 or the occurrence of postoperative
complications determined by CCI and Clavien-Dindo
score. Further investigation regarding these findings is
needed, as it seems that FMD is dependent on the patients
underlying disease state and thus homogenous
groups of patients should be studied. FMD remains an
interesting and potentially useful tool for risk assessment
in cardiovascular diseases, however, its value in the perioperative
context requires further investigation.