Background
Cervical torticollis is a rare deformity characterized by a
lateral head tilt and chin rotation toward the side opposite
to the tilt. Klippel-Feil syndrome (KFS) is a cervical
abnormalities in pediatric patients caused by the absence
or fusion of cervical vertebrae. KFS was first reported in
1912 as a triad of short neck, restricted motion of the
neck, and low posterior hairline. As a consequence of
failure in normal segmentation of cervical vertebrae during
the early weeks of fetal development, two or more of
the seven vertebrae are fused. It has a rare incidence of
1:42000 births [1, 2]. The atlanto-occipital joint and
spinal canal stenosis could co-exist in KF syndrome [3].
The surgical treatment of the cervical osseous deformity
poses potential threat to airway management both in
tracheal intubation and extubation. We reported a
unique case of a pediatric patient undergone orthopedic
surgery who need tracheostomy as a result of failed tracheal
extubation. We will discuss the airway management
of this patient and suggest possible causes in order
to provide strategies for future events. Written informed
consent was obtained from the guardian of the patient.
Case presentation
An 8-year-old boy (weighing 34 kg) was found to be torticollis
at age 1. He was diagnosed with osseous torticollis
in our hospital, and was scheduled for elective
orthopedic surgery.
History
The boy has tonsil hypertrophy and sleep dyspnea in supine
position and was scheduled for tonsillectomy in
local hospital 1 year ago. The surgery was cancelled because
of failed tracheal intubation. No special birth history
was documented. No other dysplasia were reported.
Pre-operative examination
ECG
Sinus arrhythmia by wandering pacemaker with sinoatrial
node; incomplete right bundle branch block.
Carotid artery and vertebral artery ultrasound: no left
common carotid artery was found (suspected with congenital
variation).
Cervical CT and MRI examinations
Atlanto-occipital fusion; congenital skull base depression;
atlantoaxial joint dislocation; cervical spine developmental
malformations (C2-3 block vertebrae; C6 left
appendage hypoplasia; C6-7 invisible cleft); sub tonsillar
hernia.
Airway evaluation
Modified Mallampati test was III ~ IV. The mouth opening
degree (less than 3 fingers) and head and neck
movement (60-120 degree) were limited. No significant
narrowing of tracheal lumen and airway tortuosity were
noticed in preoperative radiological findings (Fig. 1). The
Colorado Pediatric Airway Score (COPUR score) with
prediction points was 11 (C, points 1; O, points 2: with
limited mouth opening, 20-40 mm; P, points 4: past
failed intubation history; U, points 2: partially visible
uvula; R, points 2: limited range of cervical motion, 60-
120 degree). The glottic view prediction was 3, and the
COPUR prediction points of 11 was indicative of “difficult
intubation, fiberoptic less traumatic” [3]. No mandible/
maxilla deformity or other hypoplasia were noted.
Therefore, though with expected intubation difficulty,
intubation was attempted under full preparation with
difficult airway management tools. An experienced
anesthesiologist with two assistant anesthesiologists were
in charge of this case.
The patient’s periphery oxygen saturation (SpO2) was
100% breathing room air, in supine position. Dexamethasone
was given to prevent postoperative nausea
and vomiting, as well as airway edema. After sedated
with propofol (with fractioned dose of 80 mg) following
preoxygenation, sufficient facemask ventilation was confirmed.
The spontaneous breathing was retained to ensure
the absent of difficult intubation condition. The
patient’s epiglottis was revealed during sedation. However,
after administering 10 mg atracurium and 10 μg
sufentanyl, the facemask ventilation suddenly became
impossible. A reinforced endotracheal tube (I.D. of 6.0
mm) was tried under glidescope but failed. The SpO2
dropped to 60. Direct laryngoscopy with medium sized
Macintosh blade was tried again by another attending
anesthesiologist after optimizing ventilation maneuvers.
A reinforced endotracheal tube with sealing cuff (I.D. of
5.5 mm) was placed successfully. The whole intubation
duration was approximately 12 min.
After prone position was made by orthopedic surgeons
with continuous cervical traction (Mayfield®, Integra
LifeScience. Inc., US), orthopedic surgery was performed,
including the exploration anteriorly of the
wedged C2 and C3-4 intervertebral disk, the fixation
posteriorly of occipital-C4 pedicle with iliac bone graft,
and correction of cervical torticollis. The surgical duration
was 334 min and the hemodynamic status was
stable during the whole procedure. A total of 1700 ml
crystalloid solution was infused, with intraoperative
blood loss of 200 ml, and autologous blood transfusion
of 100 ml washed red blood cells. The boy was transferred
to the ICU with continuous sedation and analgesia
without extubation.
Extubation was normally performed on post-operative
day 1 in fear of prolonged intubation related complications
such as ventilator associated pneumonia or airway
complication. After positive result of cuff-leak test, ICU
doctors postponed the extubation and invited anesthesiologists
for consultation the next day. On postoperative
day 2, anesthesiologist and ICU doctors performed cuff
leak test. The result was still positive. Considering the
success of the first intubation, extubation was attempted
with preparation of re-intubation. The patient suffocated
immediately after extubation despite complete consciousness
and with normal blood-gas analysis results.
Inspiratory stridor and cyanosis was noted soon after.
Dexamethasone was administered to reduce airway
edema and other possible intubation related damage.
The patient’s heart rate (HR) dropped from 125 bmp to
80 bpm during re-intubation. Epiglottis and laryngeal
edema were revealed by video laryngoscope, but the
glottis could not be visualized. Tracheal re-intubation finally
succeeded 17 min later under propofol sedation.
CT scanning was made on postoperative day 9 which
revealed airway edema comparing with preoperative
findings (Fig. 2c-e). The extended intubation duration
and long-term sedation would lead to ventilator associated
pneumonia and complicated airway management.
After Fiber-optical bronchoscope (FOB) inspection
showing alleviated airway edema on postoperative day 9,
and the potential existence of deep cervical fascial space
from CT imaging, a proposal of attempted extubation in
the operating room and tracheotomy as the alternative
plan was made by multidisciplinary consultation including
orthopedics, anesthesiologists, otolaryngologists, and
ICU physicians. On postoperative day 10 in the operating
room, the patient was extubated after fully suction of
the sputum and sufficient oxygenation. However, inspiratory
dyspnea soon ensued. The patient was put in
left lateral head-up position with facemask oxygenation
and placement of oropharyngeal airway device. Dyspnea
was not alleviated and cyanosis appeared 5 min after
extubation. SpO2 dropped to 60% with HR of 70 bmp.
Considering the existence of upper airway obstruction,
re-intubation was performed immediately using glidescopy
under propofol sedation. Tracheotomy was successfully
performed under general anaesthesia with
orthopedists’ assistance with better positioning the head
and neck. The patient returned to ICU with vital signs
stable and was weaning from mechanical ventilator the
next day. Five days after tracheotomy, CT examination
showed the still existence of the upper airway edema
(Fig. 2f-i). Ten days later, the patient was transferred to
the orthopedic ward.
One month after the first operation, the tracheostomy
tube was blocked and no discomfort was complaint.
Four days later, the tracheostomy casing was removed.
The boy was discharged from hospital 3 days later. Three
year follow-up revealed satisfactory orthopedic results.
Discussion and conclusion
The boy was diagnosed with osseous torticollis, congenital
occipito-atlantal fusion, congenital basilar invagination,
atlanto-axial joint dislocation, KFS at C2-3,
vertebral aplasia (C6), spina bifida occulta (C6-7), and
Chiari Malformation (CM) in our hospital. It is worth
to note that the extubation failed twice and finally required
a tracheostomy. The possible reasons for difficult
airway management were discussed in the
following.
KFS is a complex syndrome of osseous and visceral
anomalies. The anatomical characteristics of KFS have
significant implications for intubation. It is characterized
by failure in segmentation of two or more cervical
vertebrae, with 75% congenital fusion cases occur in the
first three cervical vertebrae [4]. Sporadic case reports
showed the difficulties in repeated intubation attempts
and associated complications and even abandonment of
the surgical procedure. The cervical fusion present in
KFS worsens with age as the spine reaches full maturity,
and that clinicians should use available imaging modalities,
anesthetic history, and comprehensive, preoperative
airway examination to determine the potential risk of
difficult airway [5]. In the present case, though with difficulty,
the tracheal intubations were all successfully performed.
However, the attempted extubations were failed
and required emergent re-intubation and finally
tracheostomy.
The rarely occurred airway obstruction after cervical
spine surgery has been reported with swelling and
hematoma. Laryngeal edema presents as inspiratory stridor
within 30–60 min of extubation, and it is an important
cause of post-extubation obstruction [6]. Normally,
the degree of swelling peaked on day 2-3 after surgery,
and then showed a gradually decreasing tendency [7].
Experience from our tertiary center is that the extubation
could be safely performed immediately after cervical
surgery. While for some major orthopedic surgery, it
might take 24-48 h for safe extubation. In the current
case, the delayed airway obstruction still existed 2 weeks
after surgery and required tracheostomy. The upper airway
edema is obvious from postoperative CT imaging
and gradually dissipated after 1 month. For pediatric patients,
large adenoids/tonsils and obese are important indications
for difficult airway management [8].
Considering the patient’s past medical history of sleep
dyspnea in supine position due to tonsil hypertrophy,
the failed tracheal intubation and the canceled tonsillectomy,
we speculated that this might constitute as an important
factor for prolonged extubation when
complicated with airway edema.
Moreover, the occipito-cervical alignment has significant
impact on the oropharyngeal space. Sporadic case
reports revealed that the angle of occipito-cervical (O-C)
fusion would be critical for postoperative upper airway
obstruction [9]. A retrospective clinical study showed
there’s a difference in the O-C2 angle (the angles between
the inferior endplate of C2 vertebrae body and the
McGregor’s line). The percentage changes in the crosssectional
area of the oropharynx before and after surgery
were linearly correlated. Deceased O-C2 angel may lead
to dyspnea and/or dysphagia after surgery [10]. For patients
with occipital-cervical fixation surgery, extubation
should be performed with caution.
The boy’s congenital cervical skeletal deformity including
the basal invagination and KFS, as well as the internal
fixation may interfere with the accurate
measuring of O-C2 angel. Therefore, we could only
made a rough estimation of the O-C4 angel. However,
from lateral view of the cervical X-ray in neutral position,
a slight decrease of the O-C4 angel was noticed
(Fig. 3). The O-C4 fusion immobilized the head and
neck movement, and forced the patient’s head in a slight
flexion position when compared with preoperative imaging,
which further compressed the laryngeal space and
resulted in the failed extubation. Moreover, pediatric patients
with large tonsils, adenoids or obesity were prone
to airway collapse during anaesthesia [11]. The decreased
oropharyngeal space caused by the surgery were
further compressed by the postoperative laryngeal edema
and tonsil hypertrophy which ultimately resulted in difficulty
breathing and tracheostomy.
Chiari Malformation (CM) is the downward herniation
of the caudal part of the cerebellum and/or medulla
oblongata into the spinal canal, and is associated with
basilar invagination and can alter neurological functions
such as upper airway motility and respiratory control,
not only central, but also obstructive respiratory events
[12]. In this case, the tonsil hypertrophy and CM may
not directly lead to airway obstruction, but may complicate
the difficulty airway management. The compensatory
range of the upper airway space in this patient was
limited with the pre-existing tonsil hypertrophy as well as
changed upper airway muscle tension caused by the Chiari
deformity. The post-operative decreased O-C4 angel further
worsened the condition and might be an important
constitutional factor in postoperative dyspnea [13].
Extubation should be performed with caution. However,
FOB examination and cuff leak test could only reflect
subglottic airway condition. It is reported from a
multicenter evaluation study that several cuff leak tests
display limited diagnostic performance for the detection
of post-extubation stridor. Given the high rate of false
positives, routine cuff leak test may expose to undue
prolonged mechanical ventilation [14–17]. Inappropriate
selection of tracheal tube would lead to confused result.
Therefore, we did not solely depend on this test. For the
narrowing of the oropharyngeal space, more thorough
examination including CT scanning should be performed.
Multi-disciplinary consultation is important for
deciding appropriate extubation time. Anaesthesiologists
should get well prepared for the emergent airway condition.
However, there is no pediatric-specific universal
extubation guidelines or experts consensus. Current algorithms
are modifications of adult approaches which
are often inappropriate.
We reported a rare case of a pediatric patients with
cervical osseous deformity undergone orthopedic surgery
and need tracheostomy as a result of failed tracheal
extubation. The prolonged upper airway obstruction
after occipito-cervical fusion have never been reported
in pediatric patients undergone osseous torticollis surgery.
The causes of prolonged airway obstruction after
occipito-cervical fusion are multifactorial. The upper airway
edema constituted the major reason, and the hypertrophic
tonsil and the congenital cervical malformation
may further complicated the airway condition with limited
occipital-cervical range of motion and decreased
compensatory space of the oropharyngeal cavity.
Cautions should be taken during extubation process in
pediatric patients who undergone major osseous torticollis
surgery. Evaluation of general clinical factors that
may produce an adverse impact on ventilation after tracheal
extubation should be comprehensively considered
and optimized. An extubation and possible re-intubation
plan in case of failed extubation that can be implemented
to guarantee adequate ventilation should be formulated
in advance. We recommend bougie or exchange
catheters to avoid “cannot intubate, cannot ventilate”
condition. For severe airway compromise and prolonged
intubation, tracheostomy should be considered.
The appearance of the patient was significantly improved
at the 3 years follow up after discharge from hospital.