Background
Nausea and vomiting after surgery is one of unpleasant,
trouble, and the most common side effects with
general anesthesia. Laparoscopic surgery is widely used
for gynecological patients because of some advantages,
including postoperative pain relief and accelerated recovery
after surgery [1]. It was reported that the incidence
of PONV in high-risk patients with no prophylaxis was
likely to reach up to 70 to 80% [2–4]. Nausea and vomiting
after surgery may result in more discomfort and
dissatisfaction for patients, disorder of electrolyte, and
prolonged the time of hospitalization. Given the higher
baseline risk (females, laparoscopic surgery, use of postoperative
opioids, etc.), a single prophylactic measure
is often not sufficient to achieve a satisfactory PONV
prophylaxis.
Dexmedetomidine can generate sedation, analgesia,
and minimal respiratory depression. Dexmedetomidine
administration has several potential benefit effects, such
as reducing catecholamine release [5], opioid-sparing
[6], and improving the quality of recovery [7, 8]. It was
revealed that systemic administration of dexmedetomidine
might enhance the analgesic effect of opioids and
reduce opioids requirement during the perioperative
and postoperative period [9, 10], which might result in
decreasing of opioid-related adverse reactions including
PONV. Some studies have pointed that perioperative
dexmedetomidine administration can reduce the incidence
of PONV [11, 12]. In addition, some studies have
showed that intravenous (IV) lidocaine has several beneficial
effects including analgesic, anti-hyperalgesic, and
anti-inflammatory properties [13, 14]. Recent meta-analysis
showed that the perioperative lidocaine administration
reduced risk of nausea but not vomiting during the
first 48 h after operation [15]. Therefore, we hypothesized
that the combination of lidocaine and dexmedetomidine
would further reduce the incidence of nausea, vomiting,
and PONV after laparoscopic hysterectomy. The primary
purpose of the present study was to explore the effect of
a combined application of dexmedetomidine plus lidocaine
on nausea, vomiting, and PONV during the first
48 h after laparoscopic hysterectomy undergoing general
anesthesia.
Materials and methods
The present study was ratified by Ethics Committee of the
Anqing Municipal Hospital (approval number: AQ042)
and prospectively registered at www. clini caltr ials. gov
(NCT03809923, date of registration: 18/01/2019). All
methods were performed in accordance with the relevant
guidelines and regulations in our present study. Patients
were requested to written the informed consent before
surgery. A total of 248 subjects who underwent laparoscopic
total hysterectomy with general anesthesia were
recruited. The inclusion criteria included American Society
of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status I and II,
40–60 years of age, not taking the antiemetic drug which
has an effect on the incidence of PONV within 24 h
before surgery, and scheduled for elective laparoscopic
hysterectomy. The exclusion criteria in the current study
included obesity with BMI (body mass index) > 30 kg.
m−2, preoperative atrioventricular block and bradycardia,
history of allergy to local anesthetics, history of
preoperative opioids medication and psychiatric, severe
respiratory disease, and impaired kidney or liver function.
The patients suffered urticaria, severe hypotension
(mean arterial pressure [MAP] < 60 mmHg) or bradycardia
(heart rate [HR] < 40 bpm), or arrhythmia during
lidocaine and dexmedetomidine infusion period were
excluded.
Randomization and assigned groups
Randomization was performed using computer-generated
random numbers, and patient allocation ratio was
1:1. Assignments were concealed in sequentially numbered
opaque envelopes containing the group allocation
1 h before induction of anesthesia. Patients were
allocated into four groups, including groups L, D, LD
and C: patients in group L received bolus infusion of
lidocaine (2%) 1.5 mg/kg over 10 min before induction
of anesthesia, then lidocaine was infused at the rate of
1.5 mg/kg/h, and which was stopped 30 min before the
end of operation [16]; patients in group D received bolus
infusion of dexmedetomidine 0.5 μg/kg over 10 min
before induction of anesthesia, then dexmedetomidine
was infused at the rate of 0.4 μg/kg/h, and which
was stopped 30 min before the end of operation [17];
patients in group LD received bolus infusion of lidocaine
(2%) 1.5 mg/kg and dexmedetomidine 0.5 μg/kg
over 10 min before induction of anesthesia, respectively,
then lidocaine and dexmedetomidine were infused at
the rate of 1.5 mg/kg/h and 0.4 μg/kg/h, and which was
stopped 30 min before the end of operation; patients in
group C received the same volume normal saline (0.9%)
over 10 min before induction of anesthesia, then normal
saline (0.9%) was continuous infused in equal volume,
and which was stopped 30 min before the end of
operation. All participants, including researchers, clinicians,
nurses, and patients were all fully blinded to treatment
allocation. The drug solutions were prepared by an
anesthesiologist who was not blinded, but not otherwise
involved in the study.
Anesthesia protocol
All patients did not received any drugs before surgery.
Patients routinely monitored mean blood pressure
(MBP), heart rate (HR), electrocardiogram (ECG),
end-tidal CO2
(
PetCO2), and peripheral pulse oximeter
(
SPO2) after arriving at the operation room. Peripheral
venous access of each patient was established by a
nurse of operating room. To obtain sufficient oxygenation,
100% oxygen was given to each patient via facemask
for 3 to 5 min before induction of anesthesia. Patients
in the four groups were induced with target-controlled
infusion (TCI) of propofol and remifentanil. The target
predicted plasma concentration of propofol was set
at 3.0 μg/mL [18], which was maintained for 3 min, followed
by remifentanil TCI begun. The target predicted
plasma concentration of remifentanil was set at 5.0 ng/
ml [19]. Cis-atracurium 0.15 mg/kg was injected intravenously
when the patients lost consciousness, and
an endotracheal tube (ETT) with an internal diameter
of 6.5 mm (female) was inserted into the trachea after
adequate muscle relaxation. Mechanical ventilation was
implemented using Fabius Draeger machine. Respiratory
parameters were set as follows: tidal volume and respiratory
rate were set 6–8 mL/kg and 12–14 beat/min (bpm)
to maintain the PetCO2
between 35 and 45 mmHg during
the intraoperative period, respectively. A supplemental
dose of cis-atracurium was administered intermittently
according to train of four (TOF) to maintain muscle
relaxation during the anesthesia period.
The depth of anesthesia was monitored by bispectral
index (BIS), and values were kept between 45 and 60 by
adjusting plasma concentration of propofol during the
anesthesia period, and hemodynamic variables within
20% of preoperative values. 30 min before the end of surgery,
Fentanyl 1 μg/kg was administered intravenously,
and then patients were connected to an IV patient-controlled
analgesic machine (IVPCA) with 0.3 μg/kg/h fentanyl
and 0.9% normal saline (100 ml of total volume) to
deliver a bolus of 0.075 μg/kg of the above analgesics,
with background continuous infusion of 2 mL/h, and
a lockout time of 15 min. At the end of surgery, ondansetron
0.1 mg/kg was injected intravenously. Atropine
(0.5 mg) and neostigmine (1 mg) was given when the
patients restored spontaneous respiration. Endotracheal
intubation was removed with TOF ratio at least 0.9.
Thereafter, all patients were transported to the PACU.
All patients were continued to observe for 2 h during
the PACU stay period. The incidence of bradycardia, dry
mouth, agitation, and shivering were recorded during the
PACU stay period. The operations were performed by
two high-experienced surgeons under a CO2
pneumoperitoneum,
and the pressure of pneumoperitoneum was
maintained between 10 and 12 mmHg for all patients. At
the end of surgery, wound infiltration of surgical site with
10 ml ropivacaine (0.75%) was completed by one surgeon
to provide additional the analgesia protocol after surgery
for each patient.
Outcomes variables
Our primary outcome was the incidence of nausea, vomiting,
and PONV within the first 48 h after surgery. Nausea
intensity was evaluated using a 10-point VAS (0 = no
nausea, 10 = intolerable nausea) in the PACU and surgical
ward. In the surgical ward, all patients were asked by
an independent anesthesiologist who did not involve in
the study to assess the incidence and extent of nausea
according to the nausea VAS. We recorded the number
of vomiting by direct asking the patients. Emetic episodes
included vomiting and retching in the present study. The
definition of vomiting after surgery was at least incident
of vomiting or retching and PONV score was at least
4. The PONV was defined as patients who underwent
events of nausea, vomiting or retching or combination
of these. If patients underwent the following conditions
such as sustaining nausea (more than 30 min) or vomiting
or retching (great than or equal to 2 times), rescue
antiemetics (ondansetron 8 mg or droperidol 1 mg) were
given intravenously.
The secondary outcomes included the incidence of
total 24 h PONV after surgery, the occurrence of bradycardia,
dry mouth, agitation, and shivering during the
PACU stay period, postoperative pain VAS scores, postoperative
fentanyl consumption, as well as propofol and
remifentanil dose during the anesthesia period, which
were not registered outcomes in the clinicaltrials.gov.
The intensity of pain after operation was estimated with
a 10-cm VAS in the PACU and the ward (0 for no pain, 10
for the most imaginable pain). If postoperative VAS > 3,
an additional 25 μg of fentanyl was treated intravenously
until the VAS ≤ 3. Sedation levels of subjects during the
PACU stay period were evaluated with the Ramsay sedation
scale (1 = agitated and uncomfortable, 2 = co-operative
and orientated, 3 = can follow simple directions,
4 = asleep but strong response to stimulation, 5 = asleep
and slow response to stimulation and 6 = asleep and no
response to stimulation). Sedation score ≥ 4 was regarded
as excessive sedation. Bradycardia was defined as heart
rate < 50 beats/min or a decrease more than 20% of
baseline.
Sample size calculation
Data from our preliminary study indicated that the
occurrence of nausea, vomiting, and PONV within the
first 24 h after surgery in the groups C, L, D and LD was
52, 38, 30, and 22%; 47, 35, 26, and 20%; 55, 45, 36, and
27%, respectively. We achieved Power analysis by PASS
11.0 with a β value set at 0.2 and α value set at 0.05. A
sample size of 180, 203, and 216 was respectively needed,
54 subjects was allocated to each group, and considering
rate of dropout, therefore, 62 patients were enrolled in
each group for the present study.
Statistical analysis
We used SPSS v.20 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA)
software for completing statistical analyses in the present
study. Data were expressed as the number or
mean ± standard deviation. χ2 or Fisher’s exact test as
appropriate was used for categorical data analysis. Oneway
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for continuous
data analysis in all four groups. Repeated-measures
ANOVA compared difference of the pain VAS scores
and fentanyl consumption in the four groups during the
first 24 h after surgery. If group differences were found
by ANOVA to be significant, and Tukey’s post-hoc test
was performed for further analyzed. If heterogeneity of
variance was found, Dunnett’s T3
test was performed for
further analyzed. There was statistical significant when
P value < 0.05 apart from the post-hoc pairwise comparisons
in which P-values were adjusted by Bonferroni
correction.
Results
Of 285 patients screened for eligibility, 37 subjects were
excluded because of preoperative bradycardia and refusing
to participate the research. 248 subjects were randomized
in the current study, four patients were converted
to open surgery; four patients turned off the analgesic
pump because of postoperative drastic vomiting.
Eventually, 60 patients in each group were analyzed
(Fig. 1).
There were no significant differences between the four
groups regarding age, BMI, blood loss, intraoperative fluids,
anesthesia time, operation time, history of smoking,
history of PONV, history of motion sickness, and Apfel
score for PONV risk (Table 1).
The intraoperative requirement of propofol
and remifentanil
The intraoperative requirement of propofol was lower
in groups D and LD than groups C and L (P < 0.001,
P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001, respectively). The intraoperative
requirement of remifentanil was lower in
groups L, D, and LD than group C (P < 0.001, P < 0.001,
P < 0.001, respectively). The intraoperative requirement
of remifentanil significantly decreased in groups D and
LD compared to group L (P < 0.001 and P < 0.001). The
intraoperative requirement of propofol and remifentanil
was the lowest in group LD (P < 0.05) (Table 1).
The occurrence of nausea and vomiting after operation
The incidence of nausea and PONV during the first 0–2 h
after operation was significantly lower in group LD than
group C (3 (5.0%) and 13 (21.7%), P = 0.007; 5 (8.3%) and
17 (28.3%), P = 0.005, Bonferroni-corrected α = 0.0083
[0.05/6], respectively). In addition, the occurrence of
total 24 h PONV was significantly decreased in group
LD compared with group C (20 (33.3%) and 36 (60.0%),
P = 0.003, Bonferroni-corrected α = 0.0083 [0.05/6]).
There was not significant differences regarding incidence
of nausea, vomiting and PONV during the 2–24 and
24–48 h after surgery, and the use of rescue antiemetics
in the four groups. The prevalence of total 24 h PONV
was not also significant differences in groups C, L, and D
(36 (60.0%) and 28 (46.7%), P = 0.143; 36 (60.0%) and 24
(40.0%), P = 0.028; 28 (46.7%) and 24 (40.0%), P = 0.461,
Bonferroni-corrected α = 0.0083 [0.05/6], respectively)
(Table 2).
The pain VAS scores after surgery
The pain VAS scores were significantly lower at postoperative
2, 6 h in group L, and at postoperative 2, 6, and 12 h
in groups D and LD compared to group C (P = 0.004,
P = 0.030, P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P = 0.032, P < 0.001,
P < 0.001, P < 0.001, respectively). We found that significant
reduction of the pain VAS scores were observed
at postoperative 2, 6, and 12 h in group LD compared
to groups C, L, and D (P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001,
P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001,
P = 0.002, respectively). There was not statistical differences
in all four groups regarding the pain VAS scores at
postoperative 24 h (Table 3).
The consumption of fentanyl
The consumption of fentanyl was significantly decreased in
groups D and LD during the first 24 h after operation compared
to group C (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, P = 0.001, P = 0.004,
P = 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P < 0.001, respectively). The
consumption of fentanyl was lower at 6 h after surgery in
group L than group C (P = 0.024). The consumption of fentanyl
was much less at 6, and 12 h after surgery in group
LD than group L (P = 0.003 and P = 0.033) (Table 4).
Adverse effects
The number of dry mouth, bradycardia, and excessive
sedation was significantly higher during the PACU stay
period in groups LD and D than group C (P < 0.001,
P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P = 0.001, P < 0.001, P = 0.008, Bonferroni-
corrected α = 0.0083 [0.05/6], respectively).
Compared to group L, The number of dry mouth, bradycardia,
and excessive sedation was significantly higher
during the PACU stay period in group LD (P < 0.001,
P < 0.001, P < 0.001, Bonferroni-corrected α = 0.0083
[0.05/6], respectively). The number of dry mouth was
significantly higher during the PACU stay period in
groups D than L (P = 0.001, Bonferroni-corrected
α = 0.0083 [0.05/6]). Patients with agitation and shivering
were not significant differences in the four groups
(Table 5).
Discussion
The main findings of the current research showed that
combination of lidocaine and dexmedetomidine infusion
only resulted in fewer incidence of nausea and PONV at
0–2 h after operation. However, it did not significantly
reduce the incidence of nausea, vomiting, and PONV at
2–24 and 24–48 h after laparoscopic hysterectomy. In
addition, we also found that lidocaine combined with
dexmedetomidine administration significantly decreased
the incidence of total 24 h PONV after operation.
Intraoperative lidocaine administration help to
improve postoperative pain and reduces intraoperative
opioid requirement. The lower overall opioid consumption
may decrease the incidence of PONV. A study by
Wang T et al. suggested that 1.5 mg/kg lidocaine bolus
injection before induction of anesthesia, followed by
continuous infusion at the speed of 2 mg/kg/h until the
end of operation significantly reduced the occurrence
of PONV at 6 h after gynecological laparoscopic surgery,
but there was not comparable at 1 h and 24 h after
operation. It might be associated with opioid-sparing
and lower VAS scores [20]. Ahn E et al. indicated that
lidocaine administration was significantly lower incidence
of nausea compared to the control group with
laparoscopic colectomy, it most likely attributed to intravenous
lidocaine decreased the total amount of fentanyl
[21]. The results of our study showed that intravenous
lidocaine was lower postoperative pain VAS scores and
fentanyl consumption within the first 6 h after surgery,
but it did not reduce the incidence of nausea, vomiting,
and PONV during the first 48 h after operation. Our
findings were inconsistent with above studies. It might
be due to the different dosages and time of lidocaine
administration.
Intraoperative and postoperative use of opioids may
induce the incidence of PONV. Minimum consumption
of opioids may result in less opioid-related adverse events
including PONV. Previous studies documented that dexmedetomidine
decreased the occurrence of PONV by
reducing requirement of opioids [22, 23]. Geng ZY et al.
demonstrated that dexmedetomidine administration had
lower incidence of nausea, which attributed to sympatholytic
and opioid-sparing effect of dexmedetomidine
[24]. The results from Li HJ et al. showed that dexmedetomidine
reduced the incidence of nausea not vomiting
at 2 h after operation [25]. In our study, we observed
that dexmedetomidine administration significantly
decreased remifentanil requirement, postoperative pain
VAS scores, and consumption of fentanyl. However, dexmedetomidine
infusion did not significantly decrease the
incidence of nausea, vomiting, and PONV at 0–2, 2–24,
and 24–48 h after operation compared with group C. It
might be associated with the intensity of opioid-sparing
effect of dexmedetomidine.
In a study by Bakan M et al. showed that intravenous
lidocaine and dexmedetomidine infusion for laparoscopic
cholecystectomy reduced the incidence of PONV
undergoing patients requiring tracheal intubation for
general anesthesia [26]. In our study, several identified
independent risk factors for PONV such as female, history
of smoking, motion sickness or PONV, and laparoscopic
surgery in the current study were not comparable
significance between the four groups. Our results indicated
that combination of lidocaine and dexmedetomidine
infusion significantly reduced nausea and PONV at
0–2 h as well as the incidence of total 24 h PONV after
surgery. This might be associated with lidocaine plus
dexmedetomidine administration resulted in less intraoperative
remifentanil requirement and lower VAS pain
scores during the first 24 h after surgery. We also found
that combination of lidocaine and dexmedetomidine had
no significant effect on nausea, vomiting, and PONV at
2–24 and 24–48 h. In addition, use of rescue antiemetics
(ondansetron or droperidol) was not comparable in the
four groups when patients underwent sustaining nausea
(more than 30 min) or vomiting or retching (great than
or equal to 2 times) after surgery.
In the present study, our results were explained by several
probably reasons. First, combination of lidocaine and
dexmedetomidine had better opioid-sparing effect than
lidocaine and dexmedetomidine alone, which further
reduced opioid consumption. Second, lidocaine plus dexmedetomidine
infusion could provide better pain relief
than lidocaine and dexmedetomidine alone after surgery,
which resulted in less opioid consumption to achieve a
lower incidence of opioid-related adverse events such as
PONV. This was similar results by Xu et al. who found
that lidocaine combined with dexmedetomidine infusion
resulted in greater analgesic and opioid-sparing effect
compared to lidocaine and dexmedetomidine infusion
alone in patients undergoing abdominal hysterectomy
[27]. Therefore, the combination regimen of lidocaine
and dexmedetomidine had lower the rate of PONV, it
might be due to better control postoperative pain and
minimize opioid, which help to improve the quality of
recovery and minimize opioid-related adverse events for
facilitating enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS).
Although dexmedetomidine possesses the hypnotic
and sedative effect, bradycardia is the most common
side effect of dexmedetomidine administration, especially
a large dose of dexmedetomidine. Beloeil H et al.
reported that dexmedetomidine-based, opioid-free
anesthesia had higher rates of severe bradycardia [28].
A recent study reported prolonged recovery in patients
receiving dexmedetomidine, which was explained by
over-sedation, hypotension, and bradycardia [29]. Therefore,
we chose a relatively lower dose (0.5 μg/kg loading,
0.4 μg/kg/h infusion) and shorten time of infusion for
decreasing the incidence of bradycardia and facilitating
recovery after the operation. Local anesthetic systemic
toxicity (LAST) including neurotoxicity and cardiotoxicity
remains a major concern for lidocaine infusion. Kaba
A et al. showed that intravenous lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg
loading, 1.5 mg/kg/h infusion) was lower than the toxic
plasma concentrations of lidocaine [30]. In our study, a
loading dose of lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg, given as an infusion
over 10 min, follow by 1.5 mg/kg/h infusion, which was
relatively safe. Lidocaine constant rate infusion (CRI) is
associated with sedation [31]. Clinical trials proved that
dexmedetomidine administration decreased the rate of
agitation [32, 33] and shivering [34]. In our study, severe
bradycardia was not observed during the combined infusion
of lidocaine plus dexmedetomidine and dexmedetomidine
alone. The results of our study demonstrated
that the incidence of bradycardia, over sedation, and dry
mouth were much higher in group LD than group C during
the PACU stay period. In addition, although the incidence
of agitation and shivering decreased in group LD,
it was not significant difference between the two groups.
Our study has several limitations. On the one hand,
our sample was relatively small, the incidence of the total
24 h PONV was higher than we expected in the group D
compared to group C, therefore, we did not find a significant
statistic difference in group D and group C. On
the other hand, although we speculated that combined
application of lidocaine plus dexmedetomidine further
inhibited stress response, we were not detected levels
of catecholamine. Finally, the same dose of ondansetron
was treated when patients underwent sustaining nausea
(more than 30 min) or vomiting or retching (great than
or equal to 2 times) after surgery, which might have effect
on the incidence of PONV.
Conclusions
Lidocaine combined with dexmedetomidine administration
might provide better reduction of early nausea,
PONV and the total 24 h PONV in patients undergoing
laparoscopic hysterectomy. It had no significant effect
on nausea, vomiting, and PONV during the 2–24 and
24–48 h. This suggested that the antiemetic effects of
lidocaine plus dexmedetomidine might be rather shortlived.
However, it increased the incidence of bradycardia,
dry mouth, and over sedation during the PACU stay
period. Therefore, the combination regimen of lidocaine
and dexmedetomidine had lower the rate of PONV, it
might be due to better control postoperative pain and
minimize opioid, which help to improve the quality of
recovery and minimize opioid-related adverse events for
facilitating enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS).