Background
Implementation of electronic health record (EHR) systems
and ubiquitous presence of monitoring devices
in acute care environments have led to inpatient care
being associated with large streams of continuously
updating information. These electronic systems have
the advantage of providing comprehensive patient data
anywhere at any time, which can be used to improve
care by keeping providers appraised of patient’s status.
All inpatients require active management to insure
safe, effective and efficient care. The critical care and
monitored environments uses continuous physiologic
and device monitoring with parameter specific incorporated
alarms to improve safety. Unfortunately, this
large volume of continuous data may produce an overwhelming
number of alarms or alerts, with the potential
to harm due to alarm fatigue [1–3].
Integrating these multiple streams of rapidly changing
data into a system which can prioritize and display
a large amount of data in an easily understood manner,
may help address this issue. This could be considered
analogous to the development of the multifunction
flight displays in the modern aircraft that take data
previously represented across many dials or indicators
and present a single reference screen and includes
prioritized alerts to pilots [4]. When considered across
multiple patients it is necessary to have a readily prioritized
and easy to understand way of reviewing
large amounts of clinical data to enable identification
of patients in most need of immediate attention [4].
This may be considered analogous to a “flight control
tower”.
AlertWatch, Inc. has developed software which
provides live, real-time decision support alerts [5,
6]. The displays synthesize multiple laboratory, history
and physiologic parameters into an intuitive
icon-based display for easy identification of organ
system problems and alert when systems/parameters
are out of pre-specified, patient specific customizable
ranges [5, 6]. The system also allows delivery of
text alerts to devices (pagers, phones etc.) carried by
the care team, in a role specific manner to designated
individuals. These systems have been developed and
implemented for Operating Room (AWOR) and for
Labor & Delivery (AWOB) care areas [5–9]. Recently,
Safavi et al. reported on a simple version of Alert-
Watch developed for remote monitoring of patients
on a surgical floor unit [10]. In this 17 month study
they found that 88% of the alerts were actionable and
concluded that they were unlikely to cause alarm
fatigue [10]. This current manuscript describes a
more complex version of AlertWatch which has been
developed for critical care and floor patients, Alert-
Watch Acute Care (AWAC). Remote access to patient
status and expanded monitoring has become of even
more importance given the necessity of protecting
care staff by limiting unnecessary close patient
contact during pandemic situations. The purpose of
this paper is to describe this system with its tiered
organ system-based alerts and the logic used in their
determination.
Implementation
Alertwatch uses a Microsoft (Redmond, WA) stack for
data collection and analysis. Data are pulled via web services
or received via feeds like HL7, standardized and
then analyzed for notification and display. The front end
uses javascript and is written using Vue.js. AWAC implementation
is installed on a secured server provided by
the institution. The variables are mapped from the EMR
and the alert configuration is based on institutional
preferences.
Results
System description
AWAC is comprised of a census view and a patient view
with decision support alerts which are designed based on
hospital protocols and current literature.
Data acquisition
Data are acquired from multiple sources in the EMR:
laboratory, nursing flow sheet, physiologic network for
live monitored data, device data (ventilator, mechanical
circulatory support, ECMO & LVAD), patient demographics,
patient diagnosis and co-morbidities by the
International Classification of Disease 10th
edition (ICD
10) codes, medications and patients care team contact
information. The nursing flow sheet contains management
data, some of which are displayed and also used in
the calculations. For example, urine output is displayed,
graphed and used in calculation of a rate in ml/kg/hr.
Similarly, documented chest tube output is displayed
and also used for an alert when the rate exceeds a designated
amount, eg greater than 300 ml in one hr. Finally,
medication administration data can be used in alerting.
When insulin is administrated a time is set for one hr to
check for a glucose measurement. If not seen in the lab
extract, an alert is sent to consider rechecking glucose. A
complete list of alerts and limits are presented in Tables 1
(presented at the end of the paper) and 2 below.
Alerts and icons
AWAC has a series of alerts and icons. The alerts range
from simple high/low thresholds to more complex alerts
involving calculations and several types of data extracted
from the EMR. The alerts are also presented in a severity
hierarchy following the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) recommendations for Health
Informatics, Table 1 [11]. AWAC also has a series of icons
representing important aspects of the patients care to
enable easy identification on the Census View, described
below. Examples icons are; a lung for mechanical ventilation,
a pump for mechanical circulatory support
(ECMO), a brain for ICP monitoring and so on. Icons are
color coded based of severity. These alerts and icons are
described in detail, Table 1.
Alerts
Certain alerts, typically called smart or intelligent alerts,
have additional logic to help improve their relevancy and
accuracy and to reduce alarm fatigue. If the field is empty,
the alert activates with a simple threshold or limit. If the
alert has additional parameters that influence when it
activates, these will be described using the letters below:
P = Alert is either disabled or different for pediatric
patients. This does not include alerts that use weight,
BMI, or height to scale for each patient.
T = Alert uses trending, multiple values, medians, or
averaging of values over time.
F = Alert uses a formula or logic to calculate clinical
parameters.
Priority
Based on ISO’s definition of the potential result of failure
to respond, and the onset of harm, AlertWatch has
defined the priority of the alerts. In particular, they have
different Priority levels that distinguish the urgency of
the alert, along with characteristics that that they recommend
to ensure the user of the medical device correctly
interprets and responds to the most urgent situations.
There are, in order of lowest to highest priority:
I = Information Signals
L = Low Priority
M = Medium Priority
H = High Priority
Onset of harm
This ISO classification for onset of harm includes the following
parameters. AlertWatch has added a None categorization
for alerts that do not fall within the three ISO
categories.
I = Immediate. Having the potential for the event to
develop within a period of time not usually sufficient
for manual corrective action.
P = Prompt. Having the potential for the event to
develop within a period of time usually sufficient
for manual corrective action.
D – Delayed. Having the potential for the event to
develop within an unspecified time greater than
that given under “prompt”.
N = None
Census view
Figure 1a is a census view of an ICU. Each rectangle
represents a patient and has the bed number, the length
of stay, the patient name, their age and the icons representing
alerts and other important statuses of the
patient, e.g. on a ventilator or dialysis; as described
above, Table 1.
If the user is on the care team of any patients, the census
can be limited to those patients with the My Patients
filter. At the top of the census view there is a drop-down
list which allows selection of different units within the
hospital: ICUs, step-down units or floor beds, Fig. 1b.
After a provider logs in for the first time and selects a
unit, all subsequent log-ins by that provider will default
to the units they last selected.
To the right of the unit selection is a set of drop-down
Status Filters that defaults to My Patients as just noted.
These are the patients in which the user is on the patients
care team in the EHR. This drop-down can also select
patients by different therapies e.g. receiving mechanical
ventilation, on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO), treated with nitric oxide, etc. Additionally, a
variety of other patient censuses may be selected; Alert
Level, Acuity Level, sequential organ failure assessment
(SOFA) Score etc. [12]. Finally, to the right of that dropdown,
there is an option to the View; Grid, List or Multi
Patient view. This allows for different presentations or
other ordering of the patients by activity of alerts, by the
attending providing care or by the acuity of the patient,
Fig. 1c. To the right of the grid is an alarm silence selection
and a “?” which links to INSTRUCTIONS for use,
standard COLOR LIMITS, ALERTS & ICONS definitions,
PAGING and STANDARD and EMERGENCY references,
Fig. 1c and Table 2.
At the far right are three dots “…” which allows switching
to different AlertWatch applications, AWOR (operating
room), AWOB (obstetrics), or AWPACU (Post
Anesthesia Care Unit).
Each rectangle represents a patient as described in the
legend above, Fig. 1. At the bottom of the census there
is a brief description of each of the icons by name and a
description of the color coding for different levels of care
of the patient in the unit, Fig. 1a and 1c. These colors
indicate, a newly admitted patient, ICU status patient, a
moderate care or floor status. Each of the icons are listed
in Table 1 and will be described in more detail below.
Each one has color coding, which designates the acuity
of each of these icons, see Table 1. Table 1 also provides
a list of all the alerts. In general, green is normal range,
yellow is slightly abnormal, and red is abnormal, Table 2.
The alerts come in three levels; a black alert is information
of interest and is represented by a black circle, a
more concerning alert will be in red, the most concerning
alert will be flashing red and can be associated with
a text notification to a care provider via a mobile device,
Table 1.
Patient view
Clicking upon a patient descriptor in the Census View
opens a separate patient view in the same screen, Fig. 2a.
The patient view has three panels. On the left is patient
demographics and information, the middle section provides
an icon view of the patient’s major organ systems
with a beating heart and ventilating lungs. To the right is
the Active Alerts Panel, which will list text descriptions
of the active alerts for this patient. Alerts are color coded
to prioritize severity: informational alerts are black text
and represented by a black circle icon, for more important
alerts the text is red (red alert icon), and the highest
level of severity alerts are represented by a flashing circle
icon and a scrolling red text alert and may be configured
to activate a page to the appropriate care provider,
as noted above. At the top left of the patient view there is
a phone icon which provides contact information either
by phone number or paging/text numbers for all the individuals
on the patient’s care team, Fig. 2b. To the right of
the phone icon is an envelope icon which allows users to
directly contact the AlertWatch support team.
As noted in Fig. 2a, to the left-side of the Patient View
screen shows the patients name, registration number,
room location, age/gender, weight/BMI, Ideal Weight,
and length of stay. The mid-portion shows the admitting
diagnosis, below that ventilator days, urinary catheter
days, central-line days, and acuity level; if an acuity
level has been set by the care team. Below that are the
sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) and systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) scores,
which are automatically calculated [12]. If these squares
are tapped the window will provide the components of
the scores and trends. For example, the SOFA table and
trend plot is shown in Fig. 2c. Below the SIRS box is fluids
inputs and outputs (I/O) balance. Hitting the I/O box
will give a trend of the patient’s weight and the trend of
I/O balance, Fig. 2d. The I/O balance is determined every
hour and the cumulative plus or minus will be showed in
the trend box. These data are extracted from the nursing
flowsheet.
Below the I/O box is a display element containing isolation
status. This signifies the level (if any) of isolation
precautions required for this patient. If it is green there
are none, if yellow there are standard isolation precautions,
e.g. MRSA or C-difficile. If it is red, it signifies special
precautions i.e. COVID-19. Selecting the isolation
status icon it shows the specific infectious precaution. At
the bottom, current infusion medications and allergies,
Fig. 2e. As with all other icons and boxes when tapped, a
pop-up window provides the specifics, e.g. allergies and
infusion medications and doses of those medications.
The icon at the lower left provides a link to the live
waveforms the patient’s physiologic monitors, if they are
on the hospital network, Fig. 3. At the very bottom of the
patient view is the color coding for the icon-based system.
Gray meaning no data are available for that aspect
of patient, green is normal range, yellow is marginal and,
red signifies abnormal values, Table 2. An orange outline
signifies a co-morbidity associated with that organ system
or lab, “At Risk.” For example, if the patient has diabetes
there will be an orange outline surrounding the
glucose lab measurement, Fig. 2a. Clicking on a graphic
with an orange outline will give more information on the
specific co-morbidity.
The center section of the patient view provides an
anatomically organized icon-based view of the patient’s
major organ systems, below this are the current labs. If
there are special monitors or devices those icons will be
present, automatically added. For example, an intracranial
pressure (ICP) column/monitor will appear to
the left of the head icon if present, Fig. 4a. The brain
color is gray if there are no information regarding level
of consciousness, green if the level of consciousness is
normal and yellow if there is an abnormal confusion
assessment method (CAM) or Richmond agitationsedation
scale (RAS) score [13, 14]. In all cases when
the icon or lab is tapped a pop-up window will open
giving the trend values of that parameter. For example,
Fig. 4b shows the trends of ICP and cerebral perfusion
pressure (CPP) in this patient with an intracranial pressure
monitor. Below the brain is an icon of the endotracheal
tube (ETT). If the ETT is gray there are no data
regarding risk factors or history for intubation. If the
ETT is orange it notes there are risk factors for intubation
from the most recent airway exam, green if there
is a history of easy masking and intubation and red if
there is a history of difficult intubation, e.g. requiring
fiber optic or video laryngoscope, Figs. 2a, 5a and b. If
there is an icon of a tube below the jaw coming out of
the neck it means the patient has a tracheostomy or a
stoma, (Fig. 7a discussed later). Below the neck is the
trachea and main-stem bronchi and lungs. If there are
co-morbidities with the lungs, such as asthma, there
will be an orange outline of the trach and main-stem
bronchi, Fig. 4a. Each lung has data regarding oxygenation,
SpO2 and ventilation, end expired carbon
dioxide (ETCO2). If the patient is being mechanically
ventilated, a ventilator box will be to the right of the
ETT, noting the mode of mechanical ventilation: respiratory
rate (RR), peek inspiratory pressure (PIP),
positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP), Driving Pressure
(PIP-PEEP), tidal volume, Dynamic Compliance,
FiO2, rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI) and arterial
oxygen partial pressure to inspired fraction of oxygen
ratio (P/F ratio), Fig. 2a [15–17]. If this ventilator box
is tapped there are trends of these parameters. If the
lungs are tapped a window will show trending of SpO2
and ETCO2 as well as recent blood gas measurements,
Fig. 5c.
If the patient has a chest tube that icon will be in
the lung on the left and the color of the chest tube will
change as the chest tube output increases, Fig. 6a. When
the chest tube is selected, the amount drained is shown
as both increments and an hourly rate over time. If output
exceeds more than 200 ml in one hour or 300 ml in
3 h, an alert is activated, Fig. 6b (these are configurable to
site or patient specific needs).
Below the lung icon is the heart with aortic arch and
inferior vena cava (IVC). The “fluid” level of the heart
will be in the middle green, high yellow, high red or low
yellow, low red depending on measurements of central
venous pressure (CVP) or pulmonary artery diastolic
pressure (PAD), if available and prioritized in a hierarchical
manner. The green, yellow and red ranges of all values
are in Table 2. If the heart has an orange outline it means
their comorbidities, which can be determined by selecting
the heart, will be presented along with blood pressure
and CVP or PAP trends, Fig. 6c. If the patient has an
implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) or a pacer these
icons will attached to the Heart, Fig. 6a.
To the left of the heart is the liver, which will be green
if liver function tests are normal and yellow if they are
abnormal. As with all organ icons, if there is a disease
such as cirrhosis of the liver, the organ will be outlined
in orange. To the right of the heart is the current
blood pressure and heart rate and if that box is tapped
the trend of those values will be provided, Fig. 6c. The
aortic arch will change colors from green to yellow to
red depending on the blood pressure alert limits set by
the system. On either side below the heart are the right
and left kidneys. The kidney on the left-side provides
an alert for chronic renal function as determined by the
most recent creatinine value. If it is green the creatinine
is normal, yellow if it is marginally high and red if the
creatinine value is high, Table 2. Selecting the left kidney
will provide trends of the creatinine as well as trends of
blood urea nitrogen. The right kidney color designates
the current values for urine output. Again, their range
is a green, yellow and red depending on the limits set,
Table 2. The urine output trend is provided by tapping
that kidney, Fig. 6d. A curved arrow icon around
a graphic representing the kidney represents a patient
receiving continuous renal replacement therapy, Fig. 7a.
A line through the kidney indicates a patient requiring
hemodialysis, see icons and definitions, Table 1.
Below the icon to the human body are laboratory values
for international normalized ratio (INR), lactate,
platelets, hematocrit, hemoglobin, white blood count,
potassium and glucose. As with all other values, tapping
each column will provide a trend of those values
and the colors of the column will depend on whether
they are in normal, marginal or abnormal ranges.
On the right side of the patient view is the alert section
where current active alerts will be presented either
in black text, red text or scrolling red text depending on
the urgency and importance of the alert. To the right of
the alert section is a wrench icon which allows patient
specific alerts to be configured.
Icons
A series of icons which are presented on the Census
View and the Patient View that signify important aspects
of patient status. These icons are defined at the bottom
of the census view and in the online user guide and in
Table 1. They are present on each patient square in the
census view for the patients to which they apply.
Alerts icon
As stated above, the alerts icon are circles with a “!” in the
middle. The alerts are either black, red or flashing red noting
the degree of importance for that alert, Table 1. These
alerts are configurable at the institutional installation.
Some icons which are present on the census view are also
presented in the upper left of the patient view because
they do not relate to a specific organ; COVID-19 status
(see below) and Patient Refuses Blood Products, Table 1.
Airway status
Again as noted above, the ETT icon can be presented
in various colors; gray if there is no information, orange
if there are risk factors for difficult intubation, green if
there is a history of an easy masking and intubation and
red if there is a history of a difficult intubation, Fig. 5a
[18, 19].
COVID‑19 icon
This icon presents in five levels/colors; gray represents
no data available (as it does for all aspects of AW), yellow
means the test is pending, red is COVID-19 positive,
green is COVID-19 negative or Antibody positive and
orange if the COVID negative test result is greater than
4 days old, indicating potential need for re-testing (this
time window is configurable based on site policies/procedures),
Tables 1, 2 and Figs. 5a, 6a.
Pump icon to signify mechanical circulatory support
The mechanical circulatory support (MCS) icon looks
like a pump below the heart which can either be green
for a left ventricular assist device (LVAD), orange for an
intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), and red for extracorporeal
membrane oxygenator (ECMO), Fig. 7a. When
these icons are tapped a window opens which provides
specific data regarding that device. For example, Fig. 7b
presents a patient with an LVAD device and the window
presents flow, power, and RPM data as well as trends for
that information. If the patient is on an ECMO device,
the trend data will provide information regarding the
flow, pressures, saturation, RPM and the sweeps speed.
Trends are also provided for ECMO flow and resistance,
as well as, venous and arterial oxygen saturation and oxygenator
pressures, Fig. 7c.
Dialysis
The kidney dialysis icon is orange with a slash through it
if the patient is in complete renal failure and on hemodialysis.
If it is an orange kidney with an arrow the patient
is on temporary support with continuous renal replacement
therapy (CRRT) as described above, Fig. 7a.
Ventilator
The ventilator icon (lungs) is displayed on the census
view when the patient is on a ventilator. The icon can be
green, yellow or red depending on whether the ventilator
pressures are in the normal, marginal or very abnormal
range, e.g. high PIP or PEEP pressures as noted above,
Figs. 2a, 7a. These alert color change limits are configurable.
There is also a Ventilator Associated Event (VAE)
Management of continuously monitored data: BP, SpO2,
HR and RR
Patients in ICUs and step-down units are usually continuously
monitored with networked physiologic monitors.
Because of the need to address acute changes in
these vital signs, alert limits are set to alarm when limits
are breached. Unfortunately, artifacts occur, often
due to motion, and resulting alarm frequency is so high
alarm fatigue results [1–3]. To try to minimize the problem,
AWAC employs scrolling median values to trigger
alerts. The median values of each variable is determined
over a 5-min period which is updated every one minute.
The scrolling median time period is configurable. This
method will remove short term “outlier/artifact” values
reducing these measurements producing an alarm, but
will delay the alert by a few minutes depending on the
scrolling period selected.
Mobile use
AWAC has been configured and tested for use with
mobile devices; tablets and smart phones. An application
is available in the Apple App store by searching
“Alertwatch Inc.” VPN access is required for out of hospital
use. It opens to the census view and when a patient
is selected, it is designed to swipe to view all the sections:
patient view, patient information and alerts, provider
contact and waveforms. The provider can be called
directly if their phone numbers are in the EHR.
Discussion
Automated decision support systems such as AWAC,
may be utilized as back-up surveillance to support nursing
care at the bedside or as part of a remote tele-ICU
service. It has long been determined that even highly
trained and motivated personnel’s ability to detect
adverse events deteriorates over a matter of hours. This
phenomenon was originally demonstrated in the context
of assessment of the vigilance of sonar operators to
detect enemy submarines [26]. The aviation industry has
addressed this issue as the complexity of the aircraft’s
monitoring systems increased. Information from multiple
dials were integrated into a single multifunction display
[4]. This primary flight display shows a horizon with
few numbers but in the background processes multiple
streams of information and provides alerts to the pilot
in order of importance when concerning or dangerous
situations occur. In aviation these systems have been
implemented to reduce data overload causing the pilot to
lose situational awareness. Broad implementation of this
technology reduced the commercial crashes from one
in a million flights to less than one in 16,000,000 flights
despite increasing complexity of underlying systems
[27]. Introduction of systems which summarize multiple
sources of clinical information may support provider
awareness of changing clinical status and support delivery
of high complexity care.
Multifunction displays have been developed and
deployed within routine anesthesia care [5, 7]. In a sixyear
retrospective study comparing users versus nonusers
of AWOR it was found that use of this system was
associated with improved process of care compliance in
management of blood pressure, tidal volume and fluid
management [7]. Its use was also associated with a $3,500
decrease in patients encounter charges. Additional study
has associated the use of alerting display with improved
compliance with glucose management guidelines [28].
Further work has demonstrated utility of an automated
monitoring system in Labor and Delivery
(L&D) environments. Life threatening post-partum
hemorrhage (PPH) is a rare event which necessitates
immediate intervention to save the mother’s life [29].
PPH is associated with significant maternal mortality.
The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology
(ACOG) and others have published guidelines for
risk assessment and surveillance of mother; Maternal
Early Warning System (MEWS) [29]. In an attempt
to improve maternal surveillance another version of
AlertWatch was developed for L&D; AWOB [6, 8].
In a recent observational study comparing AWOB
to MEWS with the assumption that compliance with
MEWS was 100%, AWOB had a better positive predictive
value (PPV) for severe postpartum hemorrhage [8].
In addition, because AWOB retrieves vital signs directly
from the monitoring network, AWOB detected nine
severe cases of hemorrhage that MEWS did not detect
[8]. An overview display mode used in the anesthesia,
obstetrics and nursing workrooms allowed the simultaneous
monitoring of multiple patients, perhaps in a
manner more analogous to a control tower maintaining
vigilance of multiple aircraft [30, 31]. AWOB has been
well accepted by clinicians in Labor & Delivery with a
majority of providers feeling the system should remain
in use and that it improved patient safety [9].
This current manuscript describes an acute care
focused version of AlertWatch which has similarities
to prior operating room and labor and delivery specific
versions. When considered in an ICU deployment,
much like OR patients, the population is seriously ill
and at high risk of further deterioration and therefore,
have extensive monitoring with skilled providers – ICU
Nurses. But additionally the patient’s primary nurse has
multiple distracting tasks which requires them to leave
the bedside. For this reason, the monitors have high/
low alarm triggers meant to alert the nurse to come to
the bedside, but have been well documented to produce
alarm fatigue [32]. Furthermore, in ICU environments
the provider team is required to manage multiple
patients dispersed over a geographic unit. The role of
remote surveillance and communication systems and
services is well established in Critical Care [33]. These
systems mostly rely on consultation by request and/
or surveillance by another layer of provider viewing
the EHR and monitors [33, 34]. Which again relies on
human vigilance.
A preliminary version of AWAC was developed and
implemented in 2017 to monitor floor patients at a hospital
by alerting a surveillance consultant at another hospital
[10]. Safavi et al. studied the feasibility and utility of
alerting for 6 physiologic and lab values for a 24 bed surgical
floor. The nearly 1.6 million vital sign and labs electronically
reviewed resulted in 2.6 alerts pre week (0.3
per shift), 88% of which were actionable and 68% resulted
a in change in patient management [10]. They concluded
that electronic remote surveillance can provide actionable
alerts without alarm fatigue.
The AWAC system may have some advantages in that
it can automatically send notifications to specific providers;
RN, RT, MD depending the management protocols
without depending on human vigilance. As noted
above, AWAC is not limited to the ICU. The system can
be applied to step-down beds, floor units and even the
Emergency Department [10]. The data feeds are the
same for every patient in the hospital. If there are no
data available for a specific field, that organ is just gray.
The impact of AWAC on ICU patient care remains to
be determined. Improvement needs to be demonstrated
in both process of care, patient outcomes and acceptability
by providers. Implementation of systems like AWAC
may help expand to opportunities for remote surveillance,
increased monitoring and advance individualized
care plans. Para-EHR systems which aggregate information
may offer opportunities for deploying sophisticated
care algorithms derived from artificial intelligence (AI).
Douville et al. recently employed AI techniques to predict
the need for mechanical ventilation in COVID-19
patients [35]. They found that the calculated variable of
SpO2/Estimated FiO2 (non-intubated patients) was the
most predictive and could be continuously determined
with SpO2 monitoring.
Conclusion
Lessons learned from the aviation industry may offer
opportunities for improvement in medical care—Checklists,
crew/team resource management, the multifunction
display and the flight tower have led to substantial
improvements in aviation safety. This paper describes
a system which retrieves, integrates, analyses and displays
medical data and alerts providers to possible issues
regarding the patient’s condition. Studies utilizing AWAC
are required to determine its effectiveness in improving
safety and quality of patient care.