Background
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most
common form of adult lymphoma representing 25–35%
of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. DLBCL is characterized
by a high degree of molecular heterogeneity and genetics
impacting patient stratification and treatment response
[1, 2]. Although first-line therapy consisting of rituximab,
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and
prednisone (R-CHOP), cures a substantial proportion of
de novo DLBCL patients, 30–40% relapse (~ 25%) or experience
primary refractory disease (~ 15%) [3, 4]. The
outcome of B-cell cancer treatment can be affected by
somatic mutations of the cancer cells (intrinsic resistance),
treatment-selected resistant subpopulations (acquired
resistance), and genotype of the individual patient
(inherent resistance) [5]. Unfortunately for the patients
with primary refractory disease or relapse after first-line
treatment, standard salvage treatments combined with
autologous stem cell transplantation have limited efficacy
and cannot be offered to all patients due to comorbidities
or performance status [4, 6]. For those patients,
immunotherapy modalities like immune checkpoint
blockade (ICB) with antibodies targeting CTLA-4 or PDL1/
PD-1 or chimeric antigen receptor-T-cell (CAR-T)
targeting CD19 have been considered due to its ability
to restore functional anti-tumor immunity [7–9]. However,
the response in rrDLBCL treated with ICB was not
as efficient as hoped, potentially because the recognition
of malignant cells by the host immune surveillance system
was diminished or immune suppression mechanisms
were activated [10]. CAR-T treatment has shown
efficacy in rrDLBCLs but is sometimes followed by severe
adverse events such as cytokine release syndrome
and neurological toxicity along with B-cell aplasia [11,
12]. In dDLBCL immune surveillance can also be prevented
through decreased recognition by effector cells
and altered immune suppression and exhaustion mechanisms
[13]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to
characterize the genetics and underlying immune surveillance
evasion mechanisms in DLBCL.
Of significant importance for immune surveillance is
recognition of tumor cells by T-cells that require antigen
presentation in association with major histocompatibility
complex class I and class II (MHC class I and MHC
class II) molecules [14, 15]. Whereas the NK cells
recognize and attack the tumor cells with downregulated
MHC class I molecules playing an important role in the
host’s immune surveillance [16]. In dDLBCL, loss of expression
of MHC class I and II molecules frequently occurs,
40–60% and 20–40%, respectively, while the
concurrent loss of both molecules is observed in approximately
20% of cases [17, 18]. Sequencing data revealed
that genes involved in antigen presentation to Tcells,
activation of NK- and T-cells, and T-cell inhibition
are recurrently mutated in both dDLBCL and rrDLBCL
samples, implying that low immunogenicity of malignant
B-cells gives an advantage in escaping the host immune
surveillance system [19–24]. Loss of expression of MHC
molecules on the cell surface of DLBCL cells can occur
through multiple mechanisms [17, 25]. Genetic variants,
including loss of function mutations in genes related to
MHC proteins’ expression (e.g., TAP1, TAP2, HLA,
CREBBP, CIITA), lead to one of the major mechanisms
of tumor immune surveillance evasion described to date
[17, 25, 26].
A limited number of studies have investigated aspects
of immune surveillance in dDLBCL and even less in
rrDLBCLs. However, recent research examining the genomic
profile of rrDLBCLs suggested that hiding from
immune surveillance is an intrinsic-resistance mechanism
to R-CHOP-like therapies [27]. Since rrDLBCLs
have low long-lasting response rates towards various salvage
treatments and only limited benefit from ICB treatment,
we set out to improve the insight and
understanding of mutational profiles of immune surveillance
genes in dDLBCL and rrDLBCL.
Materials and methods
Clinical samples
Patients with DLBCL from the Department of
Hematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark (the
AAUH cohort) with dDLBCLs (n = 30) and rrDLBCLs
(n = 17) were included in the study. Patients with transformed
DLBCL, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma,
primary central nervous system DLBCL or primary
cutaneous DLBCL were excluded. Diagnostic patients
who relapsed during the follow-up period were excluded.
All diagnostic patients were treated with R-CHOP or RCHOP-
like immunochemotherapy after diagnostic biopsies
were collected. Four diagnostic samples were included
from rrDLBCL patients (n = 4 matching dDLBCL
and rrDLBCL patients) for additional analysis.
DNA extraction
DNA and RNA were purified as previously described
[28] from homogenized biopsies using Qiagen’s All Prep
DNA/RNA/miRNA Kit, following the manufacturer’s
guidelines. DNA from saliva or healthy tissue was purified
using: DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Germantown,
MD, USA) and PrepITL2P (DNA Genotek,
Ottawa, Canada), respectively following the manufacturer’s
guidelines.
Gene expression analysis and cell-of-origin (COO)
classification
Patients were classified as activated B-cell like (ABC),
germinal center B-cell like (GCB), or unclassified (UC)
using CEL files obtained from Affymetrix GeneChip
Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays and
methods implemented in the web-based tool (https://
hemaclass.aau.dk) providing one-by-one Robust Multichip
Average (RMA) normalization of microarrays and
subsequent risk stratification of DLBCL into cell-oforigin,
as previously described [29, 30]. Furthermore,
CEL files were used for differential gene expression with
the R-package limma [31] and Cibersort [32] analysis,
using R version 4.0.3. Before the statistical analysis, gene
expression data were background corrected and normalized
using the RMA algorithm implemented in the Rpackage
affy [33]. Expression was summarized at the
gene level using a Brainarray custom CDF for the Affymetrix
Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChip.
Sequencing
Library preparation was performed as previously described
[28] using either the Accel-NGS 2S Hyb DNA
Library Kit (SWIFT Biosciences, San Francisco, CA,
USA) or Twist Library Preparation EF Kit (TWIST Biosciences,
San Francisco, CA, USA) [28]. For exome capture,
either the Twist Human Core Exome Kit (TWIST
Biosciences, San Francisco, CA, USA) or Clinical Research
Exome V2 (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were
used and further sequenced by Illumina paired-end sequencing
producing a minimum of 26 Gb and 18 Gb of
raw sequence data for tumor DNA and normal DNA
samples, respectively.
Bioinformatics workflow
An in-house developed workflow was used for data processing
and analysis [28]. Briefly, raw FASTQ files were
quality trimmed and checked using trimgalore v0.4.3
[28]. BWA mem v0.7.12 was used to align reads against
the GDC GRCh38.d1.vd1 human reference genome sequence
[28]. Further, somatic variants were detected
using a combination of Mutect2 v3.8 and Varscan v2.4.1
[34, 35] and filtered using a minimum quality score
(QSS) of 25, a minimum allele ratio (AF tumor/AF normal)
of four, and a minimum allele frequency (AF) of
0.02. Variant annotation was performed by Ensembl’s
variant effect predictor (VEP), annotating class, population
allele frequencies, sift and polyphen predictions,
genomic region, and protein domains [36]. The annotations
from the cancer databases COSMIC Cancer Gene
Census [37], OncoKB [22], CIViC [38], and ONgene
[39] weres automatically assigned to each variant when
applicable. To obtain high-quality data, filtering of variants
was based on the following requirements: (1) that
the minimum allele frequency of the altered allele is ≥5%
and supported by ≥10 reads, (2) mapped in coding regions,
(3) to be nonsynonymous or nonsense mutations,
frameshift or indels and (4) to have high or moderate
impact predicted by Ensembl variant effect predictor
(VEP).
Statistical analysis
Fisher’s exact test and Wilcoxon rank-sum test were
used to compare groups of categorical and continuous
variables, respectively. Hypothesis test with two-sided
adjusted P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Bonferroni adjustment was used to account for
multiple comparisons; p-values were adjusted for 78
tests. The statistical analysis was conducted using R (version
4.0.3) and GraphPad Prism (Version 7, GraphPad
Software Inc., LaJolla, CA). For gene expression data
analysis, P-values were adjusted according to the
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.
Droplet digital PCR (ddPR)
The validation of selected variants was performed by
ddPCR. Nonsense mutations with loss of protein function
prediction in CD58, TNRSF14, and CREBBP genes
were selected for validation. Positive controls (gBlocks
Gene Fragments) purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies
(IDT) were prepared by mixing with wild type
(WT) gDNA from cell lines specific for each assay. Bio-
Rad ID for assays and specific mutations are listed in
Supplementary Table S1. The input of 66 ng purified
gDNA (5 μL) was added to the reaction mixture of 11 μL
of 1x ddPCR Supermix for Probes (No dUTP) (Bio-Rad),
and 1x mutant target primers/probe (FAM)/ wild-type
primers/probe (HEX) (1 μL) (Bio-Rad). Nuclease-free
water was added, giving a total reaction mix volume of
22 μL. Emulsion droplets were generated by the QX200
Droplet Generator (Bio-Rad), following the transfer of
droplets to a 96-well PCR plate. Two-step thermocycling
protocol (95 °C × 10 min; 40 cycles of [94 °C × 30 s,
60 °C × 60 s (ramp rate set to 2 °C/s)], 98 °C × 10 min)
was carried out in C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler with 96
Deep Well Reaction Modules (Bio-Rad). End-point
fluorescence within each droplet was measured using
QX200 Droplet Reader (Bio-Rad). Data were processed
using the QuantaSoft Analysis Pro software program
(Bio-Rad).
External validation cohorts
For validation of dDLBCL, data from Chapuy et al., 2018
(135 dDLBCLs, which are a mix of cured and relapsing
diagnostic samples) were utilized [40]. For refractory/relapsed
DLBCL, the Morin et al., 2016 (25 rrDLBCL
cases) and Greenawalt et al.,2017 (47 rrDLBCL cases)
cohorts were used for validation [19, 23]. The validation
cohorts are named by the author’s name. The validation
datasets were publicly available as VCF files for all cohorts,
which were filtered and analyzed in the same
manner as our data.
Results
Clinical characteristics
The median follow-up for the included patients was 7.6
+/− 3.2 years from the time of diagnosis. Patient characteristics
at the time of diagnosis for the 30 dDLBCL and
17 rrDLBCL patients are shown in Table 1. In
rrDLBCLs, fifteen patients relapsed within the first two
years from diagnosis, and the remaining two patients relapsed
after 4.7 and 6 years from diagnosis. Only lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) differed significantly at the time
of diagnosis between DLBCL patients that subsequently
were cured and experienced refractory disease or relapse.
At the time of diagnosis, the mean age was 64 years for
both dDLBCL and rrDLBCL patients, ranging from 31
to 84 and 45–80, respectively. Molecular subclassification
into ABC and GCB for dDLBCL patients resulted in
46% as ABC, 33% as GCB, and 20% as UC classified, and
for17 rrDLBCL patients 65% were ABC, 24% were GCB,
and 33% were UC classified (Table 2).
Sequencing and gene set selection
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on 47
tumor samples with a matched germline sample, having
a median of the sample mean coverages of 128× (range
47–331) and 97× (range 61–205), respectively.
From a curated list of 58 genes encompassing all major
immune surveillance pathways [21, 41, 42], genetic variants
were detected in 48 out of 58 genes in our dataset. A
total of 242 somatic variants were detected in the 48 affected
immune surveillance genes, which after filtering for
quality, resulted in 147 nonsynonymous, nonsense, small
frameshifts, and splice variants in a total of 36 immune
surveillance genes included in downstream analysis.
Mutational profile of immune surveillance genes in
dDLBCLs and rrDLBCLs
Genetic alterations in at least one of the 36 immune surveillance
genes were detected in 22 (73%) dDLBCL and
13 (77%) rrDLBCL patients. The number of genetic alterations
in dDLBCLs and rrDLBCLs ranged from 1 to
19 and 1–12 per patient, respectively (Fig. 1). Most of
the detected variants in both dDLBCL and rrDLBCL
were missense mutations followed by nonsense and
frameshifts. No difference in the distribution of mutation
types was observed for either dDLBCL or rrDLBCL (Fig.
1). Gene mutation frequencies in the 36 immune surveillance
genes ranged from 3 to 20% and 6–35% in
dDLBCLs and rrDLBCLs, respectively (Fig. 1 and S1),
with significantly higher median gene mutation frequency
in dDLBCLs (adjusted p-value = 0.002176, Wilcoxon
rank-sum test, Fig. 2), affecting 3.2 fold more
genes in dDLBCL (n = 35) than in rrDLBCL (n = 11).
Thus, somatic variants in 25 immune surveillance genes
were observed only in diagnostic patients, while only
variants in CD27 were restricted to rrDLBCLs (Fig. 2).
Higher gene mutation frequencies were observed in
HLA-A, PIM1, CD58, FAS, and TNFRSF14 in rrDLBCLs
compared to dDLBCL, even if none were significant.
For 16% of dDLBCLs and 29% of rrDLBCLs genetic alterations
were detected in genes involved in antigen
presentation, while 13% of dDLBCLs and 12% of
rrDLBCLs had genetic alterations in genes related to
immune suppression and exhaustion (Fig. 3). The mutational
patterns in targeted genes varied noteworthy, with
few samples showing events in multiple genes or multiple
events within one gene. Thus, diagnostic samples
from 1007 and 1032 only harbored genetic events in one
gene, HLA-B or CREBBP, respectively, whereas 19 genes
were affected in sample 1001. For rrDLBCL, sample
0490 had six affected genes representing the maximum
number of affected genes, whereas only one affected
gene was observed for six other rrDLBCL samples (1053,
0123, 1038, 0338, 1045, 1043) (Fig. 3). Antigenpresenting
genes were affected in more rrDLBCLs than
dDLBCLs, and most of the patients in both cohorts harbored
mutations in genes affecting both antigene presentation
and immune suppression and exhaustion
simultaneously 40 and 35% of dDBLCLs and rrDLBCLs,
respectively. However, in dDLBCL, patients had mutations
in antigen-presenting genes affecting both MHC-I
and MHC-II, like sample 1028 with mutations in
CREBBP and HLA-A, and 1039 with mutations in
CREBBP and NLRC5, and patients who harbored mutations
in genes affecting either MHC-I or MHC-II like
sample 1007 and 1032, respectively. In contrast,
rrDLBCLs harbored mutations in genes affecting either
MHC-I (1053, 0404) or MHC-II (0123, 1045), which is
also observed in our paired samples.
In four patients, we had pre-treatment biopsies collected
at the time of diagnosis and post-treatment biopsy
collected at the time of relapse or progression. Three patients
were treated with R-CHOP (1043, 1053, and
1051), obtained complete remission, and relapsed after
0.8 years (median), with a median age of 74. Patient 1055
was treated with R-CHOEP, experienced progressive disease,
and was biopsied after 0.7 years and at the age of
57 years. Variant allele frequencies (VAFs) of different
individual mutations in affected genes differ between
diagnostic and relapsed biopsies (Fig. 4), with all VAFs
but HLA-A in patient 1051 being decreased in relapsed
biopsies compared to diagnostic biopsies. Of notice,
1055 with progressive disease, genetic alterations in immune
surveillance gens were not detected at the time of
diagnosis, while at time of progression (9 months after
diagnosis), mutations in HLA-A and CD70 were detected.
All of the matched samples harbored genetic variations
in antigene presenting genes.
In addition, differential gene expression and Cibersort
analysis was performed of dDLBCLs and rrDLBCLs
comparing within each cohort samples with and without
immune surveillance affected genes and samples with
and without and MHC affected samples as well as comparison
between dDLBCLs and rrDLBCLs. No significant
difference difference by adjusted P-value were
detected between any of the immune status comparisons.
The only significant difference is observed in the
proportion of Macrophages (M1) between dDLBCLs and
rrDLBCLs harboring mutations in immune surveillance
genes and genes related to antigen presentation (Fig. S2
A).
Validation of the findings
To ensure the presence of next-generation sequencing
(NGS) detected mutations, selected genetic variants were
validated by ddPCR, as presented in Supplementary
Table S1. For CD58, CREBBP, and TNFRSF14, a higher
fractional abundance of mutant alleles was documented
by ddPCR than detected by WES (Supplementary Table
S1, Fig. S3).
Since our cohort was limited in size, we used publicly
available WES datasets with sequenced tumor and
matched germline samples, analyzing them in the same
manner as our cohort to validate our observations on
the mutational patterns of immune surveillance genes in
DLBCL. Gene mutation frequencies in dDLBCL and
rrDLBCL external cohorts were compared to evaluate if
our detection of the gene mutation frequencies and
observed prevalence of mutated antigene presenting
genes were robust. The diagnostic cohort from Chapuy
et al. (n=135) was compared to merged refractory/
relapsed cohorts by Morin et al. (n = 25) and
Greenwalt et al. (n = 47) in order to obtain more refractory/
relapsed samples. In the external dDLBCL
and rrDLBCL comparable levels of samples (72 and
80%, respectively) harbored genetic variations in immune
surveillance genes consistent with our observations.
Gene mutation frequencies observed in the
external cohorts were not significantly different between
diagnostic and refractory/relapsed DLBCL samples
as observed in our data (Fig. 5). Gene mutation
frequencies in more than half (60%) of the mutated
genes in external rrDLBCL were higher than in external
dDLBCL even if the difference was not significant,
which is in concordance with observations in our data
(Fig. 5). Findings that differed between our study and
the external cohorts were similar numbers of mutated
30) and external dDLBCL (n = 32), demonstrating the
important role of cohort size (Fig. S4).
Discussion
We analyzed WES data to provide a genetic
characterization of 58 curated immune surveillance
genes in dDLBCL and rrDLBCL, post-treatment patients,
which is essential for understanding the impact of
the treatment in a genomic context. More than 70% of
both dDLBCLs and rrDLBCLs patients harbor alterations
in immune surveillance genes in our data, which
is in concordance with external cohorts. No significant
difference in individual gene mutation frequencies of immune
surveillance genes between dDLBCLs and
rrDLBCLs was observed in our data or in external cohorts,
but in our rrDLBCL patients a smaller number of
affected genes (n = 11) were observed than in dDLBCL
(n = 35). A finding differing from external validation cohorts
possibly introduced by diagnostic samples containing
both cured and later relapsing patients, and in the
rrDLBCL cohort, patients with both short and long time
to new relapse could be included. However, more than
half of genes affected in rrDLBCLs showed higher gene
mutation frequency than in dDLBCLs, some near double
(HLA-A) in our data and external cohorts (Figs. 1 and
5). Hence, during tumor progression and development
of resistance in rrDLBCLs, we observed higher gene mutation
frequencies in PIM1, CD58, FAS, HLA-A, and
TNFRSF14 as compared to dDLBCL consistent with
other studies analyzing global genomic sequencing data
[19, 27, 43] and illustrated the loss of immune surveillance
(CD58, HLA-A) as well as immune suppression
(FAS, TNFRSF14, PIM1) [19, 43]. Recognition and elimination
by T- and NK- cells are avoided by mutated
CD58 and HLA-A genes [27, 44], which both have increased
incidence in rrDLBCLs compared to dDLBCLS
suggesting decreased immunogenicity of the tumor cells
in the refractory and relapsed situation. In addition, observations
from matched diagnostic and relapsed samples
of the same patient (n = 3) depict decreased variant
allele frequency in antigene presenting genes (e.g., HLAA)
but not vanishing after R-CHOP or R-CHOP-like
treatment, suggesting a possible tumor evasion mechanism.
This observation supports suggestion from Wise
et al., 2020 that antigen presentation represents a key
target for genetic alterations in rrDLBCL resistance [27].
The loss of function mutations in FAS gene lead to the
suppression of Fas/FasL system responsible for
activation-induced cell death [45]. In contrast, the loss
of function mutations in the TNFRSF14 gene leads to Bcell
autonomous activation as well as extrinsic activation
of the lymphoma microenvironment through B and Tlymphocyte
attenuator (BTLA attenuator) located on
CD4+ T-helper cells [46]. Specific missense mutations in
PIM1 are possibly activating. Along with PIM1 being
overexpressed in DLBCL cells compared to normal Bcells,
tumor cells are prevented from undergoing apoptosis
inactivating proteins such as apoptosis signaling
kinase 1 (ASK1), preventing further activation of FAS
ligand [47, 48]. However, neoantigen presentation is necessary
for immune surveillance, and lack of expression
of MHC molecules might be the reason for failed anti-
PD1 immunotherapies [10, 49]. In particular, if the cell
is unable to present neoantigens in association with
MHC molecules, there is no need for PD1/PD-L1 interaction
[10]. Therefore, these patients might be good candidates
for other immune therapies such as CAR-T-cell
therapy, which has shown long-term response in approximately
58% of rrDLBCLs [27, 50], or bispecific
CAR-T cell therapy that has approximately 80% overall
response rate if patients receive freshly produced anti-
CD19/20 [51]. Nevertheless, it is interesting to speculate
that clonal selection of genetic variants in antigenpresenting
genes occurs during or after the treatment
resulting in the development of rrDLBCL (Fig. 4) even if
we cannot distinguish single cell double genetic events
from polyclonal tumor formations.
Recently, several algorithms have been developed, providing
a refined classification of DLBCL into five to
seven distinct subtypes based on genetic features [24, 52,
53]. As these genetic classes are based on global genetic
analysis, and we use only a sub-selected set of genes in
our analysis, we did not include refined genetic classification.
However, it is observed that 73% of MCD genomes
acquired genetic variants in genes affecting
immune surveillance, thus becoming invisible to the host
immune system, suggesting a crucial role in DLBCL
pathogenesis, which is in agreement with cluster 5 described
by Chapuy et al.,2018 [24, 40].
Also, an important observation in our dDLBCLs and
rrDLBCLs is that 16 and 29% of the patients, respectively,
harbor mutations in antigene presenting genes excluding
genes in immune suppression and exhaustion,
while 13 and 12% harbor mutations in genes related to
immune suppression and exhaustion but not in antigenpresentation,
respectively (Table S2). Similar features are
observed in external dDLBCL and rrDLBCL cohorts
where 15 and 28% of patients, respectively, are affected
by mutated antigen-presenting genes and 25 and 25% affected
by genes involved in immune suppression and exhaustion,
respectively. Thus, a higher mutational rate of
antigene presenting genes in rrDLBCL than in dDLBCL
can be observed, though findings are not significant in
neither our nor external cohorts – perhaps due to small
cohort sizes it may suggest their possible role in the development
of resistance toward therapy. Additionally,
decreased proportion of M1 in rrDLBCLs may suggest a
less aggressive host immune response by M1 in
rrDLBCLs compared to dDLBCLS, but not restricted to
rrDLBCLs harboring genetic alterations in immune surveillance
or MHC related genes since no difference was
observed in M1 proportions between rrDLBCLs with
and without mutated immune surveillance or MHC associated
genes. Also, no significant difference was observed
in paired samples suggesting that the host does
not respond or detect a difference in the tumor even if
the IS genes are mutated and become invisible. Due to
the limited number of paired samples, this observation
requires more samples and tumor microenvironment
analysis for validation.
Conclusion
The role of genetic variations in the prevention of antigen
presentation associated with MHC molecules and
tumor suppression molecules is intriguing but offers
new biological considerations encompassed in future investigations
of larger cohorts of rrDLBCL and, ideally,
the examination of paired diagnostic and relapse samples.
Thus, successful treatment strategies for DLBCL
may be to target multiple immune escape pathways simultaneously
in a combination with more conventional
treatments such as chemotherapy.