Background
Athletes aged 5–14 suffered an estimated 5.6 million recreation
related injuries requiring medical attention
from 2011 to 2014 [1] The High School Sports-Related
Injury Surveillance Study showed that ankle and knee injuries
were two of the most common high school sportsrelated
injuries, accounting for over 30 % of all high
school sports-related injuries in the 2018-19 school year
[2]. Longer-term consequences of sports injuries include
predisposition to recurring injuries, earlier sports termination/
dropout, and potentially compromised physical
and psychological health [3].
The current standard of care for screening athletes at
risk for injury and illness is the Preparticipation Physical
Examination (PPE), but there has been no conclusive
evidence that supports the effectiveness of the musculoskeletal
(MSK) PPE to accurately identify or prevent at
risk populations from injury [4, 5]. Despite not having a
validated screening exam, the musculoskeletal portion of
the PPE has been found to be the most common cause
of disqualification for athletes, mostly through the history
and review of systems form [6].
The primary goal of the PPE as described in the 4th
Edition PPE Monograph, which is now an older version
but was used at the time of this study, is to (1) screen for
conditions that may be life-threatening or disabling, and
(2) screen for conditions that may predispose individuals
to injury or illness [5]. Currently, there is no
standardization for healthcare providers on how the PPE
is completed, and there are questions surrounding the effectiveness
of the PPE in meeting its objectives to properly
screen athletes. In a study completed in 2014, it was found
that healthcare providers overall were unaware of the PPE
screening guidelines, and that knowledge of the Fourth
Edition PPE Monograph led to increased satisfaction with
the PPE as a screening tool [7].
Effective screening tests must satisfy 2 requirements as
described by the US Preventive Services Task Force: (1)
the test must be able to detect abnormalities earlier than
without screening and (2) the screening must be accurate
[8]. Due to the need to understand more completely
how to better screen athletes for MSK injury we designed
a survey to gain information from physicians performing
PPE’s. Our aims were to understand current
physician practices in regard to the MSK screening
exam, if physicians who perform PPEs feel the current
goals of the PPE are being met, and if there may be opportunities
for education in teaching of the MSK screening
examination.
Methods
Following institutional review board approval, members
from the American Academy of Family Physicians
(AAFP) and the American Medical Society for Sports
Medicine (AMSSM) were recruited for the study. Inclusion
criteria included current practicing physicians in
primary care, primary care sports medicine, and sports
orthopedics that perform the PPE as part of his/her
practice. Exclusion criteria included providers who are
not currently practicing, and individuals that do not perform
the PPE as part of their practice.
The study utilized a cross-sectional survey-based REDCap
instrument for data collection. 3,000 members of
the AAFP were mailed postcards that contained a link
and scannable QR code for participants to access the
survey and 3,871 members of the AMSSM were sent an
email that was generated through the organization on
two occasions, one month apart, containing a link to the
survey.
The survey contained a total of 24 questions and was
separated into two main sections: a series of questions regarding
the demographics of each participant followed by
questions pertaining to participants’ MSK screening practices
for the PPE. Demographic questions investigated the
number of years of clinical practice, specialty of provider,
location of practice, and level of athlete (middle school
through professional) typically seen. The MSK screening
questions involved a variety of Likert scale, multiple select,
and yes/no questions exploring providers’ satisfaction that
their screen is appropriate for current or future injury,
knowledge of the 4th Edition PPE Monograph, what physical
exam tests are commonly performed in the PPE,
thoughts on the value of the MSK screening exam, and if
the PPE is adjusted based on athlete level. Additionally, information
regarding the number of PPEs performed per
year, most common age group of athletes screened, and
facilities in which the PPEs are being performed in was
collected. Prior to administration, the survey was reviewed
for clarity by 3 board certified sports medicine physicians
(two primary care and one orthopedic), 2 family practice
physicians, and 1 certified athletic trainer who were not
involved in the creation of the questionnaire. Descriptive
statistics were used in the analysis of the data, comparing
frequency and percentages of responses for each answer
choice.
Results
A total of 616 out of 6871 participants (9 %) responded
to the survey. The majority of participants, 72 %, were
family medicine physicians with the remaining 28 % being
composed of orthopedic, internal medicine, emergency
medicine, pediatric, and physical medicine and
rehabilitation physicians. Participants practiced across 46
states collectively.
Variability in the MSK screening exam is depicted in
Fig. 1. The 90 s MSK screening test was implemented by
52 % of the participants, the most common among physicians.
The majority of participants who perform a
MSK exam use an orthopedic exam as part of their PPE
(82 %). Twenty-six percent of participants reported that
they do not perform a physical exam at all as part of
their MSK screening examination, while 86 % of participants
agreed that the MSK exam should be performed.
Ninety-two percent of participants felt satisfied that their
MSK examination screened for current injury, while only
42 % were satisfied that it effectively screened for future
injury. One of the main barriers to performing portions
of the MSK screen was time (46 %), while 22 % reported
lack of evidence for the exam as their reason.
Educationally, 51 % received training for the MSK PPE
in residency, and 62 % had training in fellowship. The
majority of respondents (82 %) were familiar with the
4th Edition PPE Monograph and 80 % either moderately
or strongly agreed that they use this as a guideline for
their MSK screening exam. Data comparing knowledge
of the monograph and number of PPEs completed yearly
showed that of the participants that complete more than
100 PPEs yearly, there is a higher percent of participants
(88 %) with knowledge of the 4th Edition PPE Monograph
compared to those who do not have knowledge of
the PPE monograph (12 %). Additionally, of those that
were aware of the 4th Edition PPE Monograph, most participants
(59 %) completed more than 75 PPEs per year,
while those that completed 25 or less PPEs per year only
made up 11 %. 13 % reported no knowledge of the 90 s
MSK screening test that is included in the 4th Edition PPE
Monograph. These results are summarized in Table 1.
Discussion
There are a variety of approaches that are used for the
MSK screening examination during the PPE. Most participants
believe that the MSK exam should be performed
and that it effectively screens for current injuries, but the
majority of providers do not believe that the MSK exam
adequately screens for future injury. This data confirmed
our perception that providers do not believe in the predictive
ability of the screen. To that end almost a third of
respondents reported that they do not perform a physical
exam at all. This perception is also in agreement with literature
investigating the effectiveness of the MSK PPE,
which shows there has been no convincing evidence that
the MSK PPE is effective at accurately identifying or preventing
at risk athletes from injury [4, 9, 10].
Most participants were aware of the 4th Edition PPE
Monograph and reported that they primarily use it as
their guideline. Even with participants reporting using
the monograph as their guideline for the MSK screen,
there is still a lot of variability in how the screen is being
performed, with half of the participants using the 90 s
MSK screening test, 14 % using the Functional Movement
Screen (FMS), and close to a third not using a physical
exam at all for the screen. Approximately 46 % of participants
reported lack of time as a barrier to performing some
portions of the MSK PPE, providing some explanation as
to why this variability may exist. Another explanation for
the inconsistency could be due to educational differences
amongst providers as there was variability in where providers
were taught the MSK exam. Fifty-one percent of respondents
received training for the MSK PPE in residency
and 62 % in fellowship programs, which highlights the lack
of standardization in curriculums. As curriculums are updated
there should be discussions regarding the value of
the MSK screening and if standardization can improve the
quality of MSK screenings provided.
Our findings support a lack of understanding of the
PPE monograph given the wide variability in MSK
screening exam techniques used while being aware of
the PPE guidelines. This calls attention to the need for
continued standardization of the MSK screening exam,
as well as further research to validate objective screening
exams for the prevention of MSK injury. Screening
exams should be explored to look at the relationships
between screening tests and risk factors in relevant populations
to determine what tests are appropriate and effective
in identifying high-risk populations [9]. A recent
study by Teyhen et al. was able to show in a military
population that the sum of a number of risk factors was
able to produce a highly sensitive model for identifying
those at risk for MSK injury [11]. This highlights that future
MSK screenings should not focus on a single
screen, but that a multivariate model with multiple risk
factors could successfully identify a high-risk population.
Injury prevention programs have shown to be effective
in reducing injuries in athletes across a range of sports
[12–14]. Identifying the high-risk population would provide
an opportunity to direct limited prevention resources
to the most at-risk individuals with the ultimate
goal to reduce overall injury risk.
There are several limitations to our study. Our survey
was the first that we are aware of that looked to gain
provider insight to the MSK exam. As with any
questionnaire-based research study, limitations regarding
validation of the instrument used is of paramount concern.
Validation of a questionnaire requires a process to
determine construct, criterion, and content validity,
amongst others. We addressed content validity through
independent review of the questionnaire by 3 sports
medicine physicians (two primary care and one orthopedic),
2 family medicine physicians, and 1 certified athletic
trainer not involved in the creation of the
questionnaire. Because there are no other instruments
available to assess similar information, we were unable
to assess criterion validity. Given the simple design of
the questionnaire, we did not believe that it was necessary
to assess construct validity [15]. The study was also
limited due to a low response rate of 9 %, however, other
web-based survey studies targeting members of the
AMSSM had similar response rates [16–18]. Additionally,
it is important to note that the response rate is
slighter higher than 9 % due to crossover of providers
being active members of both the AAFP and AMSSM.
The low response rate from providers specializing in
fields other than family medicine did not allow for further
analysis across specialties.
Conclusions
This study provides evidence for variability in MSK
screening practices. It also highlights physician concerns
that the goals of the PPE are not being met with the
MSK screening. Finally, there may be a need to improve
educational efforts in residencies and fellowships. Future
steps include creation of a validated MSK screening
model, similar to other primary prevention screening
models (CAD, Colon cancer, etc.), that accomplishes the
goals of the MSK portion of the PPE, which can then be
implemented to be a standard part of the PPE exam.