Background
Coronary heart disease (CHD) remains the most sig-
nificant cause of mortality and a substantial contribu-
tor to reduced quality of life worldwide [1, 2]. Along 
with improved stent design, procedural techniques, and 
effective pharmacological treatments, revasculariza-
tion therapy has become an essential part of the treat-
ment of CHD [3, 4]. Nonetheless, cardiovascular and 
Open Access
non-cardiovascular death and other ischemic events 
driven by atherosclerosis after percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) remain concerning [5]. Cardiovas-
cular death is the predominant issue in the short term 
after PCI [6]. The progression of atherosclerosis does 
not stop, even in patients who have undergone coronary 
revascularization with PCI or coronary artery bypass 
grafting (CABG) [7]. Mechanical manipulation can also 
cause damage to blood vessels, which can lead to the 
occurrence of adverse cardiovascular events. Although 
revascularization with PCI or CABG has repeatedly 
demonstrated to be the best treatment for patients with 
severe coronary stenosis or occlusion, intraoperative or 
perioperative medical therapy is generally emphasized. In 
contrast, concomitant optimal medical therapy (OMT) is 
often ignored after patients have undergone PCI.
OMT is recommended in the current practice guide-
lines to improve further symptoms and reduce the inci-
dence of adverse events [8, 9]. In recent years, several 
registries have evaluated the use of OMT after PCI. There 
are substantial within-country differences in the manage-
ment of patients after PCI [10], as is the case in China. 
Moreover, several observational studies found that the 
application of OMT after PCI was suboptimal in the real 
world [11, 12]. Limited data are available on the use of 
OMT after PCI in China.
Accordingly, our study aimed to investigate the long-
term trend in the utilization of OMT, evaluate the 
utilization and impact of OMT on the main adverse car-
diovascular and cerebrovascular events (MACCEs) in 
post-PCI patients and analyze the predictive factors of 
OMT after patient discharge in China.
Methods
Patient enrollment
  Our study was a single-center prospective observa-
tional study. A total of 3812 patients diagnosed with 
coronary heart disease who successfully underwent PCI 
at TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital from 
2016.10 to 2017.09 were selected.  The study protocol 
was approved by the TEDA International Cardiovascu-
lar Hospital Research Ethics Committee, and informed 
consent was obtained from the patients before enroll-
ment. Figure 1 showed the study flow chart. The inclu-
sion criterion was successful PCI. The following were 
exclusion criterion: (1) a definite history of allergy and 
allergies to or intolerance of the drugs recommended 
by the guidelines (including statins, antiplatelet drugs, 
β-blockers, and various blood pressure and glucose-
lowering drugs); (2) a diagnosis of malignant tumors or 
a life expectancy < 1 year; (3) a diagnosis of an immune 
system disease and/or taking hormones therapy; (4) 
a serum creatinine level ≥ 265  mol/L or renal fail-
ure detected in the past or during hospitalization; (5) 
lack of autonomy or a diagnosis of a mental illness; (6) 
incomplete clinical data or coronary angiography data; 
and (7) in-hospital death after PCI.
Data collection
Demographic data included age, sex, height, weight, 
occupation, education, and type of medical insurance. 
Other clinical data included admission diagnosis, family 
history of cardiovascular disease and history of hyper-
tension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, chronic heart failure 
(CHF), chronic renal insufficiency, stroke, old myocar-
dial infarction, angina pectoris, PCI, CABG, smoking and 
other concomitant diseases. We also collected data from 
all included patients on the levels of hemoglobin, low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol, fasting blood glucose, 
serum creatinine, alanine aminotransferase and the sur-
gical records, including information about the vascular 
lesions and the number of stents placed. All clinical data 
were obtained from the electronic medical record system.

 
Follow‑up, definitions, endpoints
In this study, medication use was recorded before dis-
charge and at 1 month, 6 months and 1 year after dis-
charge. MACCEs and the occurrence of individual 
events were also recorded. Follow-up was mainly per-
formed by telephone (contact with the patient or the 
patient’s family), outpatient clinic visits and readmis-
sion. OMT was defined as the combination of dual 
antiplatelet therapy (DAPT), statins, β-blockers, and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) or 
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) during follow-up 
after PCI. The primary endpoint was the occurrence 
of any MACCEs, defined as a composite of death from 
any cause, nonfatal myocardial infarction, stroke, or 
target vessel revascularization (TVR). The secondary 
endpoints were each of the individual clinical events 
described above. TVR was defined as repeat PCI or 
CABG in the vessel treated during the index PCI or any 
coronary artery segment containing the target lesion.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 
22.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). Continuous vari-
ables with a normal distribution are expressed as the 
means ± standard deviations (`x ± s). Independent 
samples t-tests were used to compare the differences 
between groups. Nonnormally distributed data are rep-
resented as the median (quartile ranges) [M(Q1–Q3)]. 
The Mann–Whitney U test was used for intergroup 
comparisons. Logistic regression was used to calculate 
the odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) 
to find out the factors on OMT status after PCI. OMT 
status was regarded as the dependent variable. Socio-
demographic and medical variables were independent 
variables. Chi-square test was used to compare the cat-
egorical variables between groups. The effect of base-
line variables on OMT status was equalized by applying 
propensity scores match (1:1 match, caliper value set to 
0.02). Multivariable Cox regression model was devel-
oped to calculate the hazard ratio (HR) with 95% CI 
for significant differences and clinically significant vari-
ables between groups on MACCEs. MACCEs status 
were regarded as the dependent variable. Significant 
differences and clinically significant variables between 
groups were independent variables. P value below 0.05 
was considered statistically significant. The follow-
up period was from admission to the day when the 
MACCE was observed or until 1 year after discharge 
from the hospital.
Results
Baseline data analysis
Our study included 3812 patients who underwent PCI 
at TEDA International Cardiovascular Hospital from 
2016.10 to 2017.09. The median follow-up was 13.0 
months (range from 0.2 to 13.0); 224 patients were lost 
to follow-up (including those who refused follow-up, 
changed contact number or stopped responding), and 
3588 patients were included in the statistical analysis 
(Fig. 1). As shown in Table 1, the study population was 
dominated by male ACS patients with high prevalence 
of smoking (62.2%) and hypertension (64.2%). Approxi-
mately 30% of patients had a myocardial infarction or 
revascularization, and 89.0% were diagnosed with ACS 
(ST-elevation myocardial infarction, non-ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction, or unstable angina). Patients 
treated with OMT at the end of follow-up had higher 
incidence of baseline coronary risk factors (e.g., older 
age, history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabe-
tes), more comorbidities and more advanced coronary 
artery disease (as measured by the number of diseased 
vessels). See Table 1 for details.
Utilization of OMT and its components in patients after PCI
Of the 3588 patients included in the final analysis, 
58.8% received OMT during hospitalization. The utili-
zation rates of aspirin tablets, P2Y12 receptor antago-
nists, statins, β-blockers and ACEI/ARB were 99.6%, 
100%, 96.2%, 75.3 and 75.1%, respectively, in the hos-
pital at baseline. As the time since discharge increased, 
the utilization rate of aspirin tablets, P2Y12 receptor 
antagonists, statins, β-blockers and ACEIs/ARBs grad-
ually decreased (decrease to 97.0%, 98.7%, 88.9%, 59.4 
and 53.0%, respectively, at the end of follow-up); this 
was especially notable for ACEIs/ARBs and β-blockers, 
which showed the most significant decreases. However, 
the utilization rate of antiplatelet drugs still exceeded 
90%. The proportion of patients who remained adher-
ent to OMT for 12 months was 36.0%, with a reduction 
of 38.7% over time (Fig. 2).
Predictors of OMT status
As shown in Table 1, the single-factor analysis showed 
that age, BMI, medical insurance, education, history 
of PCI, comorbidities, number of coronary lesions, 
the number of types of pills, FBG, and SCR influenced 
OMT status after PCI. There were significant differ-
ences in OMT based on all the aforementioned vari-
ables (P < 0.05). After multivariable analysis (method: 
forward logistic regression), we found that the baseline 

OMT (OR = 52.868, 95% CI 38.129–73.305, P < 0.001) 
was a strong predictor of OMT after PCI, as shown in 
Table 2. Correlation between MACCEs and adherence to OMT
By the end of follow-up, MACCE occurred in 123 
of 3588 patients (3.4%) after PCI. Among them, 36 
patients died of all causes (15 patients died of cardiac 
death), 22 patients had nonfatal myocardial infarc-
tion, 26 patients had stroke, and 58 patients had TVRs 
(see Fig.  3). Propensity-score matching in a 1:1 ratio 
was used to balance the influence of baseline variables 
on OMT and eliminate confounders (matching fac-
tors included age, BMI, history of PCI, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, diabetes, number of coronary lesions, 
complications, FBG, and SCR), and 2598 patients were 
included in the final statistical analysis. A Cox hazard 
ratio model found that adherence to OMT at the 1-year 
follow-up (P = 0.001, HR = 0.486, 95% CI 0.312–0.756) 
was a significant prognostic factor for a lower incidence 
of MACCEs (see Table 3). The survival function curve 
based on the Cox regression model illustrated that the 
event-free survival of MACCEs was significantly higher 
in the OMT group than in the non-OMT group (Fig. 4). 
OMT adherence after PCI was a decisive protective 
factor against MACCEs.
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first of 
few large-sample studies to evaluate the correla-
tion between adherence to OMT and the occurrence 
of MACCEs after PCI in Chinese patients and to 
investigate the clinical and social factors affecting com-
pliance with OMT.
Our study drew some conclusions as follows: (1) There 
was still a gap between OMT utilization after PCI and 
the recommendations in the evidence-based guidelines. 
With increasing time since discharge, the utilization 
rates of the components of OMT gradually decreased, 
especially ACEIs/ARBs and β-blockers. to antiplatelets and statins at 1 year was generally good. 
However, we should pay more attention to the adher-
ence to ACEIs/ARBs and β-blockers. (2) Education, type 
of medical insurance, baseline OMT status, number 
of types of pills, and the history of PCI, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, and diabetes influence OMT utilization 
in patients after PCI. (3) Smoking cessation after PCI is 
crucial for improving the prognosis of CHD patients. (4) 
Furthermore, after Cox multivariate adjustment, OMT is 
an independent protective factor against the incidence of 
MACCEs after PCI.
It is noteworthy that medical therapy is the foundation 
of the management of CHD. Clinical guidelines recom-
mend the evidence-based use of OMT as secondary pre-
vention to reduce the risk of events associated with CHD. 
Previous studies indicated that the utilization of OMT 
decreased as time passed after discharge, and risk factor 
control was generally suboptimal [13, 14]. Medication 
adherence was independently associated with a favora-
ble prognosis [15–17]. Only 36% of the patients were still 
adherent to OMT at the end of follow-up. Our results are 
consistent with those of a previous trial, which noted that 
OMT was associated with a 51.4% reduction in the 1-year 
risk of MACCEs (P = 0.001, HR = 0.486, 95% CI 0.312–
0.756). Iqbal et al. [16] reported that the most prominent 
effect of OMT was seen within the first year after revas-
cularization because the majority of MACCEs occurred 
within the first year. In addition, the beneficial effect of 
OMT was sustained throughout the 5-year follow-up. He 
et al. [17] reported that the use of OMT was associated 
with fewer hospitalizations and lower all-cause direct 
medical costs among patients in China. OMT is signifi-
cant to reduce the risk of future MACCEs.
Our study also found that smoking cessation after PCI 
is crucial. Smoking itself is a risk factor for CHD. Smok-
ing cessation is beneficial for the secondary prevention 
of CHD. However, it is undeniable that there are still 
some patients who continue to smoke, which leads to 
higher rates of all-cause mortality and MACCEs, seri-
ously affecting patient prognosis [18]. Smoking affects 
drug efficacy and is associated with a greater risk of high 
platelet reactivity [19]. In addition, smoking is related to 
various markers of inflammation that have been found 
to be independent risk factors for CHD [20]. Our study 
supports the finding that there are severe consequences 
of continuing to smoke after PCI, as doing so was associ-
ated with a more than 200% higher risk of MACCEs in 
the first year after PCI (P = 0.001, HR = 2.060, 95% CI 
1.346–3.151).
  The burden of CHD is very high in China due to the 
high prevalence and poor control of risk factors in the 
large Chinese population [21]. Yang et al. [22] reported 
that there are geographic differences in the management 
of CHD after PCI in China, and targeted adjustments of 
strategies with the consideration of these geographic dif-
ferences are needed in the future to enhance CHD man-
agement in China as a whole and in specific provinces. 
Therefore, with coordination among the medical insti-
tutions within each region, a long-term follow-up strat-
egy for patients with cardiovascular diseases is gradually 
being constructed to maintain their adherence to OMT 
and reduce the readmission rate, thereby improving 
patient health and promoting the rational use of social 
resources.
Adherence to OMT is a crucial factor affecting the pro-
gression and prognosis of CHD. The factors influencing 
OMT status after PCI were found to be multifaceted. 
The results of our study can be used by physicians to 
improve patient compliance with OMT after PCI. Physi-
cians can use information (including sociodemographic 
data and clinical history) obtained during a patient’s 
hospitalization to predict that patient’s compliance with 
the medication regimen after discharge. Binary logistic 
regression analysis found that education, type of medi-
cal insurance, baseline OMT status, number of pill type, 
and history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia and diabetes 
influenced OMT application in patients after PCI. Base-
line OMT status was the strongest predictor. The baseline 
OMT status reflected physician prescribing practices. 
Kähkönen et al. [23] reported that a prescription is a pre-
dictor at discharge of high postoperative OMT adherence 
by patients. The Get with the Guidelines project [24] 
(GWTG) in the United States advocated for increasing 
the prescription of OMT to ACS patients during hospi-
talization because it could increase the long-term out-
of-hospital medication adherence among these patients. 
Our results showed that the education level affected 
OMT status. A higher level of education has been found 
to be associated with better patient awareness and coop-
eration with health care professionals [25]. Employee 
medical insurance has a higher reimbursement rate than 
basic medical insurance. Educationally or economically 
disadvantaged patients need more support and informa-
tion. Another study found that first-time PCI patients 
underestimated their condition and lacked knowledge 
of their disease [26, 27]. Nursing after PCI should con-
tinue into the outpatient and community settings. In 
addition, general practitioners play an irreplaceable role 
in patient management and rehabilitation after PCI. We 
should establish a hospital-community-family CHD 
management model, with grading diagnosis and treat-
ment performed by both specialists and general practi-
tioners, and establish diagnostic and treatment norms 
for CHD in primary medical institutions. The number 
of types of drugs can be represented by the daily num-
ber of pills prescribed. Several studies have shown that 
Page 8 of 9
Zhang et al. BMC Cardiovasc Disord          (2021) 21:258 
clinicians can improve adherence by reducing patients’ 
daily pill burden when possible [28]. We can simplify 
patients’ prescriptions and use combination pills when 
available to improve adherence. This study has several 
potential implications for clinical practice. These predic-
tors provide a basis for the use of OMT in patients after 
PCI. Based on the findings of this study, management 
methods can be formulated to increase the proportion of 
patients who remain adherent to OMT, reduce the inci-
dence of MACCEs, reduce the rate of rehospitalization, 
reduce medical expenditures, and improve the health of 
post-PCI patients. OMT is a new method of managing 
chronic disease in primary hospitals.
Our present study has some limitations. First, our 
study was a single-center observational study, and our 
current findings may not be generalizable to other popu-
lations due to selection bias. Second, the follow-up time 
was relatively short, while the application of OMT after 
PCI continues in the long-term. It is expected that future 
studies with longer follow-up durations after PCI will 
help guide clinical practice. Third, the reasons for discon-
tinuing drug treatment were not collected in this study 
design. Finally, although we extensively adjusted for some 
covariates, it remains possible that unknown confound-
ers influenced the association between medication non-
adherence and MACCEs and the factors influencing the 
utilization of OMT.
Conclusions
Overall, the utilization of OMT after PCI is still inad-
equate compared with the recommendations in the evi-
dence-based guidelines. The 1-year rates of adherence to 
antiplatelets and statins were generally good. However, 
the utilization of ACEIs/ARBs and β-blockers should 
receive more attention. Sociodemographic and clinical 
factors influenced the utilization of OMT, and we can use 
these factors to predict the population at risk of nonad-
herence to OMT. The use of OMT is an independent pro-
tective factor that can reduce the incidence of MACCEs 
after PCI. Therefore, we should use the identified predic-
tors to strengthen adherence to OMT after PCI, thereby 
improving patient outcomes. In addition, smoking cessa-
tion after PCI should also be promoted.
