Background
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of sustained
cardiac arrhythmia, and its prevalence rises with
age, with about 18% of patients older than 80 years being
affected [1]. Nonvalvular AF (NVAF) is strongly associated
with increased morbidity and mortality related to
ischemic stroke and systemic thromboembolism [2, 3].
The risk of stroke in AF patients is about fivefold higher
than in the non-AF population [4], and AF-related strokes
are generally more severe, with increased risk of death
and disability compared to strokes from other causes
[5]. Elderly patients with AF are at higher risk of stroke
than younger AF patients [6, 7]. Indeed, age ≥ 75 years is
a significant risk factor comparable to a history of stroke
for the assessment of stroke risk by the CHA2DS2-
VASc
score [8]. Prevention of stroke is therefore imperative in
AF patients, particularly in elderly patients.
Oral anticoagulation (OAC) with vitamin K antagonists
(VKA) has traditionally been the mainstay for stroke prevention
in AF based on the robust clinical evidence of
their efficacy in preventing stroke or systemic embolism
and reducing mortality [9]. However, VKAs have several
known limitations, including the risk of major bleeding
complications, especially intracranial hemorrhage, many
food and drug interactions, and the need for frequent
coagulation monitoring due to their narrow therapeutic
window. Direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs)
targeting thrombin or factor Xa emerged as a welcome
addition for stroke prevention in AF. These agents have
predictable pharmacodynamic effects, allowing fixed
dosing without the need for anticoagulation monitoring
[10]. DOACs, such as rivaroxaban, dabigatran, apixaban
and edoxaban, have demonstrated to be noninferior to
warfarin in stroke prevention without an increased risk
of major bleeding [11–15]. Based on their favorable efficacy,
safety profile and convenience of use, DOACs are
recommended over VKAs for stroke prevention in most
patients with NVAF [16].
Adequate selection of antithrombotic therapy for
stroke prevention is critical for improving the clinical
outcome of patients with NVAF. Several clinical practice
guidelines have been developed to guide the management
of AF patients, providing clinicians with recommendations
on individualization of treatment based on
the patient’s characteristics [16, 17]. However, the implementation
of guideline recommendations in routine clinical
practice may be suboptimal. OAC is still underused
in AF patients who are at high risk of stroke, and many
patients are instead treated with antiplatelet agents or do
not receive antithrombotic treatment [18, 19]. Accordingly,
despite the higher risk of stroke and bleeding in
elderly NVAF patients [20], anticoagulation has been
traditionally underused in this population mainly due to
the high frequency of associated comorbidities, including
cardiovascular and kidney disease, multiple drug therapy,
and concerns about cognitive impairment and risk of falls
and bleeding [21].
To date, limited data are available on the clinical management
of NVAF patients, particularly in those patients
attended in the internal medicine setting, where these
patients are typically managed. There is therefore a need
to identify current therapies used for stroke prevention
and the factors that may guide the selection of treatment
in the real-world setting. A better understanding of treatment
patterns and factors potentially influencing treatment
strategy is crucial to know whether clinical practice
is in line with treatment recommendations of the current
guidelines. Knowledge about the clinical management
of patients with NVAF in clinical practice may improve
OAC utilization for stroke prevention and outcomes.
Based on this background, we conducted a cross-sectional
study to describe the demographic, functional, and
clinical characteristics of patients with NVAF attending
internal medicine departments in Spanish hospitals
and the potential factors associated with antithrombotic
treatment patterns.
Methods
Study design and patients
A multicenter, cross-sectional observational study was
conducted in internal medicine departments from 93
hospitals distributed across Spain.
Eligible patients were consecutive adult patients
(aged ≥ 18 years) diagnosed with NVAF (defined as the
rhythm disturbance occurring in the absence of rheumatic
mitral stenosis or a prosthetic heart valve) who
attended the internal medicine departments either for a
routine visit (outpatients) or hospitalization (inpatients)
for any reason during the 9-month enrolment period.
Patients were selected on the basis of the information
recorded in the medical charts. The patients must have
been diagnosed with NVAF before the study inclusion,
and disease-related data (type of NVAF, disease duration,
etc.) was collected from medical charts. Patients currently
receiving anticoagulant therapy for venous thromboembolism
and patients participating in a clinical trial
with anticoagulant or antiplatelet agents in the previous
six months were excluded.
A cross-sectional chart review was performed to collect
patients’ sociodemographic, functional and clinical data,
as well as treatment-related data. The social, functional,
and cognitive status of patients was also assessed through
face-to-face interviews with patients at the time of the
study visit (cross-sectional evaluation). Cognitive impairment
was evaluated using the Pfeiffer questionnaire [22,
23], and data on functional disability assessed using the
Barthel index [24] was collected. Patient comorbidity
was measured by using the Charlson comorbidity index
[25] (absent of comorbidity: score = 0–1; low comorbidity:
score = 2; severe comorbidity: score ≥ 3). The
PROFUND index score [26] was calculated to estimate
one-year mortality risk as follows: low-risk (12.1–14.6%)
for a score of 0–2, low-intermediate risk (21.5–31.5%)
for a score of 3–6, intermediate-high risk (45–50%) for a
score of 7–10, and high-risk (61.3–68%) for a score ≥ 11.
Physician’s estimation of the patient’s life expectancy (< 6
or ≥ 6 months) was also assessed. The risk of ischemic
stroke and bleeding was assessed by CHA2DS2-
VASc
score [8] and HAS-BLED score [27], respectively.
The independent ethics committee of La Princesa University
Hospital (Madrid, Spain) approved the study. All patients
gave their written informed consent before their inclusion in
the study. The study was carried out in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical Practice Guidelines
and applicable regulatory requirements.
Statistical analysis
In order to describe the demographic, functional, and
clinical characteristics of patients on each antithrombotic
treatment approach, patients included in the
study were categorized into five groups according to the
antithrombotic therapy used for their clinical management
as follows: no treatment, VKAs (acenocumarol or
warfarin), DOACs (apixaban, rivaroxaban or dabigatran),
antiplatelet drugs (aspirin and/or other antiplatelets),
and antiplatelet plus anticoagulant drugs. Only patients
who fulfilled the eligibility criteria and could be categorized
in any of these treatment groups were considered
as evaluable for the study analysis. A descriptive analysis
of the characteristics of each treatment group was performed
using measures of central tendency and dispersion
(mean [± standard deviation], median [interquartile
range]) for quantitative variables, and counts and percentages
for qualitative variables. The Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test and the Shapiro–Wilk test were used for
checking normality of data. The Kruskal–Wallis test was
used to compare continuous non-parametric variables
and the ANOVA to compare continuous parametric variables.
The Chi-square or Fisher’s exact test was used for
comparison of categorical variables.
Stepwise binary logistic regression analyses were conducted
to assess the potential factors associated with the
use of specific treatment strategies whose comparison is
of clinical relevance. Thus, factors associated with OAC
(VKAs, DOACs, or any OAC plus antiplatelet therapy)
versus antiplatelet therapy and with VKAs versus DOACs
were assessed. Clinically relevant variables and those
with a p < 0.2 were included in each multivariate model
with stepwise selection to determine independent factors
associated with each treatment strategy used for clinical
management. Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval
(95% CI) were calculated.
All analyses were performed using the Statistical Package
for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 18.0 (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL, USA).
Results
Patients and treatment
A total of 1000 patients from 93 hospitals distributed
across Spain were enrolled in the study from March to
October 2015. Thirteen patients were excluded from the
analysis, as they did not meet at least one inclusion criteria.
Therefore, a total of 987 patients were included in the
study analysis. A total of 26 patients could not be categorized
in any of the five treatment groups. As a result, 961
patients were evaluable for the study analysis (Fig. 1).
Most patients received antithrombotic treatment
(> 95%). Overall, 88.7% of patients received OAC (VKAs,
DOACs, or any OAC plus antiplatelet therapy). The
majority of patients were treated with VKAs (nearly 60%
of patients), and DOACs were received by less than onequarter
of patients. Antiplatelet therapy alone was used
in less than 7% of patients, and OAC plus antiplatelet
therapy was received by nearly 8% of patients (Fig. 1).
Demographic and functional characteristics, morbidity
and life expectancy
The demographic and functional characteristics, morbidity
and life expectancy of patients according to the
antithrombotic treatment strategy are shown in Table 1.
The median age of patients was 81 years, with similar
proportions of male and female patients. Most patients
were not institutionalized (> 90%) and had no cognitive
impairment according to the Pfeiffer questionnaire
(> 60% of patients in all groups). About 65% of patients
were not dependent on assistance for activities of daily
living (ADLs). The median Charlson comorbidity index
score was 7 (high comorbidity). Most patients (90%) had
a life expectancy ≥ 6 months according to the investigator’s
estimation.
Compared with autonomous patients, non-autonomous
patients were older (84 [80–88] vs. 78 [72–83]
years; p < 0.001), predominantly female (62.3% vs. 43.7%;
p < 0.001), and with higher risk of stroke and bleeding
according to CHA2DS2-
VASc (5.6 ± 1.5 vs. 4.4 ± 1.5;
p < 0.001) and HAS-BLED (3.4 ± 1.1 vs. 2.8 ± 1.1;
p < 0.001) scores. Similarly, patients with cognitive
impairment had a more advanced age (83 [79–88] vs.
79.0 [73–84] years; p < 0.001), were mostly women (61.2%
vs. 45.1%; p < 0.001), and had higher CHA2DS2-
VASc
(5.2 ± 1.6 vs. 4.6 ± 1.6; p < 0.001) and HAS-BLED
(3.1 ± 1.2 vs. 2.9 ± 1.1; p < 0.001) scores compared with
patients without cognitive impairment. Additionally, the
median age of patients with < 4 comorbidities was 64 (54–
67) years while it was 81 (75–86) years in patients with ≥ 4
comorbidities (p < 0.001) in whom CHA2DS2-
VASc and
HAS-BLED scores were higher (vs. < 4 comorbidities)
(
CHA2DS2-VASc: 4.9 ± 1.5 vs. 1.9 ± 1.0; p < 0.001; HASBLED:
3.1 ± 1.1 vs. 1.2 ± 1.0; p < 0.001). Patients with a
life expectancy < 6 months (vs. ≥ 6 months) were older
(86 [81–91] vs. 80 [74–85] years; p < 0.001) and with
higher CHA2DS2-
VASc (5.3 ± 1.6 vs. 4.7 ± 1.6; p < 0.001)
and HAS-BLED (3.5 ± 1.2 vs. 2.9 ± 1.1; p < 0.001) scores.
The differences in sociodemographic and functional
characteristics, morbidity and life expectancy between
the patients undergoing different antithrombotic treatment
strategies are shown in Table 1. There were statistically
significant differences in terms of age and
educational level between the different treatment groups.
Significant differences in functional characteristics (institutionalization,
dependence in ADLs, and functional disability
measured by the Barthel index) were also observed
between the different treatment groups except in terms
of cognitive impairment. In addition, there were statistically
significant differences in estimated prognostic characteristics,
including comorbidity (Charlson comorbidity
index score), 1-year mortality risk (PROFUND index)
and life expectancy (investigator’s clinical judgment)
among the patients treated with the different antithrombotic
treatment strategies.
Clinical characteristics
Clinical characteristics according to the antithrombotic
treatment strategy are shown in Table 2. Most patients
were diagnosed with permanent NVAF (70%), with a
median time since diagnosis of over four years. The most
common comorbidities were hypertension (90%), congestive
heart failure (CHF) (54%), renal disease (43%),
and diabetes mellitus (40%). A history of bleeding was
present in less than 15% of patients.
The vast majority of patients had high thromboembolic
risk according to the CHA2DS2-
VASc score (≥ 2), with
more than 45% of patients with a score ≥ 5 in all treatment
groups. Most patients (> 60%) had a HAS-BLED
score ≥ 3.
The differences in clinical characteristics between
the patients undergoing different antithrombotic treatment
strategies are shown in Table 2. There were statistically
significant differences in the type of NVAF
and the median time since diagnosis among treatment
groups. Cardiovascular history also differed among
the patients treated with each antithrombotic therapy
except for CHF. No significant differences were found
in the percentage of patients with high thromboembolic
risk (
CHA2DS2-VASc ≥ 2) who were treated with
each antithrombotic therapy. However, the percentage
of patients with high hemorrhagic risk (HAS-BLED) differed
significantly by treatment strategy (p < 0.001).
Factors associated with antithrombotic treatment patterns
The results of the multivariate analysis performed to
identify the independent factors associated with the use
of OAC versus antiplatelet therapy and of DOACs versus
VKAs are summarized in Table 3.
Factors associated with the use of OAC versus antiplatelet
therapy
The presence of CHF (OR, 2.084) and permanent NVAF
(OR, 4.122) was associated with preferential use of OAC
over antiplatelets, while intermediate- to high-mortality
risk according to the PROFUND index (vs. low mortality
risk) (OR, 0.455; 0.144, and 0.133 respectively) was
associated with a higher likelihood of using antiplatelet
therapy alone instead of OAC.
Factors associated with the use of DOACs versus VKAs
Factors significantly associated with the use of VKAs over
DOACs were longer time since diagnosis (OR, 1.045) and
institutionalization (OR, 7.744). However, female gender
(vs. male), secondary or university or higher studies, and
having suffered a stroke/transient ischemic attack (OR,
0.591) were factors associated with preferential use of
DOACs.
Discussion
The present study assessed the demographic, functional,
and clinical characteristics associated with antithrombotic
treatment patterns in a large real-life population
of patients with NVAF. The median age of patients was
about 80 years, and most patients had permanent NVAF,
with a median disease duration of over four years. As
expected, this elderly population had a high comorbidity
burden, particularly cardiovascular risk factors and
disease, a very high thromboembolic risk and a moderate
to high risk of bleeding. Most patients were autonomous
and had no cognitive impairment. Patients with
worse functional status and worse prognosis in terms of
survival were those with more advanced age and with a
higher risk of stroke and bleeding.
Despite being a population comprised of elderly
patients with a high comorbidity burden, we found
that the vast majority of patients (95%) were receiving
antithrombotic treatment due to their high thromboembolic
risk. Most patients received VKA treatment
(60%) while DOACs were given in less than one-quarter
of patients. Of note, antiplatelet therapy alone was prescribed
in less than 7% of patients with NVAF in routine
clinical practice.
Older age is a common reason given for not prescribing
anticoagulation [20, 28]. Thus, the high use of
OAC shown in this real-world analysis (88%) was especially
interesting, since 75% of patients were older than
75 years and 30% of patients were aged ≥ 85 years. This
study has therefore highlighted that age alone was not
considered as a contraindication for anticoagulation.
The underuse of OAC in elderly patients is mainly due
to overestimation of the risk of bleeding in these patients
[29]. However, the benefit of stroke prevention outweighs
the potential increased risk of bleeding in these patients
[30, 31], in whom a higher net clinical benefit has been
demonstrated compared to the younger population due
to their higher thromboembolic risk [32]. We found a
substantial increase in the use of OAC in elderly patients
compared to prior studies conducted in octogenarian AF
patients in Spain, where only half of the patients received
anticoagulation [33]. This difference may suggest changes
in physicians’ perceptions of the benefits and risks of
OAC for older NVAF patients based on the available
evidence demonstrating its benefit in this population [20,
34].
Of note, the percentage of patients who received no
antithrombotic treatment in our series (4.7%) was similar
to that previously reported in the European population of
the GLORIA-AF registry (4.1%) [35]. However, compared
to other European studies, our analysis showed a significantly
lower proportion of untreated patients [36, 37]. A
higher rate of untreated patients has also been reported
among elderly patients in the internal medicine setting in
Spain (13.8%) [38].
Although a history of prior bleeding has traditionally
been associated with anticoagulation under-prescription
in elderly patients [39], bleeding history was not identified
as a factor contributing to anticoagulation underuse
in our study. Indeed, a high HAS-BLED score should not
be a reason for non-prescription of anticoagulation but
rather a tool to identify and control modifiable bleeding
risk factors to reduce the risk of bleeding [40, 41].
Antiplatelet therapy has traditionally been used instead
of anticoagulation to prevent the risk of bleeding despite
the demonstrated greater efficacy of anticoagulant treatment
over antiplatelet agents without increasing major
bleeding [42]. Nevertheless, we found that the use of antiplatelet
therapy alone (7%) was notably lower than that
previously reported in primary care (20%) [43]. Interestingly,
antiplatelet therapy users were less frequent compared
to prior national studies in elderly inpatients (about
18%) [38, 44]. Indeed, we found that compared to outpatients,
the proportion of hospitalized patients receiving
antiplatelet therapy was higher, probably because these
patients are more likely to have frailty and more comorbidity
compared to outpatients and thus may not be considered
optimal candidates for anticoagulation [28].
Of note, institutionalized patients and those with total
or partial dependence for daily activities, who were older
and with higher thromboembolic and bleeding risk, were
primarily treated with antiplatelets, which were also preferentially
used in patients with functional disability and
worse prognosis. These findings, therefore, suggest that
there might be functional and prognostic factors driving
the selection of antiplatelet therapy alone over OAC.
Indeed, the univariate analysis showed that institutionalization,
dependence for daily activities, 1-year mortality
risk assessed by the PROFUND index, and life expectancy
(physician’s clinical judgment) were factors significantly
associated with preferential use of antiplatelet
therapy over OAC. However, among these factors, only
1-year mortality risk was retained in the multivariate
model, which showed that poor prognosis (intermediate
or high risk) was a factor contributing to OAC non-prescription
in favor of antiplatelet therapy alone.
This real-world assessment has also highlighted that
the type of NVAF appears to be a factor that has played
an essential role in the underuse of OAC in NVAF. In this
regard, we found that patients with paroxysmal NVAF
were more likely to receive antiplatelet therapy alone
instead of OAC compared to patients with permanent
NVAF in line with prior reports [1, 35, 45]. The underuse
of OAC in favor of antiplatelet therapy in patients
with paroxysmal NVAF could be due to the perception
of a lower thromboembolic risk associated with this type
of NVAF [46]. However, contrary findings regarding its
impact on thromboembolic risk have been reported [47,
48]. Nevertheless, according to current guidelines [16],
the decision concerning antithrombotic therapy should
be based on the patient’s risk of stroke and bleeding,
regardless of the type of NVAF.
Regarding the type of OAC, we found that a significant
proportion of patients still received VKAs over DOACs
despite guideline recommendations [16]. The use of
DOACs among patients receiving OAC (24.4%) was similar
to that reported in Spanish studies conducted at the
regional level during 2015 (24%) and 2011–2014 (25%)
[49] and the nationwide FANTASIIA registry (22%) [50].
Thus, a substantial proportion of Spanish NVAF patients
who could benefit from DOACs did not receive them, as
recognized by experts [51]. In addition, the preference for
VKAs over DOACs may be due to the lack of available
targeted DOAC reversal agents for patients with bleeding
at the time of the study. Moreover, the prescription
of DOACs can be challenging in Spain due to the restrictions
for their use stated in the national Therapeutic
Positioning Report (TPR) [52] and the different administrative
requirements of the Spanish Autonomous Communities.
This study also found that the use of DOACs in
Spain is still far behind other European countries, where
an overall rate of DOAC prescription of approximately
50% [35] has been reported. However, geographical
differences have been found in prescription patterns [36,
53, 54].
We found that neither the functional characteristics
nor the prognosis (PROFUND index) or morbidity were
associated with the use of DOACs. Nevertheless, preferential
use of VKAs over DOACs was found among
institutionalized patients, probably due to a more controlled
environment which may enhance VKA treatment
adherence and might avoid unacceptable risks derived
from poor anticoagulation control. There appear to be
sociodemographic factors driving DOAC selection, such
as gender and educational level. Thus, educational level
was identified as an independent factor associated with
the use of DOACs, with a preference of these agents over
VKAs in more educated patients, probably also with a
higher income, in line with prior reports [55]. This may
be explained by better access of patients with a high educational
level to the available information on new oral
anticoagulants, which may influence treatment decision
for stroke prevention. In addition, patients with longer
disease duration were also more likely to receive VKA
therapy over DOACs probably because prescription of
DOACs may have only increased over the past few years
due to current guidelines recommendation [16]. A prior
history of stroke was also associated with a higher likelihood
of receiving DOACs according to the European recommendations
[16].
DOAC prescription has been traditionally limited by
renal function, especially in elderly patients whose renal
function is often unstable and affected by concomitant
comorbidities and hospitalizations [56, 57]. However,
abnormal renal function was not identified as a factor
contributing to DOAC non-prescription, in contrast to
other reports in the primary care setting [49]. Indeed,
renal impairment should not be a limitation to DOAC
prescription and reduced dose regimens of DOACs are
approved for use in moderate and severe chronic kidney
disease.
The main limitations of this study are due to the
research design. This was a cross-sectional study which
included a mixed incident and prevalent NVAF population;
new starters and switchers from antithrombotic
therapy, who were selected from a large sample of hospitals
in Spain. However, it is noteworthy that this study did
not aim to focus on treatment patterns, such as switching
or discontinuation. In addition, we must take into
account the obvious limitations of a retrospective chart
review that uses patients’ data already recorded in the
medical charts for reasons other than research, including
incomplete or unrecorded information. A further
limitation that should be acknowledged is the unequal
number of patients in each group defined by the therapeutic
strategy used for NVAF management. However,
we should note that these groups were created according
to clinical practice, given that patients could be receiving
any treatment for NVAF when they were included
in the study. Indeed, this study did not aim to assess the
differences between these groups, and the comparisons
made between them are exploratory and descriptive.
Despite these limitations, this study provides valuable
real-world data on the profile and treatment patterns of
NVAF patients and grounds for discussion on whether
antithrombotic treatment strategies are in line with
guideline recommendations. Thus, the findings obtained
in this analysis may be used to identify critical issues
that should be improved in the management of NVAF
patients, which might optimize patient care and outcomes.
The strengths of this study include a highly representative
population of non-selected elderly patients with
NVAF in clinical practice, including inpatients and outpatients,
attended in the internal medicine departments
of more than 90 hospitals distributed homogeneously
throughout the country. To our knowledge, this is the
first and the most extensive study to assess the real-world
characteristics of NVAF patients according to antithrombotic
treatment after approval of DOACs in the internal
medicine setting in Spain.
Conclusion
This study showed that the vast majority of elderly
patients with NVAF, with high comorbidity burden and
high thromboembolic risk, received OAC in the realworld
setting, with VKAs as the most frequently prescribed
treatment, while DOACs remained underused.
Longer duration of AF and institutionalization were
identified as determinants of VKA use over DOACs.
Antiplatelet therapy was still offered to a proportion of
patients. A poor prognosis according to the PROFUND
index was identified as a factor preventing the use of
OAC.