Background
Endophytes are microorganisms that reside within plant
tissues and do not cause any deleterious effect to the
plants. These microorganisms consist of bacterial and
fungal communities that colonize and spend the whole
or part of their life cycle inside tissues of the host, without
causing noticeable symptoms of plant diseases [1, 2].
Endophytic fungi are found in almost plant parts and act
as chemical synthesizers inside the host plant, producing
a wide range of bioactive secondary metabolites [3, 4].
Endophytic fungi from the genera Colletotrichum, Fusarium,
Alternaria and Aspergillus, isolated from medicinally
important plants exhibit a variety of biological
activities such as anticancer, antimicrobial, antifungal,
immunomodulatory, antitubercular, and antioxidant
activities with wide application in agrochemical and
pharmaceutical industries [5–8]. These biological activities
demonstrated by endophytes have been attributed
to isolated and identified secondary metabolites such as
alkaloids, terpenoids, steroids, quinones, isocoumarin
derivatives, flavanoids, peptides, and phenols present in
the fungal extracts [9–14]. Therefore, exploring endophytic
fungi that reside in medicinal plant species would
provide vast opportunities to discover new medicinally
important metabolites [15].
Production of reactive oxygen species known as free
radicals occurs frequently in all cells as part of normal
metabolic process. However, free radicals have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of quite a number of
chronic diseases such as diabetes, neurological disorders,
and cancer [16]. Free radical scavenging property of antioxidant
agents inhibits or delays cellular damage. Dietary
intake as well as adequate amount of exogenous antioxidants
would prevent the pathological conditions induced
by free radicals [17]. However, the use of synthesized
antioxidants in the prevention of free radical damage
may exude toxic side effects thus the search for natural
antioxidant agents is required [18, 19]. Endophytic fungi
can synthesize secondary metabolites with antioxidant
activity that can interrupt the chain reaction of reactive
oxygen species [20, 21].
Medicinal plants growing in natural habitats are
promising hosts of endophytic fungi that might produce
bioactive secondary metabolites of pharmaceutical relevance.
Different plant parts, especially the leaves, stems,
and roots are considered an enormous repository of
these fungal endophytes with reported cytotoxic, antifungal,
antiviral, and antimicrobial activities [22–24].
The genetic resources of these plants found in Nigeria
are a veritable source of pharmaceuticals and therapeutics
with significant information on their phytochemistry.
Additionally, these plants are used locally in the
treatment of various diseases. Hence, this study was
carried out to isolate and screen endophytic fungi with
antioxidant activity from eight selected ethnomedicinal
plants namely: Acalypha ornata Hochst. ex A. Rich
(Euphorbiaceae), Albizia zygia (DC.) J.F. Macbr. (Fabaceae),
Alchornea cordifolia (Schum. & Thonn.) Müll-Arg (Euphorbiaceae),
Chrysophyllum albidum G. Don (Sapotaceae),
Ficus exasperata Vahl (Moraceae), Gomphrena celosioides
Mart. (Amaranthaceae), Millettia thonningii (Schmach.)
Baker (Fabaceae), and Newbouldia laevis (P. Beauv.) Seem.
ex Bureau (Bignoniaceae).
Methods
Collection of plant samples and identification
Fresh and healthy leaf samples of Acalypha ornata
Hochst. ex A. Rich, Albizia zygia (DC.) J.F. Macbr.,
Alchornea cordifolia (Schum. & Thonn.) Müll-Arg,
Chrysophyllum albidum G. Don, Ficus exasperata Vahl,
Gomphrena celosioides Mart., Millettia thonningii
(Schmach.) Baker, and Newbouldia laevis (P. Beauv.)
Seem. ex Bureau were collected within the main campus
of the University of Lagos, Lagos State, Nigeria in the
month of March, 2019. The plant samples were identified
and authenticated by Dr. George I. Nodza at the
Herbarium of the Department of Botany, University of
Lagos where herbarium specimen and voucher specimen
number (LUH 8256–62; 8264) for each sample was
deposited. Each sample was kept separately in a sealed
plastic bag and brought to the laboratory on the same
day for the isolation of fungal endophytes.
Isolation of endophytic fungi
The collected plant samples were surface sterilized
according to the method previously described [25, 26]
with modifications. To remove dust and debris, samples
were washed thoroughly under running tap water,
followed by washing in distilled water. The leaf samples
were cut into small segments measuring 2–4mm using
sterile razor blades. Surface sterilization of leaf segments
was carried out by sequential immersion in 70% ethanol
for 60 s, 0.5% sodium hypochlorite for 5 min, 70% ethanol
for 30 s, followed by a final rinse in sterilized distilled
water for 5 min. Sterilized leaf segments were air-dried
aseptically and placed on petri dishes containing potato
dextrose agar amended with 0.01% gentamycin antibiotic
for the direct contact of cut edges with the nutrient
media. Three segments of each plant sample were placed
on PDA plates, sealed with parafilm and incubated at
27 °C for 5–7 days. Samples were checked daily for visual
growth of fungi.
Purification and preservation of endophytic fungi
Following the incubation period, different fungal strains
emerged from each sample and individual strains were
isolated by transferring hyphal tips onto a fresh PDA
medium. This process was repeated several times until a
pure endophytic fungal strain with uniform colony was
obtained. Pure endophytic fungi isolates were transferred
separately to PDA slants and 15% (v/v) sterilized glycerol
solution. Growth of endophytic fungi strains in both
media was observed for 3–5 days. Glycerol stock solution
and PDA slants were maintained at − 20 °C and 4 °C
respectively till further use.
Molecular identification
Identification of endophytic fungi was performed using
molecular characterization and sequencing of the internal
transcribed spacer region (ITS).
Endophytic fungi DNA extraction
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extraction of fungal
strains was done using Zymo fungal / bacteria DNA
extraction kit (Zymo Research Corp., South Africa)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly,
pure endophytic fungi strains isolated from the plant
samples were grown in potato dextrose broth (PDB) for
6–7 days. Following the formation of endophytes colony,
fungal mycelium was drained and homogenized in
200 μL of phosphate buffered saline to aid lysis. About
50 mg of homogenate was harvested into a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge
tube and 750 μL lysis solution was added to
the tube. The tube was vortex vigorously for 30–60 s
and 400 μL of supernatant was transferred into a Zymo-
Spin™ IV spin filter in a collection tube and centrifuged
at 10,000 rpm for 1 min. After centrifugation, 1200 μL of
Fungal/Bacterial DNA binding buffer was added to
filtrate in the collection tube. 800 μL of the mixture was
then transferred to a Zymo-Spin™ IIC column in a
collection tube. The reaction mixture was centrifuged at
10,000 rpm for 1 min. The flow through was discarded
and the remaining mixture was centrifuged again at
10,000 rpm for 1 min in the same tube. The column was
pre-washed with 200 μL DNA Pre-Wash buffer and
centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 1 min. This was followed by
a wash with 500μL Fungal/Bacterial DNA Wash Buffer
and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 1 min. The DNA was
eluted from the Zymo-Spin™ IIC column to a sterile 1.5 ml
microcentrifuge tube using 100 μL of DNA Elution Buffer.
The purity and concentration of extracted DNA was
evaluated using a NANODROP (ND 1000) spectrophotometer
(Thermo Scientific, USA).
Amplification and sequencing
Polymerase chain reaction was carried out to amplify the
ITS gene of specific DNA of each fungus using the
primer pair ITS-1 (5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG)
and ITS-4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC) as
previously described [27, 28]. PCR was done using the
Solis Biodyne 5x Hot FIREPol® Master Mix Ready to
Load. PCR reaction was performed in a total volume of
20 μL containing 1 x blend master mix buffer, 1.5mM
MgCl2, 200 μM of each deoxynucleoside triphosphate
(dNTP), 25 pmol ITS1 and ITS4, 2 units of hot FIREPol
DNA polymerase and 10–200 ng of DNA. Sterile distilled
water was used to make up the reaction mixture.
PCR amplification was performed in PTC 100 Peltier
Thermal Cycler (MJ Research) using the following protocols:
denaturation at 95 °C for 15 min; 35 amplification
cycles at 95 °C for 30 s; primer-specific annealing at
58 °C for 1 min and elongation at 72 °C for 90 s; a final
elongation at 72 °C for 10 min. Amplified DNA was
checked by electrophoresis at 80 V for 90 min in a 1.5%
agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide. The band to
PCR product was visualized with a photodocumentation
system (Cleaver Scientific, UK).
The amplified products were purified with exo sap and
sequenced by Epoch Life science, USA using Sanger
sequencing method. Identification of endophytic fungi
was performed on the basis of similarity of amplified
sequence with ITS sequence data from strains available
in the US National Centre for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) database using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
(BLAST) N sequence match routines.
Fermentation and extraction of isolated fungal metabolites
Cultivation of isolated fungal endophytes was carried out
in a conical flask containing sterilized rice medium as
previously described [25, 29] with modifications.
Approximately 200 g of rice was soaked in 200 ml sterile
water for 10 min in a glass bottle. The flask with its
content was autoclaved at 121 °C for 20 min and allowed
to cool. Three to four pieces of pure mycelia agar plugs
were inoculated aseptically into the cooled solid rice
medium. A flask of autoclaved solid rice medium without
inoculum served as the control. Fungal strain was
allowed to grow on rice medium at room temperature
(27 ± 2 °C) for 4–6 weeks with a routine check. After the
incubation period, about 500 ml of ethyl-acetate was
added into the culture flask and left overnight at room
temperature. The crude ethyl-acetate fungal mixture was
filtered through a Whatman filter paper No. 1 under
vacuum using a Buchner funnel. Collected supernatant
was evaporated to dryness under vacuum on a rotary
evaporator (Buchi, Switzerland) at 40 °C to obtain crude
fungal extract.
In vitro antioxidant activity of fungal extracts
DPPH radical scavenging activity
Free radical scavenging activities of fungal extracts were
measured using 2, 2-diphenyl-1-picryl-hydrazyl (DPPH)
as previously described [30, 31]. Briefly, 2 ml of varying
concentrations (62.5–500 μg/ml) of fungal extracts and
positive standard (ascorbic acid) prepared in methanol
was mixed with 2 ml of 0.135mM DPPH in methanol.
The mixture was shaken vigorously and incubated in the
dark at room temperature for 30 min. Mixture of
methanol and DPPH without fungal extract served as
the control. Absorbance of samples was measured at
517 nm against the blank tube that contains methanol
and used to maintain zero of the UV-vis spectrophotometer.
The assay was carried out in three replicates. Inhibition
of DPPH was calculated as a percentage of radical
scavenging activity of each fungal extract using the
formula:
Percentage of radical scavenging activity = [(Acontrol -
Asample)/Acontrol] × 100.
Where A is the absorbance reading. IC50 value (μg/mL)
was calculated from percentage of radical scavenging
activity against extract concentrations.
Reduction of Fe3+ ions by ortho-phenanthroline
O-phenanthroline assay was used to determine the reducing
capacity of fungal extracts as previously described
[32, 33]. A reaction mixture containing 1 ml of 2mM
phenanthroline, 2 ml of 0.2mM ferric chloride hexahydrate
(FeCl3.6H2O), and 2 ml of different concentrations
(62.5–500 μg/ml) of fungal extracts was shaken and
incubated at ambient temperature for 10 min. Absorbance
was measured at 510 nm using a UV-vis spectrophotometer.
Gallic acid served as positive standard.
Identification of bioactive constituents by GC/MS
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS)
analysis of bioactive fungal extracts was performed using
Agilent 7820A gas chromatograph coupled to an Agilent
5975C inert mass selective detector (MSD) with triple axis
detector operated in an electron impact (EI) mode with
ionization energy of 70 eV. An HP-5 capillary column
coated with 5% phenyl methyl siloxane (30m× 0.32mm
diameter × 0.25 μm film thickness) was used for the separation.
Sample preparation was performed according to the
procedure described [34]. The sample (1 μL, diluted 1: 100
in dichloromethane) was injected in splitless mode at an
injection temperature of 300 °C. Purge flow to split vent
was 15 ml/min at 0.75 min with a total flow of 16.654 ml/
min. Helium was used as the carrier gas at the flow rate of
1.487 ml/min with initial nominal pressure of 1.4902
psi and an average velocity of 44.22 cm/sec. The oven
temperature was initially programmed at 40 °C for 1
min then ramped at 12°C / min to 300°C for 10min.
Run time was 32.667 min with a hold time of 5 °C /
min. Identification of the chromatographic peaks was
based on comparisons of their relative retention times
and mass spectra with those obtained from the
NIST14.L library data.
Statistical analysis
All assays were carried out in three replicates and results
are expressed as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM).
IC50 values were obtained by interpolations from standard
curves. Data were analyzed using Graph Pad Prism 8.
Results
Isolation of endophytic fungi
Eighteen pure fungal endophytes were successfully
isolated from surface sterilized fresh leaf samples of eight
medicinal plants: Acalypha ornata, Albizia zygia, Alchornea
cordifolia, Chrysophyllum albidum, Ficus exasperata,
Gomphrena celosioides, Millettia thonningii, and Newbouldia
laevis (Fig. 1). The leaves of A. zygia were found to
host the highest number of endophytic fungi with four
isolates: ZA 161, ZA 162, ZA 163, and ZA 164 (Table 1).
This was followed by the leaves of C. albidum with three
isolates: CA 041, CA 042, and CA 043 and F. exasperata
with three isolates: FE 081, FE 082, and FE 083 (Table 1).
Two endophytic fungal isolates were obtained from the
leaves of A. ornata (CU 061 and CU 062); M. thonningii
(MO 211 and MO 212); N. laevis (NA 021 and NA 022).
A. cordifolia and G. celosioides leaf samples hosted one
fungal isolate LO 261 and GE 091 respectively
(Table 1). Pictorial representation of isolated endophytic
fungi is as shown in Fig. 2.
acid, 3-oxo-, methyl ester); sterols (campesterol; stigmasterol;
and sitosterol); and fatty acids and its amide
derivative (methyl stearate; oleic acid; linoleic acid;
palmitic acid; and oleamide). Figure 9 shows the
chemical structures of pyrogallol (phenolic), lupeol
(terpenoid), and β-sitosterol (sterol) as representatives of
the major classes of secondary metabolites as well as oleamide
(amide derivative of fatty acid) and α-tocospiro
A (tocopherol) present in the investigated endophytic
fungi extracts.
Fourteen compounds (0.06 to 19.84% percent composition)
were identified in fungal extract MO211. Pyrogallol
was recorded as the most abundant compound with
percent composition of 19.84% while dl-alpha-tocopherol
(0.06%) was the least identified compound. A total of
twelve compounds were identified in ZA163 fungal
extract, pyrogallol (10.72%) was the most abundant
compound while dl-alpha-tocopherol (0.15%) was least
identified. This was followed by fungal extract FE 082 with
eleven identified compounds. Alpha tocospiro (4.92%)
appeared as the most abundant while linoleic acid (0.07%)
was the least identified compound. Fungal extracts FE 084
and LO 261 recorded six compounds each with pyrogallol
(31.33%) and 9-octadecenamide (11.04%) recorded as
most abundant compounds and 9-octadecenoic acid
(Z)-, methyl ester (0.62%) and linoleic acid (0.05%) as least
identified compounds respectively (Table 3).
Discussion
In this study, eighteen endophytic fungi were successfully
isolated from surface sterilized fresh leaf samples of
eight medicinal plants. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first report describing the isolation of endophytic
fungi residing in the leaf cells of the selected plant
samples. After size separation by agarose gel electrophoresis
of the ITS PCR products, the PCR products of
the plant samples exhibited DNA band size range of
400–700 bp. Detailed taxonomic assignment of fungal
isolates remain unresolved due to limitations inherent in
fungal ITS sequences. The results obtained from this
study thus confirmed that leaves of the medicinal plants:
Acalypha ornata, Albizia zygia, Alchornea cordifolia
Chrysophyllum albidum, Ficus exasperata, Gomphrena
celosioides, Millettia thonningii, and Newbouldia laevis
are host to endophytic fungi.
The crude fungal extracts showed vary degrees of
antioxidant activity in the DPPH radical scavenging and
reduction of ferric ion assays. DPPH (2, 2-diphenyl-1-
picryl-hydrazyl) is a stable free radical that produces
purple color in methanol. Antioxidant activity of the
fungal extracts was measured by discoloration to yellow
color following the formation of non-radical (2,2-diphenyl-
1-hydrazine) molecule [17]. Fungal extracts ZA163
and MO211 exhibited significant (p < 0.05) DPPH
radical scavenging activity.
The metal chelating capacity of a compound may also
serve as a significant indicator of its potential antioxidant
activity [35]. The iron chelating activity of all fungal
extracts was determined by reaction with ortho-phenanthroline.
Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ by an antioxidant and
the formed Fe2+ rapidly react with phenanthroline to
form a stable red orange colored complex [33, 36].
Isolated fungal extracts ZA 163, LO 261, CA 041, CA
042, CA 043, FE 082, FE 084, and GE 091 from A. zygia,
A. cordifolia, C. albidum, F. exasperata, and G. celosioides
medicinal plants demonstrated iron chelating
capability. Similar observations of antioxidant activity of
endophytic fungi isolates have been reported in some
medicinal plants such as Bauhinia racemosa, Distylium
chinense, Euphorbia hirta, Guazoma tomentosa, Phoenix
dactylifer, Phyllanthus amarus, and Senna spectabilis [4,
37–41]. Our results suggest that endophytic fungi that
reside in the leaves of A. ornata, A. zygia, A. cordifolia,
C. albidum, F. exasperata, G. celosioides, M. thonningii,
and N. laevis showed promising antioxidant activity.
Fungal extracts ZA163, MO211, LO 261, FE 082, and
FE 084 were among the fungal extracts that exhibited
effective antioxidant activity with a substantial yield of
extract, thus were selected for phytochemical analysis via
GC/MS analytical technique. The identified compounds
represented phenolic, terpenoid, and sterol classes of
secondary metabolites as well as tocopherols and fatty
acids. Most of these chemical constituents have been
reported to demonstrate remarkable antioxidant activity.
Phenolic compounds act as natural antioxidants that
exert therapeutic effects such as anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic,
antimicrobial, antiviral and vasodilatory effects
and prevent various forms of diseases [42–44]. Tocopherol
plays an important role as a lipid antioxidant in
stabilizing subcellular membranes [45]. Fatty acids are
able to reduce oxidative stress from free radicals by
exerting an antioxidant role [46, 47]. Pyrogallol (phenol),
alpha tocospiro (tocopherol), and oleamide (amide derivative
of fatty acid) are present as the major components in
the investigated endophytic fungi extracts. Previous
studies have reported the isolation and characterization of
graphislactone A, a phenolic benzopyranone antioxidant
compound from the endophytic fungus Cephalosporium
sp. inhabiting the medicinal plant Trachelospermum jasminoides
[11]. Similarly, isolation and characterization of
pestacin and isopestacin, a coumarone antioxidant and antifungal
agents from the endophytic fungus Pestalotiopsis
microspora that resides in the medicinal plant Terminalia
morobensis was reported in literature [12, 13]. These results
suggest that these compounds and others identified
in fungal extracts ZA163 from Albizia zygia, MO211 from
Millettia thonningii, LO261 fromAlchornea cordifolia, FE
082 and FE 084 from Ficus exasperata could be responsible
for the antioxidant activity demonstrated by the
endophytes.
Conclusion
The results obtained from this study established that endophytic
fungi isolated from medicinal plants: Acalypha
ornata, Albizia zygia, Alchornea cordifolia, Chrysophyllum
albidum, Ficus exasperata, Gomphrena celosioides, Millettia
thonningii, and Newbouldia laevis commonly used in
Nigeria local herbal remedies may be a potential source of
bioactive compounds, which may be used for the development
of antioxidant drugs. Phytochemical analysis revealed
the presence of phenols, tocopherols, sterols, terpenoids,
and fatty acids that may have contributed to the observed
effect. These findings indicate that endophytic fungi hold
promise for large scale production of free radical scavenging
agents, which can be developed as drug molecules
used in the intervention of oxidative stress-mediated
diseases.
radical scavenging activity with an IC50 value range of
50.53 μg/ml to 257.0 μg/ml. The standard ascorbic acid
revealed a value of 12.07 μg/ml. The highest antioxidant
activity with an IC50 value of 50.53 ± 0.01 μg/ml was displayed
by extract of endophytic fungi ZA163 isolated
from the leaves of Albizia zygia. This was followed by
extract of fungal isolate MO211 obtained from the leaves
of Millettia thonningii with an IC50 value of 86.69 ±
0.02 μg/ml. Extracts of fungal isolates CA 041, CA 043,
and CA 042 isolated from Chrysophyllum albidum
leaves showed the least radical scavenging activity with
IC50 values of 239.20 ± 0.04, 252.0 ± 0.11 and 257.0 ±
0.11 μg/ml respectively.
Reduction of Fe3+ ions by ortho-phenanthroline
Except for extracts of endophytic fungi CU 061 and CU
062 isolated from Acalypha ornata, all fungal extracts
showed a dose dependent antioxidant activity with an increase
in absorbance value as concentration increases
(Table 2). At 250 and 500 μg/ml concentrations, fungal
extracts CA 041 from Chrysophyllum albidum and GE
091 from Gomphrena celosioides demonstrated significantly
(p < 0.01) higher antioxidant activity (0.843 and
1.070; 0.640 and 0.977 respectively) than standard gallic
acid (0.499 and 0.521). Also at 500 μg/ml concentration,
the absorbance values of fungal extracts ZA 163 (1.190)
from Albizia zygia; LO 261 (0.803) from Alchornea
cordifolia; CA 042 (0.932) and CA 043 (0.994) from C.
albidum; FE 084 (0.869) and FE 082 (0.852) from Ficus
exasperata; demonstrated significant (p < 0.01) higher
antioxidant capability than gallic acid (Table 2).
Identification of bioactive constituents by GC/MS
Table 3 shows the retention time, molecular weight,
molecular formula, and class of identified chemical constituents
present in endophytic fungal extracts ZA163,
MO211, LO 261, FE 082, and FE 084 with a substantial
percentage compositions and quality match ranging
from 86 to 99%. The chromatograms are shown in
Figs. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. The identified compounds include
phenol and tocopherol (phenol, 2-methoxy; phenol, 2,6-
dimethoxy-; phenol, 2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-propenyl);
pyrogallol; phenol, 2,2′-methylenebis [6-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-
4-methyl; alpha tocospiro A; alpha tocospiro B,
dl-alpha-tocopherol; and gamma tocopherol); terpenoids
(phytol; lup-20(29)-en-3-one; lupeol; and urs-12-en-24-oic