Background
Naturopathy is a philosophically-defined, distinct system
of traditional and complementary medicine (T&CM),
rooted in traditional European and North American
practices and recognized by the World Health
Organization (WHO) [1]. Naturopaths are not defined
by their therapeutic tools, but provide primary contact
care in accordance with underlying principles: first do
no harm (primum non nocere); healing power of nature
(vis medicatrix naturae); treat the cause (tolle causam);
treat the whole person (Tolle totum); doctor as teacher
(docere); disease prevention and health promotion; wellness
[2].
Consumers globally are increasingly consulting naturopathic
practitioners to enhance well-being, for common
health complaints, and serious chronic conditions [3],
with exponential growth in use and expenditure over the
past 25 years [4, 5]. The recent Australian prevalence
rate for naturopathic consultations was 6.2% [6], and in
Switzerland, the consultation prevalence rate was similar
7.7% (7.2–8.2), with use markedly increasing when
patients had access to health insurance rebates [7].
Naturopaths constitute an appreciable part of the
health care sector [8], and are globally regulated as naturopathic
technicians, licensed naturopaths and naturopathic
doctors (ND) [9]. The World Naturopathic
Federation (WNF) estimates 75,000–100,000 naturopathic
practitioners practice in 81 countries, with over
90 educational institutions providing naturopathic training
[10], and 20 naturopathic research institutions globally
[11].
Naturopathic education and regulation have been examined
primarily in single country studies. These studies
have examined the challenges of implementing accreditation
and regulation [12], descriptive studies of accreditation
standards and training competencies [13, 14],
descriptive studies on the scope of naturopathic regulation
in individual countries [15–17] and comparison of
regulation between one country and another [18, 19] as
well as comparisons between naturopathic regulation
and regulation of other professions in single countries
[20]. There have also been studies of the various limitations
of existing regulatory models in South Africa [21]
and Australia [22], as well as examination of the impact
of disharmonious regulation across the European Union
[23, 24].
Despite increasing public use, a significant naturopathic
workforce, and calls by the WHO for national
policy development for integration of services, existent
frameworks as potential barriers to integration have not
been examined at an international level. In response to
this significant research gap, this paper reports findings
from a first global examination of regulation, education,
and practice frameworks that may impact naturopathic
professional formation and integration into health care
systems.
Methods
Study design
This descriptive study reports results from analysis of a
cross-sectional survey of 65 naturopathic organizations
(including naturopathic educational institutions, professional
associations, and regulatory bodies) from 29 countries
and is the initial phase of a larger project
examining education and regulation of the global naturopathic
profession. The survey instrument was developed
in conjunction with members of the WNF
Professional Mapping Committee.
Setting
Participants completed an online survey, in the English
language, through the SurveyGizmo platform. Recruitment
and data collection occurred between November
2016 and August 2019 and collection dates can be
viewed in Supplementary File 2. An extended survey
timeframe was necessary as new organizations emerged.
Participants
Global naturopathic organizations were recruited using
purposive sampling with 228 organizations from 46
countries invited to participate. Naturopathic organizations
were identified by WNF and complemented by
additional internet searches. Organizational leaders were
invited by email to participate in this survey where the
organization was primarily focused on naturopathy, met
WHO training guidelines (educational institutions), or
provided or accepted highest national education standards,
as identified by WNF. A formal invitation and research
information sheet was provided with link to the
survey. Participants provided consent by pre-reading the
research information sheet before starting the survey.
The survey took approximately 60 min to complete. A
total of twenty follow up emails were sent to participants
over 34 months. Where English skills impacted the ability
to complete the survey, participants were requested
to collaborate with an English-speaking colleague, or to
contact the researcher for translation assistance through
WNF. No translation assistance was requested.
Measures
The survey consisted of 59 items relating to six domains
– (1) organization demographics, (2) education characteristics,
(3) organizational influence on education, (4)
regulatory characteristics, (5) perception of regulation, (6)
consultation reimbursement characteristics. Definitions
of key terms were provided. Survey logic was used to
customize questions to organizational and regulation
type. The questionnaire was piloted on a convenience
sample of organizations from five countries. Minor
changes were made to the questionnaire based on respondent
feedback.
The items, scales and open form questions used in the
survey are described in this section. Most survey items
were multiple choice (69%), 12% were seven-point rating
scales, and 42% provided comment. Open form items
accounted for 19% of the questionnaire. The survey can
be found in Supplementary File 1.
Organization demographics
Organizational demographic items measured
organization type [education institution, professional association,
or regulatory body], WHO training guidelines
supported [min 1500 h, min 2 years in length, min 400 h
supervised clinical program], country, jurisdiction, leader
characteristics and provided organizational contact
details.
Education characteristics
Education characteristic items measured institutional attributes
[profit, not for profit or state], qualifications offered
[year first offered, title, undergraduate, or
postgraduate, duration], educational framework [and
framework name] used to guide qualification
development.
Organizational influence on education
Items measured perceived influence of organizations
[educational institutions, national and regional professional
associations, third-party funders, national and regional
government departments, industry, multi-national
body and accreditation body] on education, delivery,
content, admission requirements, tuition fee schedule,
clinical supervisor/student ratio, total course hours, program
duration, learning outcomes, minimum qualifications,
clinical and research experience of classroom
teachers and clinical supervisors. Items identified and
measured organizations responsible for external audits
and types of audit undertaken.
Regulatory characteristics
Regulatory characteristic items measured organizations
involved, regulation type [‘no regulation’, ‘title protection’,
‘defined scope of practice’, or ‘other’ regulation],
date regulation was first implemented, jurisdiction, restricted
or controlled acts, professional-entry registration
requirements, regulatory board characteristics, factors
that determine practices, organizations that impact standards,
regulation of, and access to natural health products.
Items measured access to private insurance, public
funding, and hospital privileges.
Perception of regulation
Open form questions provided multiple comment by organizations
on perceptions held about regulation, factors
impacting regulation, and organizations supporting or
opposing naturopathic regulation. A seven-point rating
scale plus not applicable option measured perceived impact
of regulation on education and vice versa, and the
degree to which reimbursement was perceived tied to
regulation, influenced integration and access to naturopathic
services.
Consultation reimbursement characteristics
Items measured payment methods for naturopathic services
[direct payment by patient, government funded,
private health insurance reimbursement, other thirdparty
funder] and payment restrictions [consultation
costs, naturopathic prescription products, in-office treatments
(e.g. acupuncture, manual therapy)]. Impact of
perceived factors [malpractice insurance, license, practitioner
characteristics, condition type, practitioner qualification,
referral from medical practitioner, type of
therapies provided] on patient access to reimbursement
were measured, as was perceived degree to which reimbursement
costs associated with naturopathic care were
tied to regulation in the country.
Data analysis
Descriptive statistics were tabulated as frequencies and
percentages using IBM SPSS Statistics Standard Edition
Version 25 and cross-tabulations calculated. Qualitative
open form questions were colour coded by hand and
thematically analysed where appropriate, and reported
by frequency of themes, named organizations and relevant
organization-specific comments were summarized
and used to elaborate quantitative data. Prior to analysis,
raw data were screened for incomplete responses or
double ups. Partially completed (104) and disqualified
(30) responses were removed from analysis. Medians
were calculated for rating scales. Data was analysed by
type of regulation as compared to country in order to
examine the impact of method of regulation on regulatory
framework characteristics, naturopathic practices,
treatment reimbursements and integration into health
systems. Table 8 analysed by country is also available as
Supplementary File 3 Country Restricted Acts.
Results
Organizational demographics
A total of 65 responses were analyzed (29% response
rate) from 29 of 46 countries (63%). All six WHO world
regions were represented. The total study population by
world region, country participation and organizational
type can be found in Table 1.
Respondents primarily represented professional associations
(53.8%) (n=35) followed by educational institutions
(38.5%) (n=25) and regulatory boards (7.7%) (n=5).
Most professional associations and regulatory boards reported
national jurisdiction (82.5%) (n=33), with (58.5%)
(n=38) of total respondents reporting one national professional
association. In Australia and France up to seven
national professional associations were reported, and in
Germany 10 or more.
Characteristics of naturopathic education
Of 65 respondent organizations that completed the survey,
63.1% (n=41) reported their countries met all three
WHO training guidelines for naturopathic medicine.
Most educational institutions (80%) (n=20) reported the
program length exceeded two-year recommended minimums,
with almost half reporting programs of fouryears
in length (n=12) (48%). Higher education programs
and qualifications (60%) (n=15) predominated. Table 2
represents the characteristics of educational programs,
institutions, and auditing agencies that impact naturopathic
education, reported by educational institutions in
this study.
Most naturopathic educational institutions were private
(96%) (n=24), and most were for-profit establishments
(60%) (n=15). While some programs were offered
as early as 1956, most formal programs (56%) (n=14)
were established in the period between 1996 and 2015.
Approximately two thirds (68%) (n=17) of naturopathic
educational institutions reported program delivery via a
national qualifications’ framework (either general or
naturopathic-specific – see Tables 2 and 3), although
Italy’s was based on a national ISO standard.
Organizational influence on education
Program content and delivery
Table 2 also represents organizations independent of
educational institutions, reported by all respondents to
influence naturopathic program content and delivery. Of
65 respondents, most reported national professional associations
(75.4%) (n=49), followed by accreditation bodies
(41.5%) (n=27); regulatory boards (33.8%) (n=22);
national government departments (27.7%) (n=18) and
other health professions (21.5%) (n=14) as stakeholders
influencing naturopathic program content and delivery.
Where naturopathy was unregulated (n=28), national
professional associations (89.2%) (n=25) followed by national
government departments (42.9%) (n=12) were
most frequently reported to influence program content
and delivery. Where regulated, accreditation bodies and
regulatory boards were most commonly reported as influential
in influencing naturopathic program content
and delivery. The presence of multiple professional associations
in Australia was reported to create complexity,
and hinder educational and professional progress, as the
following representative quote from the free-text section
demonstrates:
“There are a number of professional associations
and these associations often differ in their views
causing disunity. This creates challenges for [NAME
OF COLLEGE] as we attempt to develop courses
which prepare students for future practice, as the
profession can disagree on what that practice should
look like”. (Australian educational institution).
Naturopathic educational institutions were perceived to
have significant influence on course, curriculum, and
faculty characteristics. Educational institutions were perceived
to have ‘moderate to high’ influence on course tuition
fees, delivery method and faculty characteristics –
teacher and clinical supervisor qualifications, clinical and
research experience across all regulation types. Accreditation
bodies were seen to have influence in course content,
admission requirements and clinical supervisor/
student ratio in some regulated jurisdictions.
Program audit
Most naturopathic educational institutions (76%) (n=19)
reported some form of external audit by multiple organizations.
Educational institutions most frequently reported
program audits by professional associations
(33.3%) (n=12), followed by government (30.5%) (n=11)
and accreditation bodies (30.5%) (n=11) (see Table 2).
Professional association audits were commonly reported
where naturopathy was unregulated, and accreditation
body and government audits were more common where
the profession was regulated. Government audits were
also reported when programs were delivered via a national
framework regardless of regulatory status. Table 3
also represents reported accreditation bodies.
Of the 91 external audits reported by educational institutions
(n=24) most were focused on content delivery
and assessment (29.7%) (n=27), followed by clinical processes
(22%) (n=20), and governance/quality assurance
(19.8%) (n=18). Governance/quality assurance, course
content, delivery and assessment, clinical processes and
financial audits were commonly reported by educational
institutions that delivered programs via a national qualifications’
framework. However, there was significant
heterogeneity in how this was applied.
In Australia, where naturopathy was reported unregulated,
a respondent reported national qualification
framework compliance audits related to optimization of
student outcomes, that is, completion of a program, as
opposed to meeting professional standards. A respondent
from Italy reported ‘other’ audit type by the UNI
international standards organization (ISO). Respondents
from France reported self-regulating organizations
undertook governance/quality assurance, course content,
delivery, and assessment audits. Respondents from
Uruguay and Belgium reported self-regulating organization
audit of course content and assessment, and by
Belgium additional clinical and independent financial
audit. Auditing was not reported in following unregulated
jurisdictions - Czech Republic, Nepal, Slovenia, and
Venezuela, nor in the UK where voluntary regulation was
reported.
Characteristics and perceptions of regulation
Regulation type
Regulation of naturopathy was reported to predate 1949
in Canada, Germany, and USA. There was significant
heterogeneity of regulatory types, with organizations
sometimes reporting more than one type (see Table 4).
The most commonly reported regulatory status was ‘no
regulation’ (43.1%) (n=28), followed by ‘defined scope of
practice’ (41.5%) (n=27), ‘title protection’ (27.7%) (n=18)
and ‘other’ type of regulation (10.8%) (n=7). Voluntary
self-regulation was reported in Australia, Cyprus, UK,
and Sweden. ‘Heilpraktiker’ regulation was reported in
Germany, while in Switzerland regulation was by federal
degree. In Congo DR, naturopathy was regulated under
1950 traditional/natural medicine legislation and the respondent
from Italy reported regulation by voluntary national
standardization (ISO) mechanisms.
‘Title protection’ and ‘defined scope of practice’ were
not always tied to professional registration/licensing.
Furthermore, the implementation of national policy at a
state level was not always consistent, with each subnational
jurisdiction in Canada, Switzerland and the
United States reported to apply their own rules and
regulations.
Standards setting
Regulatory boards were reported most influential in setting
standards when naturopathy was regulated by a ‘title
protection’ mechanism (77.7%) (n=14) and/or a ‘defined
scope of practice’ mechanism (74%) (n=20). Professional
associations were reported responsible for setting standards
when naturopathy was unregulated (75%) (n=21),
and when ‘other’ types of regulation (85.7%) (n=6)
existed. Enforcing standards/guidelines followed the
same structure, as did requesting changes to standards,
although, educational institutions were also reported influential
in the latter. Educating practitioners about standards
and guidelines generally involved all three
organizations – educational institutions, regulatory
boards, and national professional associations.
Accreditation and regulatory frameworks
Accreditation bodies were reported by 41.5% respondents
(n=27), with 33.8% (n=22) reporting regulatory
boards. These bodies were not always distinct organizations.
Respondents from USA, Canada, Mexico, and Italy
reported separate and independent accreditation and
regulation/licensing boards for the naturopathic profession,
although Nepal, Portugal, Switzerland, and South
Africa had dual purpose boards (i.e. for both accreditation
and regulation). The regulatory board was described
by a respondent from Canada as being multipurposes,
and responsible for investigating and disciplining
registrants, overseeing licensure, setting standards
for a range of certifications, policies for emergency
medicine and continuing education.
Professional entry requirements were globally inconsistent.
Respondents from Canada, Chile, Congo DR,
Nepal, Puerto Rico, South Africa, Switzerland, and USA
(57.6%) (n=19), reported requirement for completion of
a program from a specific naturopathic institution, with
successful completion of a regulatory board examination.
However, only respondents from Canada, Puerto Rico,
and Switzerland, consistently reported this method (see
Table 5). Direct entry into the profession based on completion
of a specific qualification with no requirement to
graduate from a naturopathic institution was reported
by respondents from Congo DR, Italy, Nepal, Sweden,
and UK. In Germany professional entry was based on
successful completion of a board examination without
any other specific qualification, with the professional association
from Germany reporting that ‘Heilpraktiker’
held a high level of self-responsibility concerning education
and practice. Board examinations were reported not
required in Brazil, and Mexico, where ‘title protection’
or ‘defined scope of practice’ were reported, and were
one of multiple methods used in Chile, Congo DR,
Nepal, and South Africa. Voluntary regulation was reported
to not require professional entry examinations in
Australia, Cyprus, and UK.
Board examinations were administered by organizations
independent of naturopathic educational
institutions. Respondents from Puerto Rico and USA
reported the North American Board of Naturopathic
Examiners ascertained eligibility and administered
licensing/registration examination, NPLEX. Regulators
in Canada and South Africa were reported to undertake
this function, and government departments in Chile and
Nepal. Ability to sit board examinations were based on
graduation from an accredited program in Canada,
Puerto Rico, South Africa, Switzerland, and USA, with
assessment of prior learning and recognition of substantial
equivalency reported in Canada.
Licensing was mostly reported the responsibility of a
government entity. Naturopathic specific regulatory
boards were reported to be commonplace in jurisdictions
with ‘title protection’ (72.2%) (n=13) and ‘defined
scope of practice’ (70.3%) (n=19), although, naturopathic
regulation was not always the boards’ sole purpose. The
composition of regulatory boards varied according to
regulation - where naturopathy had ‘title protection’
and/or ‘defined scope of practice’ the regulatory board
comprised of naturopaths, independent community representatives
and government officials. In contrast, where
‘other’ type of regulation was reported, the regulatory
board was reported to comprise of mostly representatives
from naturopathic professional associations,
educational institutions and practicing naturopaths (see
Table 5).
Regulation of naturopathic practices and access to tools of
trade
Access to ‘tools of trade’ were not always freely available
(see Table 6). Over the counter consumer access to botanical
medicines was reported by 53.8% (n=35) respondents,
nutraceuticals by 52.3% (n=34) and homeopathic
medicines by 47.7% (n=31). Requirement for prescription,
behind the counter, and health professional only
access, were reported, potentially impacting naturopathic
practice favorably or unfavorably depending on the
definition of health professional, in some unregulated
regions (see Table 7).
Full access to restricted or controlled acts were more
frequently reported where the profession was regulated
(see Table 8). Organizations from Canada, USA, and
Congo DR reported full access to a range of 14 potentially
restricted acts (see supplementary information).
Regulation did not always provide full access to the naturopathic
scope of practice, with practices in Chile,
Portugal and South Africa being restrictive relative to
other regulated regions.
Sale of naturopathic products directly to clients was
more commonly reported where naturopaths were regulated
compared to unregulated. (see Table 8). Almost
one-quarter of respondents (21.5%) (n=14) reported inclinic
sales of naturopathic products not permitted. Prescription
for naturopathic treatment (6.2%) (n=4) was
not allowed in Belgium, Egypt, Florida [USA], and
Venezuela (see supplementary information).
Of 65 total respondents, more than half reported some
access to general manipulation (66.2%) (n=43), followed
by acupuncture (55.4%) (n=36) with fewer reporting
ability to undertake cervical manipulation (47.7%) (n=
31) (see supplementary information). Access was reported
even with regulation of chiropractic, osteopaths,
and acupuncturists, indicating shared access to therapies
between profession, although potentially with some
limitations.
Of the 65 total respondents, ability to write pharmaceutical
prescriptions (full access, limited, permitted but
not in curriculum) was reported by approximately onequarter
(26.1%, n=17) of respondents, most commonly
in regulated jurisdictions. A minority of respondents
(15.4%) (n=10) reported physical examination being restricted,
and for almost one third of respondents (32.3%)
(n=21) laboratory pathology testing was not permitted.
Perception of naturopathic regulation
Respondent organizations (95.4%) (n=62) commonly reported
support for regulation of naturopathy, although
opposition to further regulation was reported by
Germany, where long-standing ‘Heilpraktiker’ regulation
provides access to a broad range of therapies. The Swedish
respondent which reported self-regulation of education
and ‘defined scope of practice’ was undecided about
statutory regulation due to concerns about more restrictive
practice, and the organization from Egypt was
unsure.
Statutory regulation was perceived to provide public
protection from unqualified or incompetent practitioners
and to overcome lack of practice control systems,
and diploma mills that provided low quality education,
as the following representative quotes indicate:
“… There are education providers who are offering
naturopathic education without government
approval to innocent members of the public who
have no awareness of the quality of these nonapproved
programs. With no formal registration of
the profession there is no enforceable national standard”
(Australian professional association).
“As naturopathy is not regulated, and membership
to professional organizations is voluntary, there is
little control over safety of practitioners once they
are qualified and beyond the supervision of our College”
(NZ educational institution).
Regulation was perceived to raise and enforce education
and practice standards, provide public safety, state recognition,
title protection, public access to reimbursement
schemes for costs associated with naturopathic
care, and to overcome issues associated with equal employment
opportunities in national health systems.
However, regulation of naturopathy was reported to
not necessarily provide legitimacy and acceptance by
other health profession, nor guarantee state alliance and
benefits afforded other health practitioners, as indicated
by the following representative quote.
“We were being penalized by the Medical Association
saying that we are not professions of Health
and for this reason we had to pay the VAT- tax (tax
on value added) … They … put in Tax Enforcement”
(Portugal professional association).
Instruments of occupational control reported by respondents
included the establishment of an accreditation
board to regulate education, development of national
curriculum guidelines, educational consortiums, professional
association standards, self-regulation body, and
professional codes used to differentiate the qualified
from the unqualified, to provide public certainty around
naturopathic education, to advance the profession and
provide commercial advantage.
In jurisdictions where naturopathy was regulated, respondents
reported formalized frameworks that linked
regulation with education and entry to profession providing
consistent quality control mechanisms for education
providers and practitioners entering practice, as the
following representative quotes indicate.
“Regulators accept educational standards set by the
CNME in the USA; thus, regulators tend to have
standards across North America in respect to examination
and licensure” (Canada professional
association).
“Any education and training in naturopathy requires
statutory health council approval against its
mandate to protect the health of the public” (South
Africa regulator).
Respondents perceived naturopathic regulation to be
politically influenced and circumvented by other health
professions protecting market share. Almost one-third of
respondents (31%, n=20) reported opposition from medical
associations, osteopathic medical, and other health
professional associations – nurses, physiotherapists,
pharmacists, dieticians, psychologists, dentists, and some
chiropractic associations. A regional professional association
in USA reported:
“[State] affiliate of the American Medical Association;
Chiropractic Association, Nursing Association,
Pharmacy Association have all testified against our
original licensure as well as more recent efforts to expand
our scope of pharmaceutical prescribing rights”
(USA regional professional association).
Other respondents described the challenge of overcoming
opposition by state bureaucrats who were perceived
to subvert the naturopathic contribution to integrative
health care by strategic exclusion from policy development
in favor of established health profession, as the following
quote demonstrates.
“The current political context is very challenging.
There are very complex class conflicts of interest. For
example, we were not cited in the WHO GLOBAL
REPORT ON TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY
MEDICINE 2019. The questionnaire was sent
to a department of the government responsible for
integrative practices, and the respondent concealed
all the information about the bachelor's degree in
naturopathy, citing only specializations linked to
traditional medicine from other health professions.
This attitude generated a conflict, the working group
that produced most of the technical documents for
the technical area of government responsible for
traditional medicine and integrative practices, was
predominantly composed by naturopaths. We are
currently requesting an erratum of the publication
for the WHO” (Brazil educational institution).
Controversy over regulation was reported by the respondent
from Germany. Medical doctors were reported
to want increased Heilpraktiker education, and some osteopaths
and homeopaths were reported to favor development
of separate professions within or outside the
‘Heilpraktiker’ framework.
In addition, some organizations reported intraprofessional
opposition to regulation. Some respondents
(12.3%) (n=8) from Australia, Italy, Spain, and USA
perceived unlicensed naturopaths, mixed natural medicine
associations, and professional associations with no
economic interest in regulation, hindered progress on
regulation in order to maintain their own interests.
Factors perceived to impact regulation of naturopaths
Most respondents reported ‘attitude of decision makers’
(87.7%) (n=57); ‘opinion of other health practitioner
groups (including medical doctors)’ (76.9%) (n=50);
‘regulation or scope of other health practitioners’
(73.8%) (n=48); and ‘existing legislation’ (73.8%) (n=48)
as factors impacting the regulation of naturopaths.
Where no regulation existed ‘professional unity’ (or lack
thereof) was commonly reported to have most impact
on naturopathic regulation (85.7%) (n=24).
Access to public resources and reimbursements for
naturopathic services
Most respondents reported ‘full or limited access’ to private
health insurance (63.1%) (n=41), relatively few respondents
reported accesses to government funded
public health (13.8%) (n=9) and medical integration
(21.5%) (n=14). Where respondents reported ‘title protection’
access to private health insurance (88.9%) (n=
16), government funded public health (33.3% (n=6) and
medical integration (55.5%) (n=10) were more commonly
reported, (see Table 9).
Most respondents reported the most common payment
options for naturopathic services were direct out
of pocket followed by private health insurance. Almost
two thirds of respondents (66.2%) (n=43) reported out of
pocket payment for naturopathic consultations, product
prescriptions (64.6%) (n=42), and in-office treatments
(58.5%) (n=38). Respondents reported some reimbursement
by private health insurance for consultations 55.4%
(n=36), product prescriptions (21.5%) (n=14) and inoffice
treatments (55.4%) (n=36) (see Table 9), with
coverage of consultation costs and in-office treatments
more frequently reported when the profession was
regulated.
Consumer access to reimbursement of costs for naturopathic
services where unregulated, were reported to
be dependent on practitioner holding malpractice insurance
(39.2%) (n=11), or the practitioner’s level of education
and qualification (35.7%) (n=10), or a registration
title or number from a voluntary regulatory board
(32.1%) (n=9). Reimbursements where naturopathic
medicine was regulated were reported to be dependent
on practitioner holding a registered title or number issued
by regulatory board, type of therapies or treatment
provided (‘title protection’ 61.1%, [n=11]) (‘defined scope
of practice’ 51.8%, [n=14]), diagnosed disease or condition
(‘title protection’ 44.4%, [n=8]) and practitioner
holding malpractice insurance (‘defined scope of
practice’ 40.7%, [n=11]) (see Table 9). Using a sevenpoint
rating scale, most respondents (56.9%) (n=37) perceived
reimbursement of costs associated with naturopathic
care to be ‘more than moderately’ tied to
regulation (M=6), integration (55.3%) (n=36)] (M=6) and
utilization of naturopathic services (56.9%) (n=37) (M=
6).
Discussion
The results presented here represent the first in-depth
examination of global naturopathic regulation, education,
and policy frameworks that constrain
professionalization and integration into health systems,
as perceived by the naturopathic community. Key findings
serve to inform policy development by state, professional
bodies, educational institutions, and third-party
funders for development of frameworks that support
professional formation, public access, and integration
into national health systems. Closer examination of the
interface between country, regulation, and education
frameworks should be considered in future research.
Regulation
Diverse regulation is a barrier to consistent education,
professional frameworks, and integration
Our study demonstrated significant heterogeneity and
wide-ranging methods of global naturopathic regulation,
which may act as a barrier to development of consistent
global educational and professional frameworks, and integration.
This may in part be compounded by the difficulties
in many countries to accurately capture
naturopathic medicine in legislation. Broad terminology
(e.g. ‘natural medicine’) or more narrow definitions
based on specific therapeutic tools (e.g. ‘herbal medicine’)
may be used by governments, as this is often easier
to practically implement than regulation of a complex
system of traditional medicine. This would explain variations
within the WHO 2019 T&CM report, which reported
population use of naturopathy in 98 of 133
countries (73.6%), yet practicing naturopaths in 35 countries
(26.3%) [25], and differences with WNF reported
presence of naturopathic practitioners in 81 countries
[9].
The recommendation by the WHO that national policy
development of T&CM practitioners and practices is
the responsibility of member states [26], without
provision for clear guidance, potentially underpins this
issue. An alternative explanation for the results, is habituated
denial of naturopathic practitioners’ contribution
to healthcare, an exclusionary tactic reported by Brazil
in our study, but one that has also been reported by
other professions [27].
Inconsistent or delayed regulation of T&CM professions
may potentially be less about risk management –
control of sub-standard education, practice standards,
and public safety, and more about national politics and
established state-profession relations – and may reflect
professional tensions between biomedicine and complementary
medicine, as reported elsewhere [21, 28–30].
Prejudice against professionalization of T&CM practitioners
by established health profession undertaking
boundary construction, jurisdictional protection, and expansion
of practices, supported by enduring structural
arrangements, is well documented in the literature in
many of the countries that have been part of this study.
In South Africa, for example, the Medical Association of
South Africa in 1953 declared naturopathy unscientific,
and through code of ethics, prohibited collaboration between
doctors and naturopathic practitioners, which has
been reinforced through regulatory Acts [21]. Inconsistent
and delayed regulation by the state enables continued
biomedical hegemony and economic self-interest,
marginalization of naturopathic practitioners and consumers,
and negates broader interests of society.
Our results confirm and extend findings from the pan-
European CAMbrella project [19, 23], which found EU
regulation directing member states to develop T&CM
health policy, resulted in diverse regulation that was
non-conformant with EU Cross-border Healthcare Directive
and out of step with current theory of risk management,
risk regulation and patient safety. In this study,
patient’s seeking T&CM across borders encountered different
training of identical T&CM practitioners, and different
reimbursement systems. Diverse regulation was
found to be a barrier to consistent delivery of T&CM
treatment and research [23, 31]. Our study suggests
heterogeneity extends to include inconsistent global
delivery of education, development of professional
frameworks, and integration.
Integration of naturopathic medicine into health care
systems
We found limited reporting of integration of naturopathic
services in healthcare systems in 29 countries,
although there are other examples of state-funded naturopathic
services. In India, the separate Ministry of
AYUSH (abbreviation for Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy,
Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy) is responsible for
mainstreaming this range of T&CM medical systems,
and in 2014, forty-two AYUSH hospitals providing 1107
beds, were reported to provide yoga and naturopathy
services [32].
In our study, access to private health insurance, government
funded public health and medical integration
were more frequently reported where ‘title protection’
forms of regulation existed. Full access to government
funded public health, was only reported in USA (and
then only in some States), and full medical integration
only reported in Congo DR, Zambia, and Switzerland.
Lack of integration may create additional difficulties for
patients who wish to use naturopathy in addition to
other services. Individuals with chronic health conditions
use T&CM care regularly and frequently for condition
management, and limited system interface may mean
consumers have to manage and negotiate parallel systems,
determining interpretation, and sharing of health
information between healthcare providers [33].
Limited medical integration of naturopathic medicine
reported in our study is consistent with findings in
chiropractic, where chiropractic integration was limited
to several hospital outpatient settings [34]. Integration of
naturopathy into health systems requires political will,
potentially driven by a demanding public, as demonstrated
by Switzerland constitutional referendum in 2009
that resulted in inclusion of complementary medicine in
Article 118a of the Switzerland Constitution [35] and in
2017, inclusion of some T&CM in mandatory health insurance
when delivered by dual trained conventional
doctors [36].
Consistent with our findings, the last major Australian
(Victorian) government review into the regulatory and
legislative requirements for naturopathy, found lack of
direct legislation counter to development of consistent
standards of education and professional standards,
resulting in difficulties in enforcing and sustaining minimum
standards of training and practice [37]. We argue
diverse regulation, and subsequent variation in education
and professional frameworks, may not support WHO
T&CM (2014–2023) strategic objectives to: build a
knowledge base to support evidence-based practice;
strengthen safety, quality and effectiveness; and promote
universal health coverage [26]. We propose that growth
in naturopathic educational programs in the past 25
years, in an environment of limited or inconsistent
regulation, with absence of consistent frameworks and
minimal WHO training guidelines, has fostered differences
in global naturopathic education and hindered
professional formation. Moreover, we propose that although
naturopathic practice is impacted by varying
regulatory dynamics and structural and cultural differences,
consistency in education frameworks operationalized
within and between countries, will assist
professional formation, integration, practitioner transportability
and user access.
Education and practice standards
Primary contact care demands higher education training
In our study, global naturopathic training varied between
two to four years in length, with a presence primarily in
the higher education sector, although vocational qualifications
were reported by educational institutions from
Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Italy, Nepal, Slovenia,
Uruguay, and Venezuela. Almost two-thirds of educational
institutions, mostly private, reported delivery of
bachelor’s or postgraduate qualifications via a national
qualifications’ framework with almost half delivering
four-year programs. A previous study by McCabe found
that the degree-level of training is the minimum preparation
required for independent, primary contact practice
in naturopathy, which requires a culture of enquiry,
interaction with other health professionals, and understanding
of practice limitations [12]. This is consistent
with other T&CM professions providing primary-pointof-
care practice such as chiropractic [20], and primary
care nurse practitioners in private practice [38]. On this
basis the WHO naturopathic training guidelines should
be considered only the minimum requirement for entrylevel
technician roles [1].
Voluntary organizations lack legal mandate, have
potentially inadequate regulatory frameworks, and
conflicting interests
Educational institutions in our study were reported to
have significant influence on faculty characteristics and
programs, with accreditation bodies influential where
there was regulation, and government departments and
professional associations where programs were delivered
on a national qualifications’ framework. Where naturopathic
education was delivered outside these parameters,
professional associations provided limited oversight
based on organizational standards. However, voluntary
professional associations may not be equipped for this
role, and studies in Australia and the United Kingdom
have shown them to be insufficient in this role as it relates
to naturopathy [37, 39]. Attempts to complement
professional associations with voluntary registers has
also been largely ineffective [40, 41].
In our study, presence of unified national representation
of the naturopathic profession was not ubiquitous,
and multiple competing national and mixed associations
– with differing views on standards and professional priorities
– were a reported obstacle to advancement of naturopathic
education and the naturopathic profession.
Professional unity (or lack thereof) was perceived to impact
regulation in some unregulated jurisdictions. This
finding supports previous qualitative examination of
Australian naturopaths where factional agendas and conflicts
within competing associations was found to delay
registration, higher education standards, as well as other
professional development activities [42]. Intraprofessional
conflict has been a previously reported barrier
to professionalization in Portugal, where lack of cohesion
and infighting between T&CM groups delayed
regulation of naturopathy and other disciplines by 10
years [19] and in Ontario, where only those T&CM
groups with good internal communication,
organizational infrastructures, and fit with the healthcare
system, achieved regulation [43].
Development of global education standards and
accreditation agencies a priority
In our study naturopathic programs were primarily
based on local education standards. We found limited
evidence, other than CNME accredited programs in
North America, of consistent education frameworks and
attempts for harmonization of programs across countries.
This is in stark contrast to other T&CM professions
such as chiropractic which has harmonized
education frameworks across world regions [44]. Chiropractic
established an international umbrella council,
Council on Chiropractic International (CCE-International)
with representatives from four regional Councils
on Chiropractic Education (CCE) [Australasia,
Canada, Europe and USA] all contributing to development
of the Accreditation Standards for the CCEInternational
[44]. CCE-International is the body recognized
by WHO as the source for evaluation of chiropractic
education, and guides education development
globally with accreditation of educational programs
undertaken by four regional accreditation bodies [44].
The naturopathic profession has not developed an
equivalent body, but the development of the World Naturopathic
Federation may provide an avenue for organizations
such as WHO, to provide a basis for
development of global standards potentially for different
forms of practice. Existing regional standards and competencies
for the spectrum of regulated naturopathic disciplines
- naturopathic doctor, naturopath and
naturopath technician [9], could form the basis of international
standards and competencies, indirectly supporting
national regulation and naturopathic integration into
health systems. Our study indicated that much of this work
is quite advanced at a national level in Australia, Brazil,
Canada, Switzerland, and the United States, which could
provide a basis for development of global naturopathic
standards and competencies for alignment by world regions.
Limitations
Findings from this study should be viewed within the
context of its limitations. Due to the nature of the survey,
and overlapping regulatory groups, analysis is largely
descriptive. As the survey was limited to the English language
there may have been some cultural or linguistic
differences in interpretation, reporting and participation.
Additionally, not every country was represented as educational
institution participation was limited to 16 of 25
countries, professional associations to 25 of 44 countries,
and regulatory boards to 5 of 7 countries. Some countries
were not represented by both educational institutions
and professional associations, limiting ability to
examine education frameworks and accountability
mechanisms relative to professional frameworks. The extended
timeframe of this survey and the evolving nature
of jurisdiction may mean data collected early may not be
directly comparable with data collected near the end of
the project. This study was also limited to organizations
self-reporting and did not examine policy, nor
organizational documents for concordance between
what was described and praxis, all of which may warrant
further more detailed examination. Nevertheless, the results
of this study form the most comprehensive global
examination of the education, regulatory landscape of
naturopathic practice to date, and as such offer valuable
insights to the naturopathic profession, policy-makers,
and other key professional stakeholder groups.
Conclusion
Education and regulation of the naturopathic profession
has significant heterogeneity, even in the face of global
calls for consistent regulation that recognizes naturopathy
as a medical system. Standards are highest and
consistency more apparent in countries with regulatory
frameworks. Consistent regulation, formalized education
frameworks and practice standards, could potentially
support increased professional formation, integration of
naturopaths into health systems and increased access to
naturopathic care by the public.