Background
Cancer in children is naturally always an unexpected
and demanding diagnosis for parents [1], and it is diffi-
cult for many to find reliable information about Comple-
mentary and Alternative Medicine (CAM). The user-
friendly platforms developed to inform patients, for ex-
ample CAM Cancer [2] and the website of the United
States’s National Cancer Institute, are directed towards
adult cancer [3].
Few parents discuss CAM use with the pediatric on-
cologist [4–6]. The reasons for non-disclosure might be
that the parents do not think it is important, or they fear
a negative reaction from the oncologist [7]. From a risk
perspective and due to possible negative interactions
with conventional cancer treatment, it is important to
disclose the use of CAM to health care professionals [8].
However, many physicians do not receive training or
have little or no knowledge about CAM. They are there-
fore unable to discuss pros and cons about these modal-
ities with the parents [9, 10]. According to the American
Academy of Pediatrics [11], clinicians should avoid dis-
missal of CAM in ways that communicate a lack of sen-
sitivity or concern for the family’s perspective.
In Norway, the incidence of cancer in children under
the age of 15, is about 15 per 100,000 children [12],
which is similar to the rest of Europe [13]. More than
300,000 children worldwide are diagnosed with cancer
every year [14]. The most common cancers in children
are neoplasms of the blood and lymphatic systems, em-
bryonal tumors, and tumors of the brain, bones, and
connective tissues [15].
According to parents, symptoms such as pain, emo-
tional distress, fatigue, and loss of appetite cause the
most problems for children undergoing cancer treatment
[16]. Therefore, many parents choose support such as
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM), to re-
duce cancer treatment-related symptoms in their chil-
dren [17]. CAM modalities most commonly used are
herbs, diet and nutrition, homeopathy, and prayer [4, 18,
19]. CAM is defined as a group of diverse medical and
health care symptoms, practices and products that are
not generally considered part of conventional medicine
[20]. If CAM is used together with conventional medi-
cine, it is considered complementary, and if used in place
of conventional medicine, it is considered alternative
[20]. The prevalence of CAM use among children with
cancer is high and varies between 6 and 100%, depend-
ing on the survey sample and country. The prevalence is
on average 47% in high-income countries [21].
Many parents want high quality and reliable informa-
tion on CAM from authoritative sources [9, 22], prefera-
bly provided at the hospital where the children are
treated. They also want open, non-judgmental conversa-
tions about CAM with the attending physician or on-
cologist who respects their choices [23, 24]. However,
this area of pediatric cancer care has been subjected to
limited investigation in Norway. Therefore, we wanted
to investigate the use of CAM among parents and chil-
dren who have had cancer and delineate which commu-
nication and information needs they have about CAM.
Aim
This study draws on qualitative data obtained through
in-depth, semi-structured interviews conducted with
parents in Norway of children who have been treated for
cancer and young adults who themselves were treated
for childhood cancer. The aim of this paper is twofold:
(1) identify how the participants communicated with
conventional health care providers about CAM, and (2)
identify types and sources of information they would like
to receive about CAM.
Methods
Anonymity
In this study, we used pseudonyms and randomized
identifier numbers to protect and ensure the anonymi-
ties of the participants. According to Norwegian privacy
regulations, we are allowed to record age and sex at a
group level (the Norwegian Centre for Research Data/ 7,
478,928).
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 2 of 11
Study area and setting
Many parents who have children with cancer find it dif-
ficult to navigate in a health market where the offer of
healing and help is contradictory and complex. The
overarching aim of this research project was therefore to
generate knowledge and information about CAM that
can be helpful for them. This study was conducted as a
component of a focused ethnographic study [25] where
the investigators wanted to identify parents’ needs re-
garding the use of CAM. The study took place in
Norway. Norwegians receive conventional medical treat-
ment free of charge within the public health care system.
According to the Norwegian Health Personnel Act [26],
there are 29 occupational groups that are authorized
health care professionals in Norway and four main cen-
ters/hospitals for treatment of children with cancer.
These hospitals are Oslo University Hospital, Haukeland
University Hospital in Bergen, St. Olav University Hos-
pital in Trondheim, and University Hospital of North
Norway in Tromsø (Fig. 1: Map of Norway).
Recruitment
Twenty-two families with 24 adult participants (two
couples) were recruited to this study. The participants
Fig. 1 Map of Norway including the four main hospitals for cancer treatment (Oslo, Bergen, Trondheim, and Tromsø, copyright NAFKAM)
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 3 of 11
were recruited through Barnekreftforeningen (Chil-
dren’s Cancer Society). The society [1] is a voluntary,
nationwide organization run by parents who have or
have had children with cancer. The aims are to be a
partner of support and provide reliable information to
families who are affected by childhood cancer so that
they never feel alone. The society contributes to re-
search and education to combat childhood cancer, and
promotes the awareness of childhood cancer in the
media. The society has 14 regional offices, all organized
and run by parents. These offices also organize social
events for families.
Those included were parents/families with a child
who have (had) cancer; with any cancer; at any stage;
any time since cancer diagnosis. Parents with inad-
equate Norwegian language skills, or parents who did
not understand the meaning or consequences of par-
ticipating, and parents who were unable to complete
the informed consent form were excluded from the
study.
To recruit participants to the present study, the first
author posted invitations on Facebook and Instagram
and asked parents to participate in the study. This strat-
egy resulted in nine (n = 9) participants. One of the par-
ticipants gave the researcher contact information to a
woman who had been a member of The Children’s Can-
cer Society for many years. She referred fourteen (n =
14) participants to the researcher. Before completing the
interviews, the researcher informed the participants
about the aim of the study, the purpose, the content of
the interviews and her contact information. Written
informed consent was obtained from each individual be-
fore conducting and recording the interviews. The study
participants were informed that they could withdraw
from the study for any reason and at any time. A sample
of 22 families was perceived enough to achieve satur-
ation (see Fig. 2: Flow chart of the inclusion process in
this study).
Participants
The majority of the participants were females who
lived together with a partner. Most of the parents
worked in the public sector or health service sector.
The cancer-affected children were mostly infants or
toddlers
when
they
received
a
cancer
diagnosis
(Table 1: Demographic data of the participants). This
study was a health service study, so health informa-
tion about the cancer affected children of the partici-
pants was not collected.
Data collection
Interviews were semi-structured, and the researcher ap-
plied an interview guide developed by the investigators
based on an integrated review of the existing literature
on parents of children with cancer (see supplementary
material). The interview guide was not tested before
use. The first author conducted the interviews during
the period 1 January 2019 to 31 July 2019. Most of the
interviews took an hour to complete. They ranged in
length from 30 min to 2 h. The interviews were tape-
recorded and took place in a car (n = 1), a classroom
(n = 1), the participants’ home (n = 14), hotel rooms
Fig. 2 Flow chart of the inclusion process in this study
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 4 of 11
(n = 2), over the telephone (n = 3), as well as at a work
place (n = 1). Nobody else than the participants were
present during the interviews and none repeated inter-
views was performed. The researcher made field notes
during and after the interviews. These interviews were
very moving and evoked strong emotions in the partici-
pants, as well as in the researcher. Having a child with
cancer was a traumatic event for many of the partici-
pants, and was experienced as a stroke of fate that af-
fected the whole family.
Data analysis
Each interview was transcribed verbatim and translated
into English as soon as possible following collection.
Transcription and translation were completed by profes-
sional services. The first author read all transcripts mul-
tiple times. She wrote case summaries [27] of topics
based on questions from the interview guide and what
the parents had expressed in the interviews and synthe-
sized information from different parts of the transcripts.
These were reviewed and discussed by the whole team.
Information was then sorted across case studies to create
a variable-based analysis where the variables were orga-
nized into components of three main domains (advice
from laypeople about CAM, communication with conven-
tional health care providers about CAM, and parents’ in-
formation needs
about
CAM).
These domains
and
variables were identified in advanced and during the
analysis (see Table 2 for clarification). The team read
these, and the analyst returned to the text in an iterative
fashion to add more details and to search for commonal-
ities and contrasts across the participants. In particular,
the analyst returned to the transcripts to delve deeper
into the text to produce descriptions and illustrative
quotations about advices from laypeople, communica-
tion and information needs about CAM. The transcripts
were not returned to the participants for comments.
Results
This section is organized according to the three main
domains (advice from laypeople about CAM, communi-
cation with conventional health care providers about
CAM, and parents’ information needs about CAM) de-
rived from the data analysis. Minor domains (communi-
cation needs that were met, unmet communication
needs) will be presented in the communication section
and preferred information sources and types of informa-
tion will be presented in the information section.
Description of the sample
The sample consisted of 22 families with 24 adult partic-
ipants (two couples), including two adults who were
Table 2 Domains and variables identified in the study
Domains identified
Domains
Variables
Variables identified
Before the analytic
process
Domain I
Advice from laypeople about CAM
Parents contacted by:
• CAM provider
• Media
• Friends/family
Before the analytic process
started
Before the analytic
process
Domain II
Communication with conventional health care providers
about CAM
• Needs that were met
• Unmet needs
During the analytic process
Before the analytic
process
Domain III
Parents information about CAM
• Preferred information
sources
• Preferred type of
information
During the analytic process
Table 1 Demographic data of the participants
Parents’ sex
Female:
(n = 20)
Male:
(n = 4)
Child’s sex
Female:
(n = 13)
Male:
(n = 9)
Age of parents
41 years (mean)
18–59 years (range)
Age of child at diagnosis
Infant/toddlers (0–2 years):
(n = 10)
Young children (3–9 years):
(n = 8)
Teenager (10–19 years):
(n = 4)
Household
Married/living as married:
(n = 20)
Single parent:
(n = 2)
Occupationa
Health service sector:
(n = 8)
Public sector/teacher:
(n = 10)
Private sector:
(n = 7)
Self-employed:
(n = 3)
Disability pension:
(n = 2)
Place of cancer treatment
Oslo:
(n = 17)
Trondheim, Bergen, or Tromsø:
(n = 5)
aMore options possible
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 5 of 11
young adults (18 years of age) when they were diagnosed
with cancer. The participants’ mean age was 41 years
(range from 18 to 59 years). The majority of the partici-
pants were women (83%) who held a variety of occupa-
tions like teachers, welfare nurses, and self-employees.
The households consisted mainly of two parents with
two children. Ten children were under the age of 2
years, eight were under the age of 10 and four were in
their puberty/teens when they were diagnosed with can-
cer. The majority of the children (n = 17) received treat-
ment at Oslo University Hospital. The other children
(n = 5) received treatment at the other three centers in
Trondheim, Bergen and Tromsø.
Norwegians receive conventional care within the pub-
lic health system free of charge, while CAM is practiced
outside this system, and the patients themselves cover
the cost for CAM services. Many (n = 11, 46%) of the
participants in this study had visited a CAM provider
before the children got sick. Others (n = 13, 54%) did not
consult CAM providers, mainly because they were very
satisfied with the treatment they received at the hospital,
and the family had agreed to adhere to conventional
medicine. Tom (ID11) was generally skeptical of CAM:
There are too many well-intentioned fools and too much
profit involved. Nevertheless, he claimed that CAM def-
initely has its place in the cancer treatment of children.
The treatment itself and the oncologists are very technic-
ally oriented. They [the oncologists] are not the best at
psychosocial issues, nor good at talking to relatives.
Therefore, it is valuable to have someone else to talk to,
he claimed. Anette (ID14) was somewhat ambivalent
about whether CAM should have a place in cancer care.
She thought CAM needed to be used in cooperation
with the hospital, because she said, I have to be able to
trust people that I need to deal with.
Domain 1: advice from laypeople regarding CAM
Many parents with children who have had cancer find it
difficult to navigate in a health market where the offer of
healing and help is contradictory and complex [28].
Seven families received advice from friends and families.
Three families were contacted by CAM providers who
offered them their services. Recommendations from lay
people were often perceived as too much to handle, as
they were not in line with the parents’ own health values
and philosophy. Consequently, most quotes represent
negative experiences, while one positive example is de-
scribed at the end of this section.
The majority of the participants received advice from
lay people (n = 13) (ID2, ID3, ID7, ID8, ID9, ID10, ID11,
ID12, ID13, ID14, ID15, ID17, ID18). Marianne (ID2)
had a friend who told her to give cannabis oil to her
child to cure the cancer. The suggestion frustrated her. I
did not discuss it with her [the friend]. I just tried to live
my life as normal as possible and have confidence in the
recommendations from the oncologists, she said. This
family also received a hint from a colleague about a Rus-
sian who had made an aerial of aluminum. The idea was
to stand between the aerial and a candlelight. The en-
ergy from the light was supposed to go through the per-
son and make the person healthy again. The family
thought this was stupid and would not expose their child
to anything more than the treatment at the hospital.
Trude (ID3) was offered healing and tarot card consulta-
tions, but she declined. I just said that we follow our
own religion (Roman Catholicism), and then it was ok. A
cousin of her husband told Anette (ID4) that the reason
why her child was diagnosed with cancer was that the
child had negative thoughts. The cousin told the parents
that he and his wife could help them, as they were both
healers. Anette still does not speak to that man, as she
was very upset about this accusation. Jane’s (ID12) child
had been active in the media sharing her cancer history.
Therefore, the family received unsolicited advice from
several sources. Three healers, among others, offered the
child healing. One of them told the mother that he could
heal the child, but they had to stop the conventional
treatment as he regarded it as poison that would block
the body’s ability to heal itself. After that conversation,
Jane deleted the healer’s contact information from all
her electronic devices. Bente (ID8), on the other hand,
experienced that people they knew, family, and friends
gave them good advice on CAM, which they appreciated.
However, when their advice turned into nagging, she
had to put her foot down.
Domain II: communication with conventional health care
providers about CAM
Generally, parents emphasized the importance of an
open communication about CAM, as this might avert
feelings of frustration and powerlessness that impelled
parents to these modalities. Eleven participants (46%)
used CAM. Six of them (n = 6, 25%) disclosed their
CAM use to the health care providers at the hospital
(ID3, ID8, ID12, ID14, ID17, ID18), and five participants
(n = 5, 21%) did not (ID2, ID5, ID6, ID9, ID10). The rea-
sons for withholding disclosure were that the oncologists
did not ask, or did not raise the question (ID2, ID5).
Marianne (ID2) would have liked the doctor to initiate a
conversation about CAM. This would make it easier to
talk about CAM, she told the interviewer. She would
never have initiated such a conversation herself, as she
would have felt embarrassed questioning the doctor’s
professionalism. Tove (ID9) would have discussed CAM
with her doctors if she had felt convinced it would work,
and if she could have relied on the doctors to take these
questions seriously.
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 6 of 11
Communication needs that were met
The majority of the participants were satisfied with the
communication about conventional treatment between
them and the health care providers at the hospital. Sol-
veig (ID6) experienced that the communication between
herself, her child, and the nurses was good and attentive.
Ella (ID20) thought it was frustrating having to deal with
so many different doctors, but maybe that’s the way it
has to be, she said. She claimed, however, that the nurses
were like angels. Good communication about conven-
tional treatment facilitated positive conversations about
CAM. Bente (ID8) told the oncologist about the use of
CAM for her child. She showed the doctor the remedies,
and he started laughing and told her they could try. He
did not regard these remedies as useful. The mother was
happy that the doctor did not turn unfriendly, and, if he
had informed her that the combination of these remed-
ies with conventional cancer-treatment could be danger-
ous, she would have stopped her child from using these.
Jane (ID12) discussed the option of a specific diet with
the doctors at the hospital, which was approved by the
oncologists. Knut and Mari (ID17) told the oncologists
and nurses at the hospital that people prayed for them.
One of the oncologists told them [the parents] that they
tried to meet people, regardless of faith. The parents felt
that they were met in a positive way regarding their
faith, which made them feel safe. They told: We are all
different. Therefore, we accept that CAM might have a
place in cancer care of children, because we need treat-
ments that take care of the whole person. This concept
[treat the whole person] differs from person to person,
they said. Therefore, the health care providers have to
meet the needs of every single person.
Anette (ID14) thought it would be easier being a pa-
tient if the walls between the various professions had
not been so solid. She would want patient-centered
teams, consisting of a physician, nurse, psychologist, and
CAM provider. She trusted conventional medicine re-
garding the treatment of cancer, and she would welcome
unambiguous doctors. She experienced that the doctors
only wanted the best for her child. Nora (ID22) was
pleased with the follow-up at the hospital. She would
welcome cooperation between the oncologists and ho-
meopaths. She believed that working together would re-
sult in proper individual treatments.
Unmet communication needs
Grete (ID5) described how she was perceived as a
troublesome mother by the hospital staff. During cancer
treatment of her child, her job was to provide the best
possible care. Mette (ID19) had also mixed experiences
of communication with the health care providers. Some
oncologists were arrogant and did not want input from
the family, whereas others were receptive and attentive.
She and her husband wanted to be in control and paid
close attention to what happened to their child during
treatment. She did not care if some of them [health care
providers] did not like her. After a while, there were only
nurses in their room, who communicated well with the
family. She concluded: I would do anything for my child,
and that is that. Solveig (ID6) and her husband had their
hands full following up the treatment protocol as their
child got a lot of medication. When the mother men-
tioned her concerns about the amount of medication,
the oncologist got irritated and told her that they just
had to follow the program.
Negative communication and experiences at the hospi-
tals about conventional treatment, might be transmitted
to other health care areas such as CAM. Silje (ID15) and
her husband remembered that a nurse at the hospital
advised them to go to Denmark to have crystal therapy.
According to the nurse, the crystals would light on their
child’s body and heal the cells. Silje found this piece of
advice incredible, and her husband said: Well, that [pro-
posal] is probably inappropriate. Anne (ID1) found Nor-
wegian doctors conservative with the attitude that you
do not experiment with children. Therefore, they are not
open to new ways of doing things unless sufficient testing
has been performed, and I question how progress can be
made, she explained to the interviewer. Moreover, one of
the doctors at the hospital advised us [the family] to fol-
low the protocol and not listen to well-intentioned advice,
Ronja (ID10) explained.
Domain III: parents information needs about CAM
Autonomy of the family is important when making
treatment decisions for children, and adequate, under-
standable information may empower parents and give
them freedom to act on that information. None of the
participants in this study received information about
CAM at the hospital when their children were sick.
Preferred information sources
The majority of the participants wanted information
about CAM on the web page of the Children’s Cancer
Society (n = 8) (ID13, ID11, ID10, ID8, ID7, ID6, ID4,
ID20), and/or from health care providers at the hospital
(n = 13) (ID1, ID2,ID3, ID4,ID5,ID6,ID7, ID9,ID11, ID13,
ID14, ID20, ID22). Anne (ID10) would want information
about CAM from health care providers at the hospital.
She had the opinion that the doctors and nurses had lit-
tle knowledge of CAM, and they got no information
about this at the hospital, which she would have appreci-
ated. Marianne (ID2) would want objective evidence-
based information from oncologists or other impartial
persons (social workers) at the hospital. She would wel-
come a website about CAM and cancer in children.
Trude (ID3) thought that information about CAM could
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 7 of 11
be made available in a folder that can be handed out at
the hospital. Mette (ID19) needed no information about
CAM when her child was sick. She continued: At the
hospital, we were told not to Google, not to choose CAM,
and that is what counts. However, if she had needed
such information she would like the information to be
available at the hospital. She would welcome CAM treat-
ment there, such as treatment for nausea, pains, and ad-
verse effects. Tom (ID11) and Trude (ID3) wished for
controlled, scientific information about CAM preferably
from the Children’s Cancer Society (for example a link)
or from health care providers. Tom would prefer quality
information, which needed to be objective, and based on
research and experience. Bente (ID8) said that the Chil-
dren’s Cancer Society could have a link to a page con-
taining objective information. Ingrid (ID16) was not
negative
to
CAM.
Nevertheless,
she
was
skeptical.
Sondre, her husband, failed to see the need for offering
information about CAM in general.
Type of information
Marianne (ID2) and Anne (ID1) would want information
on whether CAM might cure cancer, improve the im-
mune system, information about the effect of CAM on
the cancer itself (in the absence of conventional treat-
ment) and whether it can increase the chances of
survival.
Anne (ID1) thought the information about CAM
should be objective and focus on reducing adverse ef-
fects and information about possible negative interac-
tions with conventional treatment. Nora (ID22) would
welcome further research on CAM and cancer and a
possible modality with less late effects compared to to-
day’s conventional treatment. Children have a develop-
ing body, and cancer treatment have more or less strong
adverse effects. Several of the participants were therefore
concerned about late effects of the cancer treatment and
would appreciate further research on late effects (ID4,
ID10, ID22). Jane would like information of long-term
effects of cancer treatment such as harvesting of ovarian
eggs, and why influenza vaccines are important.
Several of the participants wanted information about
how to increase quality of life. Ella (ID20) demanded in-
formation about things that can make daily life easier for
the children. Marianne (ID2) wanted information about
how to increase quality of life, including how to support
the family, how to support children who are afraid, and
what to do for yourself when you get anxious. She
claimed that parents need support to find out about all
of this.
Jane (ID12) explained: When your child gets cancer,
you don’t know what to ask. Therefore, she would want a
folder containing information about CAM in general,
and more specifically about D-vitamins. Ella (ID20)
would also welcome information about which vitamins
and minerals that can be used. Many doctors advised the
parents not to give antioxidants to their children to
strengthen their immune system. The rationale was that
when suffering from cancer, herbs or supplements that
increase the count of white blood cells should not be
given, as this count is already too high. Many parents
found this information important, and they thought that
this information should be spread to others parents.
Sofie (ID4) would want information about reflexology
and nutritional needs.
Mette (ID19) thought that great caution should be
exercised when giving CAM to children with cancer. It
must be safe to use, mostly to provide relief rather than
an additional burden, and approved by conventional
doctors, she said. Essentially, she was open to CAM, but
when it came to her own child, she needed to be abso-
lutely sure that it would not hurt, and that it would help.
Discussion
Many of the participants (n = 11, 46%) in this study used
CAM for themselves, and when they disclosed their chil-
dren’s use of CAM, the oncologists were mostly positive.
However, some were very skeptical and recommended
against such use. The reason for withholding disclosure
was that the oncologist did not ask.
The participants did not receive any information about
CAM at the hospital, which they would have appreci-
ated. Instead, they were advised not to use CAM and
not to take into consideration well intended advice from
family and friends. The majority of the participants in
this study received advice about CAM from lay people.
Many of these recommendations were rejected, as they
were not in line with the parents’ health values.
The majority of the participants (n = 21, 95%) wanted
evidence-based information about CAM from authorita-
tive sources such as health care providers at the hospital
or from the Children’s Cancer Society. They wanted in-
formation about vitamins and supplements, how to re-
duce adverse effects of chemotherapy, improve the
immune system, and fight the cancer. Moreover, they
wanted information about how to support the families,
how to cope with life, and reduce anxiety for themselves
and for their children.
Use of CAM
The National Research Center in Complementary and
Alternative Medicine (NAFKAM) study from 2016 [29]
found that 5% in an unselected Norwegian population
visited a CAM provider for their children’s health prob-
lems during a year. About 15.7% of the parents gave
their children supplements, herbs, or natural health
products. Only a handful of the children used self-help
techniques. A Norwegian study from 2007 [30], reported
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 8 of 11
that parents were very restrictive about giving supple-
ments and natural remedies to their children with can-
cer, but more positive regarding their own use.
A study from The Oslo University Hospital showed
that
53%
of
the
patients used
CAM
products
to
strengthen the immune system of the child. Only 18%
thought that such products would contribute to the in-
hibition or cure of the cancer, whereas 62% did not
know [28]. Another Norwegian study [31] demonstrated
that CAM treatment was provided either simultaneously
with the hospital treatment or when the patients were
referred to palliative care. Moreover, the parents’ motiv-
ation for CAM use seemed to be focused on the basic
need of actively taking part in saving their children’s
lives, knowing they had tried everything [31].
Advice about CAM
The majority of the participants (n = 13, 54%) in our
study received well-intended advice about CAM from
family and friends, which was mostly perceived as a bur-
den and therefore rejected. However, according to Gil-
mour [32], the reason for using family and friends as the
main source of information was that they did not receive
CAM information from the oncologists. Fernandez et al.
[33] also reported that parents received information on
CAM from families and friends. This is in accordance
with Gozum et al. [34] who reported that most parents
in Turkey learn about CAM from friends and relatives
or other families with children who have cancer.
Studies about communication of CAM
Parents and patients with cancer highly value the input
from physicians about CAM [30, 35, 36]. Ideally, they
should feel free to discuss all options without the fear of
being rejected. This can best be achieved through open,
transparent, non-judgmental, and informed discussions
about possible outcomes of combining CAM and con-
ventional treatment for cancer [37, 38]. Between 38 and
60% of cancer patients, however, use CAM without
informing their healthcare teams [39]. The reason for
withholding disclosure was that the oncologists did not
ask. The parents in this study reported that positive
communication about conventional treatment facilitated
fruitful conversations about CAM. If they talked with
the treating oncologists about CAM were met in a posi-
tive way. Compared to previous research in Norway
[37], this demonstrates a positive change in health pro-
viders’ attitude towards CAM.
Health care providers provide ethical care by respect-
ing parents’ choice on using CAM for their child [40].
The importance of keeping hope alive when the child is
serious ill is important [7, 40, 41]. In order to try all pos-
sible modalities for their child and maintain hope, par-
ents often perceive CAM safer and more efficient than
research demonstrates [7, 40]. Gagnon and Recklitis [42]
investigated how the parents’ preferred level of control
in treatment decision making was related to their per-
sonal health care involvement and their decision to use
CAM for their children. They found that most parents
using CAM preferred active or collaborative versus pas-
sive decision-making.
Studies about information on CAM
There is a need among parents of children with cancer
for information about CAM. Studies demonstrates that
the most common reason for not using CAM is lack of
information [33, 43] and additional stress for the child
[44]. This is in line with the findings from our study
where the participants had limited capacity to search for
information regarding CAM because following up the
conventional treatment protocols was time consuming.
This is in line with Fletcher et al. [24] who found in a
qualitative interview study that parents wanted informa-
tion about CAM integrated in the services they already
received in the hospital, as lack of time hindered them
from examining CAM modalities themselves. In a survey
Ben-Arush et al. [45] reported that the majority of par-
ents were very interesting in obtaining more information
and guidance about these modalities. Krogstad et al. [30]
found that the participants had not received any infor-
mation from the oncologists or other health care pro-
viders at the hospital about CAM products, which they
were very interested in obtaining. Moreover, information
about CAM may give the parents a sense of control of
the child’s treatment. It may also provide additional ways
of helping their child to get through his/her cancer treat-
ment. Finally, it may give parents the feeling that they
are doing everything possible to support their child’s re-
covery [43].
Strengths and limitations
Qualitative analysis provides insights into how partici-
pants understand and interpret situations, but it cannot
be used to establish associations [25, 46]. This study
should therefore be interpreted in light of its strengths
and limitations. Twenty-two families agreed to be part
of an interview. Having more than 22 interviews may
have resulted in a richer variety in experiences. However,
no further substantial variation was added during the
final three interviews, leading to the judgment that the
information power was sufficient and that a larger num-
ber of interviews would not have significantly altered the
outcome of the thematic analysis [47]. Moreover, the in-
terviews were of much depth, and the material was
therefore very rich, and the participants demonstrated
striking similarities in their personal history, concerns
and strategies. Another strength of this study was that
the interviewed parents were geographically from all
Stub et al. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies           (2021) 21:85 
Page 9 of 11
over Norway. However, the study is based on data from
a selected group of parents, as all were recruited via The
Children’s Cancer Society. Therefore, the present find-
ings may not be representative for all parents of children
with cancer in Norway.
Conclusion
The reason participants did not disclose CAM use is that
physicians did not ask them about it. However, positive
communication about conventional treatment facilitated
fruitful conversations about CAM. Parents of children
with cancer need information about CAM from authori-
tative sources. An evidence-based decision aid is war-
ranted to enable health care professionals and parents of
children with cancer to make well-informed decisions
about CAM.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12906-021-03253-x.
Additional file 1. Interview guide, families with children/adolescents
who have had cancer.
Abbreviation
CAM: Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Acknowledgments
We want to express our gratitude to the parents who participated in this
study. We want to thank Jane Ekelund for technical support. The publication
charges for this article have been funded by a grant from the publication
fund of UiT, The Arctic University of Norway.
Authors’ contributions
AEK (senior researcher) is a language sociologist. She holds a PhD in medical
science and is trained in quantitative research. MJ (professor) holds a PhD in
medicine and has expertise in both quantitative and qualitative research
methodology. SAQ (professor) holds a PhD in medical anthropology and has
expertise in self-management strategies and in particular, qualitative design.
TAA (professor) holds a PhD in anthropology has expertise in both survey
design and qualitative research. TS (research professor) holds a PhD in med-
ical science and is trained in both qualitative and quantitative research meth-
odology. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
Funding
This research was funded by Barnekreftforeningen (The Children’s Cancer
Society) in Troms and Finnmark, Norway. The funding body had no role in
the design of the study and collection, analysis, and interpretation of data,
and in writing the manuscript.
Availability of data and materials
The raw dataset is not available publically due to Norwegian privacy
regulations. Applicants for any data must be prepared to conform to
Norwegian privacy regulations. Researchers, who want to request the data,
can contact the first author.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before the
interviews started, and all were informed that they could withdraw from the
study for no reason. The study was approved by the Norwegian Centre for
Research Data (NSD) with the reference code: 478928. This study meets the
standard of the Helsinki Declaration of 1975 last revised in 2013 [48].
Consent for publication
Consent to publication was obtained from the participants.
Competing interests
Sara A. Quandt and Agnete E. Kristoffersen are members of BMC
Complementary Medicine and Therapies. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests.
Author details
1Department of Community Medicine, The National Research Center in
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NAFKAM), UiT The Arctic
University of Norway, Hansine Hansens veg 19, 9037 Tromsø, Norway. 2Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Department of Epidemiology and Prevention,
Division of Public Health Sciences, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem,
NC 27157, USA. 3Wake Forest School of Medicine, Department of Family and
Community Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157,
USA.
Received: 13 April 2020 Accepted: 17 February 2021
