Background
In many musculoskeletal diseases muscular weakness
leads to functional disability and decreased quality of
life. For therapists, it is important to assess and quantify
muscle strength in order to choose the most appropriate
treatment or to evaluate therapy effects [1, 2]. Joint torques
are generally of primary importance for clinicians
to analyze the effect of a surgery on symmetry and comfort,
and to obtain an indicator of functional capability
to perform a motion. Joint torques are very often analyzed
in patients with osteoarthritis (e.g.: [3, 4]) or scoliosis
(e.g.: [5, 6]). Especially at the elbow, the change in
elbow torque is an indicator of incremental release of
the brachioradialis insertion footprint, for surgeons performing
open reduction or internal fixation of distal
radius fractures [7]. For physio/ergo-therapists, the
elbow torque is an indicator of functional capability to
perform a motion, e.g. in stroke patients, and a control
variable for assistive devices developed for these patients
[8]. In the rehabilitation field, strength is assessed
though the measurement of the maximal joint torque
[9–11], which represents the resultant action of all muscles
crossing the joint, but do not provide each muscle
force contribution. Studies have shown the potential of
musculoskeletal simulation tools to determine the contribution
of each muscle crossing a joint during movement
which was otherwise impractical or impossible to
obtain experimentally [12]. According to the clinical
relevance and accuracy of the used method, such quantification
would help clinicians to target the best therapeutic
solution. Indeed, computational model could give
the opportunity to predict the effect of the muscle property
modifications on joint torque production [13]. For
example, the effect of antagonist muscle release (e.g.:
spasticity treatment) on joint torque production could
be anticipated.
The upper limb function is of utmost importance in
improving the quality of life and enhancing functional
independence. Especially, elbow flexion movement has
been related to motor impairment and performance
[14]. Thus, accurate modeling of elbow muscle involvement
could provide an interesting tool to better understand
the movement limitation. Within this process of
calculating the muscle forces, joint torque is an essential
intermediate variable [15–17]. Moreover, precise and repeatable
quantification of the upper limb joint torque is
of major importance for numerous applications (e.g.
[18–20]) including exoskeletons and interactive rehabilitation
devices development (e.g. [18, 21]), the understanding
of the mechanisms resulting in joint rigidity
(e.g. [22, 23]), or the impact of joint co-contraction on
joint constraint (e.g. [17, 24]).
However, it is not always obvious to obtain accurate
joint torque results that could be usefully exploited in
model [25–27]. Applied to human motion analysis, several
parameters can be a source of error. The major
problems are linked to the inverse dynamic solution repeatability,
which is affected by both the data processing
and the experimental procedure. More specifically, in a
top down approach, inaccuracy in movement coordinate
data, joint centre of rotation location, and kinematic
data processing can impact on inverse dynamics solution
[25]. Indeed, using marker-based optical motion capture
systems, marker misallocation and skin movement
greatly influence joint centre localisation [28, 29]. The
inertia parameters of the body segments can also influence
inverse dynamic solution [30]. Lastly, the estimate
of internal efforts, i.e. joint torques and muscle forces, is
particularly sensitive to accelerations [31–33]. As a result,
kinematic data analysis is also of greatest importance
and mainly impact inverse dynamic results. Riemer
et al. found that these various inaccuracies can result in
uncertainties of estimated joint torques ranging from
6 % to 232 % of the peak torque during gait. As suggested
in the literature however, more accurate results
can be obtained with corrected kinematics based on a
kinematic identification process, named solidification
procedure [34], compared to inverse dynamics using
either raw kinematic data, smoothing or low-pass
filtering [35–37].
Additionally, in order to use inverse dynamics to
follow patient progress, the experimental procedure
should (1) allow the spontaneous adaptation of the
participant to perform the task (e.g.: minimally constraint
movement) and (2) result in within-subject
test-retest task repeatability, according to the kinematic
and dynamic movement parameters used in the
model.
In light of this information, we have developed a
model which quantifies the contribution of muscles
crossing the elbow joint during flexion and extension
movements [17] in order to use it as a clinical tool. The
model-based process includes two consecutive steps: a
kinematic identification based on procedure of solidification
[34], combined with inverse kinematics and an inverse
dynamics process that provides the elbow joint net
torque (for more details, see [17]). As a first step to test
the accuracy of the model, the aim of the present study
is (1) to assess the maximal elbow joint torque variability
during cyclic elbow flexion extension movements and
(2) to assess participant test-retest repeatability in
healthy young adults.
Methods
Participants
Twelve healthy young adults (age = 23 ± 2; male n = 6)
were included in the present study. Exclusion criteria
were known musculoskeletal or orthopaedic pathology,
on the basis of a questionnaire in participants. The study
was approved by the Research Ethics Board of Ste-Justine
Hospital, Montreal, Canada (Ethics case #3362). A written
informed consent was obtained from participants. The research
was in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration.
Procedure
Experimental set-up
The experiments were conducted on cyclic elbow
flexion-extension movement with the upper arm maintained
vertical. As illustrated in Fig. 1, an experimental
chair was designed to enable standardized motion of
elbow flexion-extension in the sagittal plane. The person
depicted in Fig. 1c gave a special consent to publish
this one. Particularly, our incentive was to minimize
the elbow joint motion during the task, but without
mechanically blocking it, to highlight the behaviour of
only one joint, i.e. the elbow. Consequently, right elbow
optokinetic sensors were inserted in specific holes created
on the side of the chair rest (Fig. 1a). Further, to
limit the range of the flexion-extension motion (approximately
50°), 'sensitive' stops were placed to keep
the movement between 70 and 120 degrees of flexion
(Fig. 1a). This arc (70–120) was chosen because it corresponds
to range of movement involve in many functional
tasks [38]. The chair was adapted in height and
depth in order to seat the participant with their hips
and knees flexed at 90 degrees, and the right arm
placed vertically downward. The participants were
equipped with optokinetic sensors, placed on the following
anatomical landmarks: the acromion, the middle
of the arm (technical marker), the lateral epicondyle,
the middle of the forearm (technical marker), the radial
styloid, and both extremities of the dumbbells. This
placement was set to enable the three-dimensional
kinematic reconstruction of the upper limb and the
dumbbell. The displacement of the markers was filmed
by six infrared cameras (Elite-BTS, Milano, Italy) cadenced
at 100 Hz.
Participant instructions
During experimentation, the participant sat on the chair.
The participants were asked to perform 10 cycles of
flexion-extension, following the rhythm of a given
metronome, with and without dumbbells. Participants
had to keep the shoulder and elbow joint as motionless
as possible and the dumbbell axis horizontal. Participants
were involved a few minutes with the dumbbells,
before beginning the experiments.
The participants had to perform ten elbow flexionextension
movements with five different masses: 0, 1,
2, 3 and 4 kg, and at three motion frequencies,
0.5 Hz (i.e. a cycle in 2 seconds), 0.33 Hz (1 cycle in
3 seconds) and 0.25 Hz (1 cycle in 4 seconds). The
order of the masses and frequencies was drawn randomly
by the operator. Each male participant performed
the whole experimental protocol twice in
order to assess test and retest reproducibility of the
joint torques. The retests were performed approximately
20 min after the tests, without removing the
kinematic sensor.
Joint torque quantification process
Using the measurements of kinematic sensors, a 3D
multibody model of the human body [17] provides the
elbow joint torques via these three consecutive steps:
1. The full model joint kinematics: the system is
modeled as a constrained multibody system, using
kinematic loops.
2. The joint kinematic identification: the joint
coordinates q, velocities q and accelerations q
are numerically determined by an optimization
process that estimates the joint coordinates of
the multibody model that best fit the
experimental joint positions.
3. The inverse dynamics: using recursive Newton-Euler
formalism, a 3D multibody model [17] provides the
vector Qinv of joint forces and torques during
movement as follows:
Qinv
¼ f q;
:q
ð ; q€; Fext ;Mext ; gÞ ð1Þ
where f is a function of the kinematics q, q̇, q and represents
the inverse dynamical model of the human body,
on the basis of the external forces Fext and torques Mext
applied to the system, and also gravity g. The inertia parameters
of the body segments have been defined using
the Table from de Leva [39].
These equations were symbolically generated by
the ROBOTRAN software [40], UCL, which allows
us to straightforwardly interface these equations with
any numerical process, such as the optimization
process presented above and the time simulation of
the trials.
Statistical analysis
Data was reported as mean (standard deviation) (SD).
Normality of the distributions was determined using the
Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. For each frequency (0.5, 0.3,
and 0.25 Hz) and mass (0, 1, 2, 3, 4 kg), the peak torque
variability within each trial was assessed by computing
the coefficient of variation (%CV). The aim of this
intra-test variability analysis was to enable to average
the peak torques of each trial for the repeatability
analysis. Paired t-tests were performed to detect possible
systematic bias between test and retest trial. The
possibility of heteroscedasticity was examined on the
basis of the Pearson product-moment correlation (r)
between the mean and the absolute differences. If the
correlation coefficient was significant the data were
considered as heteroscedastic [41]. Bland and Altman
plots and limits of agreement analyses were also calculated
to determine whether peak torque is in agreement
between tests and retest trial [42]. This method
(Bland & Altman, 1986) was extensively used in different
research fields in test-retest studies [43–46]
and is suitable in the case of the present study [41].
A corrected standard deviation of differences for repeated
measurements, SDcorrected = √(2●SD2), was used based on
Bland and Altman (1986) [42]. Statistical analysis was performed
using SPSS 17.0 (IBM, Chicago, USA).
Results
In each condition, the peak torque values were normally
distributed (Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, p > 0.05).
Intra-test variability
Whatever the test conditions, the variation coefficient of
the peak torque ranged between 0.8 and 4 % (see
Table 1).
Test-retest repeatability
Test-retest repeatability was performed with the male
participants (n = 6). Whatever the condition, test and retest
values were not significantly different (p > 0.05).
Considering that the assumption of homoscedasticity
was not met when the 4 kg conditions were included in
the analysis, the conditions involving 4 kg were no longer
considered in the present study. Whatever the other
test conditions, the limits of agreement were -0.52 Nm
to 0.62 Nm, which represent a variation of 8.5 % of the
averaged peak torques (6.7 Nm) around the mean testretest
difference (See Bland and Altman plots, Fig. 2,
right panel).
Whatever the mass condition, with a frequency of
0.25, 0.33, and 0.5 Hz, the limits of agreement values
were -0.64 Nm to 0.86 Nm, -0.75 Nm to 0.92 Nm, and
-0.49 Nm to 0.72 Nm, which represent a variation of 9.1,
9.9, and 7.2 % of the averaged peak torques (8.3 Nm,
8.4 Nm, and 8.3 Nm) around the mean test-retest differences,
respectively (see Fig. 3).
Whatever the frequency condition, with a mass of
0, 1, 2, and 3 kg, the limits of agreement values
were -0.16 Nm to 0.24 Nm, -0.64 Nm to 0.60 Nm,
-0.34 Nm to 0.44 Nm, -0.74 Nm to 0.99 Nm, which
represent a variation of 9.3, 12, 4.6, and 7.6 % of the
averaged peak torques torques (2.2 Nm, 5.2 Nm,
8.5 Nm, and 11.4 Nm) around the mean test-retest
differences, respectively (see Fig. 4).
Discussion
This study showed that the data processing and the experimental
procedure implemented in the present study
resulted in a low within-trial variability, i.e. a low variability
inside each trial, and a good within-participant
test-retest repeatability, i.e. a good repeatability between
tests of the same participant, of the elbow peak torque
in typically developing young adults. As shown by the
limit of agreements, expressed as a percentage of the averaged
peak torque, the result repeatability was equivalent
whatever the frequency, amongst 0.25, 0.33, and
0.5 Hz, or the load, amongst 0 1, 2, and 3 kg, imposed
during the movement.
This study highlighted that the 4 kg resulted in a more
important variability compared to the lower masses.
Based on this observation, it can be assumed that increasing
the mass higher than 4 kg would result in a
more important variability that would not be appropriated
to evaluate the joint torques. On the contrary, using
lower masses, such as 0 kg, are recommended for the
good repeatability, and certainly do not imply fatigue, especially
in female participants.
In summary, to evaluate muscle efforts in the rehabilitation
field, the repeatability of the model at low frequencies
and with light loads was a key result. In
patients with neurological disorder, muscular strength
and movement velocity is potentially very low depending
on their functional capacity. As supported by the Bland
and Altman analysis (Fig. 3), at low frequency (0.25Hz)
the limit of agreement represented 9.1 % of the averaged
peak torque, and considering the condition without
dumbbells, the limit of agreement represented 9.3 % of
the averaged peak torque. Even if the literature still has
no consensus on the clinically important difference in
elbow torque for humans, because this torque relates to
each joint and each motion, Laitenberger et al. (2015)
[47] reported an elbow torque variability up to 24 % in
healthy subjects, which confirms that the obtained repeatability
of 8.5 % when all test conditions are viewed
together (Fig. 2) is relevant compared to the magnitude
of this measurement. As described earlier, kinematic
data processing, marker misallocation and skin movement
could greatly influence joint centre localisation
[28, 29] and in turn greatly impact inverse dynamic solution
repeatability [25]. Riemer et al. found that these
various inaccuracies can result in uncertainties of estimated
joint torques ranging from 6 % to 232 % of the
peak torque during gait. The methodology used in the
present study in terms of kinematic data processing,
based on solidification procedure [34], was adequate to
result in a good within-participant test-retest repeatability.
At the same time, these results showed that the device
used (Fig. 4) was adequate to obtain a repeatable
elbow flexion-extension maximal torque.
Several limits were inherent with this study. First the
repeatability of the data processing and the experimental
procedure was tested with a limited number of participants.
Nevertheless, many conditions were tested (frequency*
mass), resulting in a test-retest repeatability
analysis based on 90 trials. The test-retest repeatability
analysis was performed only in male because fatigue
could be more present in female compared to male participants.
Secondly, the present study included healthy
participants, the repeatability of the data processing and
the experimental procedure implemented in the present
study should be tested for each targeted disease. Thirdly,
the repeatability of the model has been tested without
removing the maker. A Further study is required to test
the reproducibility with markers replacement because
markers location could impact the inverse dynamic solution.
Fourthly, the gender effect on repeatability was not
studied and could be a further perspective. Fifthly, the
trials were randomised and a 3 min. rest period was allocated
between the trials, as recommended by Kollmitzer
et al. (1999) [48] to avoid the muscle fatigue effect in the
context of a sub-maximal effort of the upper limb. However,
it is never excluded that either a fatigue or a time
effect may have influenced the CV results. Especially
concerning the higher CV reported for the 1 kg condition,
we believe that this results from the method variation
that might also be seen in other conditions.
Nevertheless, the CV reported for the 1 kg condition remains
low, even if it represents twice the CV reported in
the other conditions. Sixthly, a method with a good reproducibility
does not necessarily guarantee an accurate
estimation of joint torques. Reproducibility is a necessary
feature that is complementary to the accuracy, guaranteeing
that the results will be similar for any trial. Let
us remind that it is still not possible today to check the
accuracy of the joint torques in a non-invasive way, even
if this information is of primary importance for clinicians
to analyze the effect of a surgery and to obtain an
indicator of functional capability. Being aware of these
limitations, the incentive of this paper was to analyse the
quality of our joint torque quantification. The present
inverse dynamical model of the human body, necessarily
preceded by a kinematic identification of the model
configurations, is proposed as a satisfying method to estimate
the joint efforts in dynamical context. This problem
being deterministic, Qinv becomes a sufficiently
accurate result that can be exploited as a reference for
the optimization process that attempts to solve the
muscle force redundancy. These results represent the
first step leading to the development of an accurate assessment
of elbow muscle strength in clinical environment.
The ability of giving accurate elbow joint net
torques during motion, without requiring an important
computational cost, is the main benefit of this method.
Based on these results, multibody model refinement and
clinical analysis will be implemented in further studies.
Conclusion
The aim of this study was to assess the peak torque
elbow variability and repeatability. Whatever the flexionextension
movement conditions imposed, within-trial
peak torque variability was low and within-participant
test-retest repeatability of the elbow joint torques resulted
in good agreement. This method is promising for
potential clinical applications and can be used as a basis
for further comparison between efforts quantification
methods or refined multibody models in the human
body during motion.