
The Emergency Room (ER) remains one of the most utilised 
areas for paediatric patients in healthcare institutions. 
It continues to suffer from prolonged length of 
stay, overcrowding and extended waiting hours, all of 
which may lead to adverse events [1]. This is especially 
the case in Saudi Arabia (SA), where the ER may still be 
considered the main point of entrance to the healthcare 
system [2]. 

Paediatric ER visits vary worldwide. For example, in the 
US, it comprised an estimated 20% of all ER visits. In SA, 
children were reported to comprise 32.6% of all ER visits 
in a tertiary hospital in the Capital city of Riyadh [3]. 

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) has 
been implemented in almost all tertiary care hospitals in 
SA. The scale is used to manage and prioritise patients 
according to the severity of their condition and is based 
on five levels. It ensures that patients who are critically 
ill or injured are attended to before the less ill or injured 
patients [4]. The implementation of this system 
highlighted the significant problem in which patients arrive 
at the ER with non-urgent and mild conditions 
where they would have been more appropriately seen by 
a primary care physician. 

According to recent research of one tertiary hospital 
in SA, 78.5% of visits to the ER were of non-urgent cases 
[5]. Another research which looked into three tertiary 
hospitals in SA found that non-urgent cases comprised 
53% of all ER visits and examining paediatric ER visits 
specifically, non-urgent cases ranged between 35.9 and 
59.5% [6, 7]. 

This problem has been a focus of the government lead 
by the Ministry of Health, in which an attempt has been 
made to reform the healthcare system by including primary 
healthcare services in its reform strategy for 2010– 
2020. The strategy aimed at increasing the number and 
quality of primary care centres including its preventive 
services. Additionally, more programmes and initiatives 
for the Saudi Vision 2030 focus on public health and primary 
healthcare services [8]. 

This study aims at assessing the characteristics of 
paediatric ER visits, as well as estimating the rate of admissions 
and its predictors in one large teaching hospital 
in the Eastern Province of SA. 

Methods 

Study setting and design 

Following ethical approval, we conducted this retrospective 
study at King Fahd Hospital of the Imam 
Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University in the Eastern 
Province of SA. The Paediatrics’ ER contains 7 observation 
beds, 2 examination rooms, 1 triage room, a waiting area, 
and a minor surgical room. Major trauma cases are 
treated in the resuscitation room (for both adults and 

paediatrics). Paediatric ER is supported by pharmacy, radiology 
services, and the ability to refer the patient for admission 
as needed. The ER staff is made up of six qualified 
paediatric emergency consultants, as well as eight paediatric 
specialists devoted to emergency coverage. This is in 
addition to rotating paediatric program residents in different 
levels, one each month. The initial triage in the registration 
area is done by a qualified nurse while the 
paediatric ER triage is done by the assigned paediatric 
nurse and the rotating residents. The ER staff work in 
three shifts to cover the 24 h, these are the morning shift 

(8:00 am-16:00 pm), the evening shift (pm 16:00–00:00 
am), and the night shift (am 00:00–8:00 am). To cover the 
needs in the morning and night shifts, there are two to 
four physicians, and two to four nurses except for the 
evening shift where there is a minimum of three physicians. 
Some shifts also involve rotating interns and students 
for training and teaching. 
Study population 

The study included all patients presented to the paediatric 
ER, aged from 1 day to < 14 years old between the 1st 
of January 2018 and the 31st of December 2018. According 
to the hospital’s policy, the paediatric department is 
responsible for patients who fall within this age range. 

Data collection 

A structured data collection sheet to collect data from 
the patient’s electronic medical records was used. Data 
included information about patient’s age, sex, season in 
which the patient presented in, chief complaint – as reported 
by the caregiver and categorised by the involved 
system, which shift received the patient, and whether admission 
to the hospital ward was ordered. These variables 
were chosen based on the study objectives as well 
as the literature and availability of the data. 

Statistical analysis 

The age groups were allocated as the following: neonates 
(< 29 days), infants (29 days–1 year), toddlers (> 1 year–3 
years), pre-schoolers (> 3 years–6 years), schoolers (> 6 
years–12 years) and adolescents (> 12 years–14 years). 
Nationality as: Saudis and non-Saudis. The time of visits 
was grouped based on the season; Winter (December, 
January, February), Spring (March, April, May), Summer 
(June, July, August), and Autumn (September, October, 
November). Shifts were divided into three groups: morning 
(8:00 am-16:00 pm), evening shift (pm 16:00–00:00 
am), and night shift (am 00:00–8:00 am). The chief complaints 
were categorized according to the system involved. 
The triage categories were according to the 
CTAS implemented in the hospital, in which I is for resuscitation, 
II for emergent, III for urgent, IV for less urgent, 
and V for non-urgent [4]. Descriptive statistics 


were presented as frequencies and percentages. The 
main outcome was whether the patient was admitted to 
hospital or not. The Chi-squared test was performed to 
compute the P-values, and statistical significance was set 
at P < 0.05. The Bonferroni adjustment was used to adjust 
for multiple comparisons. Unadjusted and adjusted 
Odds ratios (ORs) were drawn through multivariable 
binary logistic regression, where the reference category 
was the most frequent. The final model was chosen 
based on appropriate model diagnostics. Statistical analysis 
was performed in Stata Software 15 Software [9]. 

Results 

The total number of ER visits by paediatric patients was 
46,374. The sociodemographic characteristics of patients 
are presented in Table 1. The sample consisted of 55.4% 
males and 44.6% females. The highest number of visits 
belonged to the toddlers age group (32.0%), followed by 
schoolers (24.9%). The smallest number of visits were 
for the neonates (0.9%). Most patients were of the Saudi 
nationality. 

The ER characteristics of paediatric patients are presented 
in Table 2. Of the total sample, only 2.5% of patients 
were admitted. The highest number of complaints 
recorded was for fever followed by respiratory symptoms 

(27.0 and 24.9% respectively). With regards to triage, 
only 0.02% were for triage I and 0.02% for triage II, 
whereas triage IV and V made up 71.0 and 26.2% of the 
visits. Most visits occurred in the evening shift and the 
winter season had the highest rate of visits (31.9%). 
When exploring the association between sociodemographic 
characteristics and admissions, the age group 
variable was found to be highly statistically associated 
with admissions (P < 0.001). Analysing this further, 

comparisons between all age groups were statistically 
significant, except for adolescents with other age groups. 
Further, the rate of admission was not found to be different 
between males and females (Table 3). 

Associations between ER visit characteristics and admission 
are presented in Table 4. The presenting complaints, 
triage and shifts were found to be highly 

statistically associated with admissions at the P < 0.001 
level. The Endocrine and Haematological complaints, as 
well as triage group V, were found to have contributed 
mostly to the high statistically significant p-value when 
compared to other groups following multiple comparison 
testing. For shifts, the only statistical difference was 
found for the comparison between the evening and the 
morning shift (Bonferroni adjusted p-value < 0.001). No 
significant association was observed for the season. 

The unadjusted and adjusted ORs of admissions in relation 
to the sociodemographic and ER visit characteristics 
are presented in Table 5. The analysis shows that before 
and after adjusting for other variables, there is higher odds 
of admission for both neonates and infants, although the 
risk is almost fourfold for neonates (Adjusted OR = 3.85, 
95%CI = 2.57–5.76 and Adjusted OR = 1.89, 95%CI = 1.56– 

2.28 respectively). With regards to the complaint, the highest 
odds of admission were for haematological illnesses 
both before and after adjustment, followed by endocrinal 
conditions when compared to fever which is statistically 
significant. In comparison with triage IV, triage I had a 
19.02 OR for admission, followed by triage II (OR = 10.66, 
95%CI = 1.98–57.23). Triage V had the lowest odds of admission 
both before and after adjustment and was statistically 
significant (Adjusted OR = 0.30, 95%CI = 0.23–0.38). 
Morning shifts were associated with a relatively high odd of 
admission, although they were not significant after adjustment, 
and neither were the seasons of the visit. 
Figure 1 shows the number of admissions by month of 
visits. It can be seen that the lowest numbers of admission 
were during July and August, whereas the highest 
were for January, February and March. 


Discussion 

This study supports the evidence that paediatric ERs are 
very much being used by patients as the first point of 
contact with the healthcare system, rather than visiting 
their local primary health care physician. This is a problem 
which should have eased with the current governmental 
initiative in promoting the use of primary 
healthcare. 


aDental category dropped in regression analyses due to zero counts 


Characteristics of paediatric ER visits 

Within this data, it was found that the most common 
paediatric age group was for toddlers aged between 1 < 
3 years. Similar distributions have been found in other 
paediatric ERs in the US [10], Lebanon [11], and in another 
Saudi hospital located at the capital city of Riyadh 
[12]. Toddlerhood is a critical period where children 
start crawling, walking, learning to run, climbing, and 
jumping. Therefore, they may be prone to accidents or 
minor injuries. Moreover, the least common age group 
in our data were neonates, which is in sharp contrast to 
data from Pakistan which found that neonates had the 
highest rate of visits [13]. Cultural differences may have 
played a role where mothers attempt to treat theirs infants 
with herbal medicines or over the counter medications 
when they display certain symptoms such as infantile colic 
rather than presenting their child to a doctor [14]. 

Fever was the highest presenting complaint in our 
data. This is similar to other studies in Thailand and 
Lebanon [11, 15]. Fever is a general complaint and may 
be a sign of a wide spectrum of illnesses which may explain 
how it became the most common presenting complaint. 
Like the Thailand study [15], respiratory 
symptoms were the second most common complaint, 
which usually presents in the form of coughing, sneezing 
and difficulty in breathing. Such symptoms may be 
brought by air pollution, second-hand smoking or more 
strongly by changes in weather. Indeed, our findings 
show that weather has been found to play a role in the 
rates of ER visits. The highest number of visits were 
found to be during the winter, in November and December, 
but more specifically in January. Higher winter visits 
are mainly due to the common viral infections occurring 


in this period such as bronchitis, viral upper respiratory 
tract infections as well as complicated viral infections 
superimposed with bacterial infections. On the other 
hand, the summer season had the lowest number of 
visits. Prior to the COVID-19 epidemic, families tend to 
travel abroad during this season [16]. Other studies have 
also found similar patterns to that of our analysis both 
locally and internationally [12, 15]. Two Saudi studies, 
one based in Riyadh (1997) and the other in the Eastern 
region (2007), have found that non-urgent cases belonging 
to triage IV and V comprised between 35.9 and 
59.5% of ER visits [6, 7]. Although, these two studies 
have been published a long time ago, the issue remains 
persistent and is worsening. Approximately two thirds of 
our patients were classified in Triage category IV, indicating 
they are non-urgent cases which may have been 
better dealt with in a primary care setting. To date, parents 
and patients in general in SA still prefer to seek 
medical services in the ER. Possible explanations may 
have to do with a lack of knowledge of a primary care 
centre near their home, long appointment hours in the 
primary care centre, dissatisfaction with the primary care 
physician, accessibility issues or even a perception that 
the condition is urgent and warrants medical attention 
straight away [5, 17, 18]. The management of such non-
urgent cases in the ER increases the burden on the ER 
staff which may subsequently affect the quality of care 
that should be reserved for the high priority cases. 

Admissions and their associated factors 

The admission rate of paediatric ER cases in this study was 
2.45%. It is similar to the 3.3% rate of admission reported in 
the US [19], but much smaller than that reported in 


Lebanon, South Korea, and Pakistan, where the rates were 
reported to be 9.8, 14.3 and 45% respectively [11, 13, 20]. A 
systematic review by Obermeyer et al. (2015) assessed 
emergency care in low and middle-income countries and 
found that the median paediatric admission rate was 22% 
[21]. Comparing it with the admission rate from this study 
further emphasizes the role of primary care centres in accommodating 
the vast majority of patients presenting in 
the ER. Similar to the South Korean study [20], we found 
no significant differences in admission rates between males 
and females. 

Unlike studies conducted in the US, Lebanon, Pakistan 
and Egypt, analyses here have shown that the neonate 
age group had the highest odds of admission, even 
though they were the smallest number with regards to 
ER visits [11, 13, 22, 23]. Differences in rates may be attributed 
to the different disease prevalence in these 
countries which may be affected by genetics, accessibility 
and the type of healthcare provided in hospitals. A further 
explanation to the higher odds of admission of neonates 
could be related to the hospital regulations and 
protocols to rule out neonatal sepsis [24]. 

Haematological conditions also had the highest odds 
of admissions. The Saudi population, especially those 
residing in the Eastern Province, which this data is derived 
from, are known to have a high prevalence of 
sickle cell disease (SCD) in children [25]. The prevalence 
of genetic haematological diseases in SA may be lowered 
by educating new prospective couples and enforcing recommendations 
by premarital counselling, as they are yet 
to be obligatory. Our data contrasts with that of Pakistan 
and Nigeria, where respiratory complaints had the highest 
rate of admissions [13, 26]. In Lebanon, complaints 
related to cardiology were the highest [11]. 

Furthermore, Triage I was associated with the highest 
odds of admission in these patients. Similar patterns 
were found in a US study, although the Emergency Severity 
Index level was used rather than CTAS [27]. Triage 
V was associated with lower odds of admission, 
which again highlights that the ER may suffer from overcrowding 
due to the presentation of non-urgent cases. 

Neither the shift nor the season of the paediatric patients 
visiting the ER had any association with the rates 
of admission. It may be of notice that Spring, Autumn 
and Summer, despite their non-statistical significance, 
did show lower odds of admission when compared to 
Winter. In Australia, high and low temperatures were 
significantly associated with an increase in paediatric ER 
admissions [28], this was also noted in the UK [29]. 
Higher admission rates in low temperatures may be explained 
by children being more prone to cold weather 
viruses that could subsequently cause bronchiolitis in 
under 2 years olds and ultimately lead to an increased 
ER admission [30]. 

 

Several limitations with this study have been identified. 
The study is based on retrospective medical records 
drawn from a single healthcare institution, which may 
compromise the generalisability of the results. Also, despite 
the large number of data, some confidence estimates 
were wide which may be due to the extremely small 
number of cases within cells. 

Conclusion 

This study examined paediatric ER visits at a large 
teaching hospital in the Eastern Province of SA. It 
showed that the admission rate of ER visits is extremely 
low. It also showed that neonates, patients with haematological 
conditions and patients classified as triage I 
had the highest odds of admission. However, patients 
classified as triage V had lower odds of admission. Clear 
guidance should be used to inform patients and parents 
of the proper process for seeking medical assistance, as 
well as ensuring more accessibility to primary health 
care centres. Moreover, further analysis focused on the 
predictors identified in this research is highly recommended 
to inform hospital administrators of potential 
minor changes that could lead to significant reduction in 
the over utilisation of the ER. 
