
Suicide is an intentional act to end one’s own life. Wish 
to kill oneself may remain limited to thought (suicidal 
ideation) or turn into action (suicidal attempt) and on 
some occasions result in death (committed suicide) [1]. 

Nearly 800,000 people commit suicide each year in the 
world and still many more attempt suicide [2]. Suicide is 
the second leading cause of death between the ages of 
15–29 in the world [3]. Suicide is a serious public health 
issue and has several risk factors including previous 
suicide attempts, unemployment, substance use, and 
being affected by at least one psychiatric disorder. Major 
depressive disorder and substance use disorder have 
been the most common mental health problems associated 
with suicide [4]. 


The prevalence of suicide attempts in Iran has increased 
in the last two decades [5]. The prevalence of suicide attempts 
in Iran varies from 16.8 per 100 thousand people 
in a year in south of Iran to 117.8 per 100 thousand people 
in a year in north of Iran [6]. The highest rate of completed 
suicide in Islamic Republic of Iran is 12.9 per 100, 
000 which is related to Western Provinces, including Ilam, 
Lorestan, Hamedan, Kurdestan and Kermanshah. One of 
the methods of suicide in this area is self-immolation 
(about 27% of all suicides). About 80% of self-immolation 
cases are committed by women. Self-immolation is more 
common in the first years of marriage when there are 
many emotional problems and conflicts and low coping 
skills between couples. Studies attribute issues such as the 
decline in the Human Development Index, cultural factors 
and negative attitudes toward women, and the reduction 
of suicidal stigma [7, 8]. The lowest rate is 2.8 per 100,000 
related Central Provinces including Isfahan, Yazd, Semnan 
and Qom [9]. 

According to Iranian Social Welfare Organization 
(ISWO), the social emergency of ISWO has taken preventive 
action in 8400 suicide attempts through mobile 
teams (> 3000 cases), social service bases (242 cases), crisis 
intervention centers (1300 cases), and contact with 
social emergency hotline (3400 cases) in past year [10]. 

Pre-hospital emergency has also been involved as a 
first line contact in suicide situations in the country and 
has played an important role in this case [11]. They are 
the most widespread medical emergency facility in 
throughout the county and in most cases are the first 
line contact with possible suicidal patients and should 
provide interventions based on their prioritization, clinical 
judgment, and decision-making skills. Therefore, 
they are generally trained for the skills of how to deal 
with a suicide situation [12]. 

In critical cases such as suicide attempts, emergency 
technician should transfer the patient to a suitable medical 
center, after appropriate crisis management. Inadequate 
skills and mastery of emergency technicians in 
these conditions can lead to serious injury and even 
death in a person who threatens to commit suicide. Furthermore, 
poor decision-making ability in critical situations, 
increases psychological stress on emergency 
technician [13–16]. Therefore, different countries try to 
provide coherent and comprehensive clinical programs 
for suicide management so that the emergency technician 
can use them in the face of a patient threatening to 
commit suicide. In the United States, Dr. Betz described 
the important principles of suicidal patient management 
(patient safety, attention to physical issues, and suicide 
risk assessment) in his article, given the limited time and 
the likelihood of impending injury [17]. Dr. Christopher 
reviewed existing protocols for managing suicide in a 
pre-hospital emergency room in Washington to evaluate 

and integrate them to achieve a coordinated and comprehensive 
protocol in the future [11]. In Brazil, 15 psychiatrists 
and psychologists, after a systematic review of 
sources and articles, provided guidelines and recommendations 
for the Brazilian Psychiatric Association for the 
management of patients with suicide [18]. In Iran, there 
are cultural and religious issues that affect the relationship 
between the patient and the technician such as the 
need for covering, maintaining a minimum distance with 
patient, not touching an opposite sex patient. There are 
also barriers that have been identified in previous studies 
Ordinary people (who have no information about vital 
and psychological first aid) are crowded at the scene, 
which can complicate the decision for the technician 
[19].The purpose of this study was to develop a Compatible 
with culture, concise, evidence-based, and step-bystep 
guide for dealing with a suicidal patient, which 
could be quickly reviewed by technicians before confronting 
a suicide situation. 

Method 

Review of literature 

This study was performed in two stages with the mixed 
method. We used the literature review to access the relevant 
resources. First, we searched PubMed, Scopus, and 
PsycINFO databases for the combination of the following 
keywords: 1)"Suicide” (OR) “suicide prevention” 
(OR) “suicide risk factors” (OR) “self-harm” (OR) “suicidal 
patients”.2) “Management” (OR) “protocol” (OR) 
“pre-hospital care. Then, we combined the two searches 
using AND operator. We limited the search date to the 
results published in the recent 10 years (from June 1, 
2010 to June 1, 2020). Additionally, we reviewed the 
chapters related to suicide management in psychiatric 
textbooks. 

In the next step, we reviewed the abstract of the 
retrieved articles and selected 30 relevant articles. Subsequently, 
we used the Cochrane checklist to assess the 
full text of the articles and select suitable articles for further 
analysis. In this way, 20 articles were selected for 
the next stage (Table 1). We used these 20 articles and 
the textbooks for data extraction. 

The extracted findings were then categorized according 
to the stage of intervention. The first stage is similar 
to the stages for other acute psychiatric patients, which 
are described in detail in the “pre-hospital emergency 
protocol for mental disorders in Iran” [16]. Here, we report 
the special and additional points related to suicidal 
patients including: ensuring safety in suicidal patients; 
evaluation and history taking in suicidal patients; behavioral 
and pharmacological management in suicidal patients; 
important points to reduce life-threatening risks 
in suicidal patients. 

Protocol development 

Two psychiatrists categorized the extracted points and 
prepared the first draft of the protocol. Then, an expert 
panel was held including the following people: 1. an assistant 
professor of psychiatry with clinical and research 
experience with acute psychiatric patients, 2. a professor 
of psychiatry with years of experience in the emergency 
department of a training psychiatric hospital, 3. a professor 
of psychiatry with years of experience in the field of 
suicide and president of the National Suicide Prevention 
Association, 4. a professor of forensic medicine with related 
clinical experience, 5. a clinical psychologist with 
years of clinical experience with non-pharmacological 
therapies of patients, 6. a specialist in emergency medicine 
working in the country’s emergency organization 
with years of experience of working with emergency 
technicians, 7. a general practitioner working in the 
country’s emergency organization with years of clinical 
experience, 8. a clinical psychologist working in Social 
Emergency of Welfare and Rehabilitation Organization. 

In the panel, participants were asked to comment 
about the framework and steps of the protocol and also 
to answer the following questions: 

1. To what extent is this step necessary for a suicidal 
patient? 
2. To what extent is this item understandable and 
transparent to an emergency technician? 
3. Is this item inclusive (considering both patient’s 
physical and mental needs)? 
4. Considering the existing facilities and conditions in 
our society, is this a plausible step to perform? 
5. Has enough attention been paid to the patient’s 
safety at this stage? 
6. Has enough attention been paid to the safety of the 
emergency technician? 
7. Has enough attention been paid to the safety of the 
patient’s relatives and those present at the scene? 
8. Considering the laws of the country, does this item 
have legal legitimacy for the technician? 
Each question was scored on a Likert scale from very 
low to very high (1–5). Experts answered all of these 
questions for each protocol item. And the scores of 8 experts 
participating in the meeting for each item were 
added together. Finally, items with a total score of 27 
and above (more than two-thirds of the total score) 
were selected for the protocol, and a score of 13 or less 
(less than one-third of the total score) was removed, 
and the items with the average score of 14–26 were discussed 
again and revised to a final agreed upon format 
for the protocol. 

To check the clarity and comprehensibility of the revised 
protocol and the feasibility of its implementation 

in pre-hospital emergency setting, we held two sessions 
with two different group of people to receive feedback 
about the protocol and consider possible executive problems. 
The first session included emergency technicians 
and technical and operational deputy of one of the 
Emergency Centers of Tehran (about 50 people). The 
second session was held with general practitioners 
(dispatch) of operations in the pre-hospital emergency 
department. Prior to the start of both sessions, informed 
consent was obtained from the participants. 

Then, we revised the protocol another time considering 
the feedbacks of the sessions and finalized the protocol in 
a two-page format that could be easily used in the ambulance 
as a quick review of important measures in dealing 
with a suicidal patient before confronting him/her. 

Result 

The general measures that should be considered in the 
management of suicidal patients are not much different 
from those of other psychiatric emergencies, as reported 
in “pre-hospital emergency protocol for mental disorders 
in Iran” [16] and include the following three levels. For 
those patients who have attempted suicide, the technician 
should skip the first two levels and begin with management. 
For those who are threatening to attempt 
suicide, the technician should begin with level one. 

1. Basic and safety tips (patient, technician and those 
at the scene): 
The first stage (primary action) are including a) prescene 
assessments of site security, escape routes, and 
safe locations in the event of violence from the patient, 

b) assessment of the patient’s access to weapons and 
equipment that could threaten his/her own life, technicians 
or attendees [30], c) Assessment for risk and need 
for back up and the presence of police, which includes 
anticipating their entrance method and avoidance of entering 
the place alone, d) using family capacities to provide 
security [30] and e) Assessment of risk factors for 
violence and predicting it Symptoms of imminent aggression) 
[16]. In addition, the police should be contacted 
from the beginning. Dispersal of people present at 
the scene should be done immediately, as their presence 
may play a provocative role in attempting suicide [22]. 
Furthermore, when the suicide threat is made with dangerous 
measures such as firearms, explosives or chemicals, 
the presence of crowd can be quite dangerous [30]. 
2. Important points for patient assessments: 
It includes history taking from patient and his family 
as well as assessing patient’s physical condition, especially 
life-threatening cases, and examining the 


possibility of a medical origin for symptoms, and psychological 
assessments. The suicide threat should not 
preclude the consideration of medical and physical 
causes for psychiatric symptoms. 

Regarding suicide management, patients are divided 
into two groups: 

1. Those who has not attempted suicide: 
In these patients, the following were suggested: 

A) Try to build a relationship with patient using 
respect and empathy. Avoid threats, humiliation 
and judgmental behavior. 
In these situations, generally both patient and family 
members are agitated and emotionally unstable. Therefore, 
it is important for technician to remain calm and patient 
in dealing with them [40]. Many patients may refuse 
to cooperate because of fear of hospitalization. Thence, 
the use of behavioral techniques can be effective (Table 2). 

B) Evaluate vital signs and ensure the stability of 
patient’s medical condition 
C) Evaluate patient’s history and directly ask about 
intent for another suicidal attempt [31]. 
D) Risk assessment of suicide: Items listed in the table 
below increase the risk of suicide (Table 3). 
Verbal threat to commit suicide and history of previous 
suicide attempt, especially with dangerous methods, 
and a history of aggression are more important risk factors 
[41, 42]. 

In addition to the items listed in Table 3, If the patient 
threatening to commit suicide is from the northern or 
western provinces of the country (especially in young married 
women with a history of marital problems, a history 
of psychiatric illnesses, especially major depression and 
post-traumatic stress disorder, a past history of self-
immolation) Be aware of the possibility of self-immolation 
and examine the evidence [7, 8]. 

Although the assessment of suicide risk factors can 
help in providing better care and a more accurate evaluation 
of the patient, according to the current prehospital 
emergency guidelines in Iran, all of these patients, 
regardless of the assessed risk, should be transferred 
to medical centers. If the patient or his family 
refuse to go to hospital, the technician should contact 
the attending physician and ask for advice. 

The following points are of great importance, provided 
that the patients becomes agitated and behaves in a 
threatening way and seems to be potentially dangerous 
for oneself or others: 

1. Pay attention to people at risk present on the scene 
and maintain their safety [43]. 
2. Use the aggression management protocol including 
behavioral and drug managements (full description 
in the protocol for dealing with an acute psychiatric 
patient). 
3. Transfer the patient to the hospital. 
E) Collect empty containers of toxins, alcohol, and 
drugs, for being delivered to the hospital emergency 
department; even if the patient and his family claim 
that s/he has not attempted suicide. It is medically 
important to examine evidence to the contrary and 
can prevent legal consequences for the technician [44]. 
F) Documentation of the findings: The emergency 
technician should document all of the relevant 
findings and evidence to prevent further legal 
problems (such as what condition the patient was in 
at the time of his presence in terms of consciousness, 
vital signs, scene conditions, etc.) [44]. 
2. In a person who has attempted suicide: 
In a person who has attempted suicide, immediate attention 
to the patient’s medical risks is a priority. Therefore, 
the measures include the following: 

A. Measuring vital signs: 
The first step is to consider the patient’s immediate 
medical needs, initial assessment (Airway -Breathing Circulation) 
and control of vital signs and its stabilization. 
In a conscious patient, the introduction is done simultaneously 
and permission is given to perform examinations, 
and in patients with a decrease in the level of consciousness, 
this is done for the patient’sfamilyor companions) 

2.a) If vital signs are stable: 
It is important to pay attention to the patient’s medical 
condition and transfer him to a medical center for further 
diagnostic tests and treatment measures. Medical 
conditions should be monitored along the route, and 
life-threatening warning signs should always be considered. 
Behavioral recommendation in dealing with these 
patients is similar to the previous section. 

2.b) If vital signs are not stable: 
Attempts to stabilize the patient’s vital signs (based on 
the patient’s condition and needs, IV line implantation, 
opening the patient’s airway and starting serum therapy, 
etc.) should be considered and then the patient should 
be transferred to the nearest medical center as soon as 
possible. Behavioral and non-pharmacological interventions 
can be performed as much as possible depending 
on the patient’s medical and environmental conditions. 

It is also important to gather evidence and document 
findings on the scene, any findings that help to understand 
the means of suicide (Like empty cans of pills and 
ropes, etc.) and evidence that is effective in understanding 
the cause of suicide (Patient’s will or any manuscript, patient 
medical prescriptions, patient medications, etc.) [44]. 

C) If the patient has died 
The first step is to ensure the definitive death of the 
patient. Call the police to be present at the scene, because, 
this may be murder instead of suicide. In the next 
step, it is important to pay attention to the emergency 
psychological needs of patients’ families. Usually, families 
in such situations are in a critical situation and may 
show impulsive reactions reactions [45]. Tips for dealing 
with such situations are provided in Table 4. 

Discussion 

Several studies have been conducted on suicide management, 
as one of the most important issues in psychiatric 
emergencies. However, in most studies, more attention has 
been paid to the management of these patients in hospital 
emergency department than in the pre-hospital emergency 

Table 4 Important points in dealing with committed suicide 

1. Ask for help from police (who has been called at the beginning to 
provide security, he must record clues at the scene indicating the cause 
of death to report to forensics) 
2. Do not manipulate evidence and documents in the scene) Avoid 
destroying police clues as number 1( 
3. Do not remove the body of the deceased from the scene (For the 
same reason number 2) 
4. Express empathy with the family and use verbal calming techniques 
5. avoid judgmental behaviors with the family 
6. In families with severe restlessness use medications (oral lorazepam 2 
mg tablets) 
7. Educate family about the condition and the normalcy of experiencing 
symptoms of acute psychological stress. Advise them to go to public-
university clinics or call the crisis hotline for help from psychologists. 
8. Encourage family to contact relatives and other people who can help 
them 
9. Provide information and telephone number of centers that can be 
contacted, if they would need it. 
10. If the situation does not improve with these initial measures, contact 
the dispatch center and get an assignment 
department. In 2004, for example, the Australian National 
Institutes of Health provided aguidancefor managing 
suicides in the emergency department, which was a good 
guide for emergency room therapists. 

Lipton developed a clinical guideline of prevention, assessment, 
and management of suicide for pre-hospital 
technicians in 2005. However, drug management is not 
covered in this article [17]. Dr. Chunduri et al. used 
focus group discussions of psychiatrist working in emergency 
psychiatry wards to write a clinical guideline for 
assessment and management of suicide in 2017 [29]. 

Our purpose in writing this protocol was to increase 
the technician’s skills in the following areas: 

1. Reducing the risk to himself, patient, patient’s 
family and those present at the scene. 
2. Diagnosing the possible medical origins of the life-
threatening medical symptoms and comorbidities 
3. Quick assessment of the risk of imminent suicide 
4. Establishing a therapeutic relationship with the 
patient and his family 
5. Management of the suicidal patient and helping in 
management of the crisis 
6. Collecting and recording the evidence related to 
suicide in the scene, both to assist hospital staff and 
to protect themselves from possible future legal 
problems. 
Similar to the protocol for dealing with an acute psychiatric 
patient, the first step in this protocol is preparing 
the scene and ensuring security of the scene [16, 22]. 

The initial assessment and taking history in this protocol 
are the same as the general protocol for dealing with 
a psychiatric patient. However, it is especially important 
to ask about the history of any psychiatric disorder from 
the family of the suicidal subject. Assessment of risk 


Shirzad et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:47 

factors (especially those that increase the risk of 
imminent suicide) as well as protective factors are the 
next crucial steps. However, according to emergency 
protocols in Iran, all of the suicidal patients must be 
transferred to a hospital, even if the technician considers 
the patient to be in a low risk for suicide. Although patients 
with low risk for suicide can be generally effectively 
cared for, monitored and followed-up at home, this 
decision is reserved for mental health professionals 
working in hospitals [30]. 

The protocol also emphasizes on assessment of risk 
factors for imminent suicide as opposed to chronic risk 
factors of suicide in the pre-hospital emergency setting 
due to time limitations [45, 46]. Furthermore, to reduce 
the negative reactions related to the stigma related to 
the word “suicide”, in this protocol we suggest technicians 
to ask patient about the decision and any immediate 
plan to harm oneself [21]. 

In the management of patients threatening suicide in our 
protocol, verbal intervention is the basis of treatment in line 
with other protocols [21, 47]. As in previous studies, it has 
been seen that many suicide threats are in fact a kind of 
protest against the conditions. Available and requesting a 
change and requesting assistance. Empathy and empathy 
for the patient’s condition and, if necessary, intervention in 
the crisis can be very helpful [47] Respect for the patient is 
very important and behaviors that induce the patient to be 
a failure or a sinner should be avoided. Attitudes that send 
the patient the message that “he does not know what is 
right?” And that he “does not have the authority to decide 
for himself” can also complicate matters [48]. 

Our protocol, like other protocols, prioritizes physical 
needs and risks in patients who have attempted suicide 
[42]. If behavioral interventions are not helpful, medications 
are considered [27]. Choice of medication and administration 
method are similar to that mentioned in 
the protocol for dealing with an acute psychiatric patient 
[16]. Additionally, although the main issue here is suicidality 
of the patient, the technician should address any 
other emergent symptoms such as aggression accordingly 
and not to ignore them as subsidiary [16]. 

This protocol, like others, has emphasized on paying attention 
to the emotional needs of the family of the patients 
who have committed suicide [27, 48, 49]. Feelings of 
anger or guilt towards the deceased is expected. Local religious 
and cultural teachings about the sinful act of suicide 
and the ambiguity of the fate of person who commits suicide 
also increase the pressure and stress of the family and 
mandates the intervention by technician as the first member 
of the treatment team to enter the scene. 

Conclusion 

It is practical and useful to develop an evidence-based, 
but concise and portable protocol for pre-hospital 

emergency technician, which covers all of the major issues 
for a quick review before confronting a suicidal 
patient. 

