
In most societies today, quality pre-hospital emergency
care is an essential component of caring for patients in
need of emergency care [1]. Pre-hospital emergency care
consists of all the emergency medical services which are
provided to patients outside the hospital before they are
transferred to the nearest medical center [2]. In prehospital
emergency care, seconds and minutes can mean
the difference between life and death, between suffering a
serious disability and living a normal life. In order for
EMS personnel to provide timely care and evaluate patients’
status in the shortest possible time, it is necessary
that they be equipped with effective clinical decisionmaking
skills and be able to make the right decision for a
patient in unpredictable conditions [3, 4]. Clinical
decision-making, an important process in which the best
action to achieve the desired goals is chosen, largely determines
the quality of care, patient safety, and the possibility
of future complications [5]. As an essential part of the professional
duties of the medical personnel, clinical decisionmaking
consists of analysis of information, making decisions,
and taking action based on those decisions to accomplish
the desired objective [6]. According to
Emergency Nurses Association, clinical decision-making
is one of the most important professional capabilities in
emergency care personnel which can significantly improve
the efficacy and quality of care provided [7].
The work environment in pre-hospital emergency care
is complicated and unpredictable. At times, the EMS
personnel should provide care to patients whose conditions
are critical and unstable and who are in a lifethreatening
situation. Obviously, in order to make an appropriate
response to quick changes in a patient’s conditions,
EMS personnel should be able to decide quickly:
they should know how to perform a quick evaluation of
a patient’s status, determine the clinical priorities, and
implement the correct intervention accordingly [8, 9]. If
EMS personnel do not have good decision-making skills,
they cannot make good clinical decisions and make the
right intervention, which can make a patient’s condition
more critical or, in some cases, even cause permanent
injuries or death [10].
Background in Iran
Pre-hospital emergency care in Iran dates back to 1975
when the first emergency care department was founded
in the capital city of Tehran. After that, pre-hospital
emergency care departments were gradually formed in
the other provinces of Iran. These departments consist
of urban centers and road centers. Pre-hospital emergency
care personnel have an associate or bachelor’s degree
in emergency care. Also, nurses who have a
bachelor’s or master’s degree may be employed in prehospital
emergency care. Two staff members must be
present in every shift. Due to lack of staff, the shifts are
on a 24-h basis and each staff member should work
three 24-h shifts a week. Moreover, currently, only males
are employed in pre-hospital emergency care and there
is not any female staff. In pre-hospital emergency care
departments, there is not a single set of clinical guidelines
for the personnel and, in certain cases, the
personnel act according to the internal regulations laid
down by their mangers, which limits their freedom and
independence.
Not many qualitative studies have addressed the factors
which affect the clinical decision-making of emergency
care personnel. However, a qualitative approach
can result in an in-depth understanding of the concept
in question and help determine its various aspects.
Qualitative studies allow for determining the dimensions
of a concept in a cultural context from the viewpoint of
individuals who have been involved with the concept in
question for a long time [11]. In addition, a qualitative
approach can prove useful in identifying the barriers to
clinical decision-making by emergency care personnel
and achieving a deeper understanding of their experiences
and challenges. In order for the quality of prehospital
care to be improved, the rich experiences of the
personnel with regard to the challenges of clinical
decision-making need to be addressed. Without an understanding
of the feelings and challenges which emergency
care personnel experience during clinical
decision-making at the scene of accidents, it is not possible
to develop their professional capabilities and improve
the quality of pre-hospital emergency care.
Accordingly, the present study is a qualitative attempt at
investigating the leading challenges and barriers in EMS
personnel’s clinical decision-making.
Methods
The present study is a qualitative work of research with
a content analysis approach. Conventional content analysis
in qualitative research is applied when there is a
lack of knowledge about the concept under study. Since
the body of literature on the leading challenges and barriers
in EMS personnel’s clinical decision-making is
quite small, the researchers used the above-mentioned
approach for their study [12]. Twenty-five members of
pre-hospital emergency care personnel were selected via
purposeful sampling and invited to participate in the
study. Purposeful sampling is one of the frequently-used
methods in qualitative studies. In purposeful sampling,
the subjects are selected by the researcher. The subjects
who are selected have rich and in-depth knowledge and
experience of the concept under study and can provide a
detailed insight into it [13]. Thus, the researchers selected
individuals with extensive experience or knowledge
of the subject of the study. After consulting the
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 2 of 12
emergency care mangers, the researchers selected one of
the personnel who could interact better and provide rich
information for the initial interview. Then the first participant
was asked to name a colleague who had rich
knowledge and experience of the subject under study. In
this manner, based on the information provided by the
mangers and the participants chosen earlier, more participants
who had a good understanding of the subject
of the study were selected. Sampling was maintained to
the point of data saturation. Data saturation was
achieved when no new data could be collected and no
new categories or sub-categories could be extracted [14].
In this study, data saturation was reached after 23 interviews,
and two further interviews were done to ensure
no new data was available.
Yet, to ensure that the data was saturated, the researchers
conducted two additional interviews. The inclusion
criteria were having at least 1 year’s experience
of work in pre-hospital emergency care, being willing to
participate in the study, and being able to provide extensive
and rich information about the challenges and barriers
in clinical decision-making.
Data were collected through semi-structured, individual
interviews, in the interval between December 2019
and July 2020. All the interviews were conducted by the
first author (MB) in the conference room of the emergency
department after prior arrangements with the
head of the emergency department and the participants.
Each interview lasted from 45 to 60 min.
The interview guide was developed according to the
views of the research team and the available literature.
The face and content validity of the questionnaire was
examined and verified by 10 members of the emergency
care personnel and 4 pre-hospital emergency care experts
and professors. Accordingly, the face validity of the
interview guide was determined based on the results of
three initial interviews with the participants and some
minor changes were made to make the questions more
comprehensible. The content of the three interviews was
not included in the final analysis. The focuses of interview
questions were based on your experiences; what
factors can influence clinical decision-making?” What
skills do you need to make the right clinical decision?
(Additional file 1: Interview Guide and Question).
At the end of each interview, the participants were
thanked for their cooperation and were asked for their
phone numbers in case the interviewer had any other
questions, needed the participants to confirm their statements,
or had to interview a participant again. Immediately
after completion, each interview was transcribed.
To maintain confidentiality with regard to the information
acquired from the participants by phone or in interviews,
the researchers assured the participants that their
information would be used for research purposes only
and would remain confidential throughout the study and
after in the process of collecting and analyzing the data.
The collected data were analyzed using Graneheim
and Lundman’s approach to content analysis (2004): initially,
to immerse in the data and to achieve a general
idea of it, the researchers read each transcript several
times. Next, the words, sentences, or paragraphs which
carried significance were selected as meaning units. The
meaning units were assigned codes which showed a
summary of the meaning of the unit and then the texts
were codified. Afterwards, the codes were compared in
terms of their similarities and differences, the similar
codes were merged, and the codes and texts were
reviewed again. Based on their similarities, the meaning
units were categorized. To ensure the reliability of the
codes, the researchers reviewed the categories and compared
them against the data again. The themes were
identified after deep reflection and comparison of the
categories with each other. In this regard we try to use
both manifest and latent analysis [15]. Accordingly, after
completion, each interview was immediately transcribed
by the first author (MB). Subsequently, the first author
read and re-read the transcripts and, after obtaining a
general understanding of the content, analyzed the data
inductively. When the transcripts were being read, significant
paragraphs and sentences were marked. The
words, sentences, and paragraphs which contained a significant
point about the challenges of clinical decisionmaking
were selected as semantic units. Each significant
paragraph or phrase was assigned a code. In the next
stage, the third author (SK) reviewed the transcripts and
verified the semantic units and open codes. Possible disagreements
over the semantic units and codes were resolved
in meetings attended by all the research team
members (MB, SK, SA, and BT). The research team also
verified the quality of data analysis. Based on the similarities
and compatibilities between them, the codes were
classified and categories were developed. To ensure the
reliability of the codes, the researchers reviewed the categories
and compared them with the data again. Eventually,
in consecutive, joint meetings, the research team
extracted the main themes after careful consideration
and comparison of the categories. The collected data
were analyzed in MAXQDA v. 2007 (Table 1, Example
of data analysis process).
To ensure the trustworthiness of the results, the researchers
applied Lincoln and Guba’s criteria [16]. Accordingly,
to ensure credibility, the researchers applied
prolonged engagement with data, member checking, and
peer debriefing. For member-checking, 2 of the prehospital
emergency care personnel were presented with
a copy of the encoded interviews which was confirmed.
To perform peer-checking, the researchers had four experts
analyze and observe the process of data analysis
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 3 of 12
and validate the codes and categories. The dependability
of the study results was enhanced through describing
the methods used to code the concepts and themes, as
well as presenting textual and audio data. Also, two
members of the research team examined the findings individually
and then discussed them to resolve any possible
disagreements to ensure dependability. To ensure
that the results were confirmable, the researchers
showed the encoded data to the participants to verify
the accuracy of the extracted categories and subcategories.
The conditions of the respondents and how they
were interviewed were clearly described to add to the
transferability of the study results. The researchers also
tried to select the study subjects solely based on the objectives
of the study and free of bias. Data were analyzed
as soon as they were collected to help the researcher be
aware of the principles of the research. Transferability
was ensured by providing a comprehensive description
of the subject of the study, the participants’ characteristics,
and methods of data collection and data
analysis, along with documented examples of the participants’
quotes.
In the process of collecting and analyzing the data, the
researchers applied bracketing. Bracketing is a method
used in qualitative research to minimize the potential
threats of prejudgment which can adversely affect the research
process [17]. Thus, the researchers tried to ignore
their own personal knowledge, beliefs, values, and experiences
in order to accurately describe the emergency
care personnel’s views on the challenges of clinical
decision-making. The researchers did not judge the data
and accepted it as it was.
Ethical considerations
All participants gave written informed consent to participate
in the study. The present study was conducted in accordance
with the principles of the revised Declaration of Helsinki, a
statement of ethical principles which directs physicians and
other participants in medical research involving human subjects.
Moreover, the study was approved by the local Ethics
Committee of Fasa University of Medical Sciences, Fasa, Iran
(IR.FUMS.REC.1398.168).
Results
This study recruited a total of 25 subjects. The mean
and standard deviation of the participants’ ages was
33.52 ± 5.89 years. The personal characteristics of the
participants are shown in Table 2. Based on the participants’
experiences, as a major professional capability
which emergency care personnel should be skilled at,
clinical decision-making is comprised of clinical knowledge,
skills, experience, and judgment for identifying patients’
problems, analyzing their conditions, making the
right decision, and taking effective measures based on
that decision. From the participants’ point of view, clinical
decision-making is influenced by a wide variety of
factors. Analyses of the qualitative data yielded four
themes and eight categories (Table 3).
Professional capabilities
“Professional capabilities” was the most noticeable theme
extracted from the participants’ experiences. This theme
consists of the following categories: Clinical Competence
and Psychological empowerment consists of emotional
stability and resilience.
Clinical competence
Clinical Competence consists of clinical knowledge, clinical
experience, clinical skills, teamwork skills, time management
skills and clinical judgment skills.
According to one of the participants:
One of the most important professional capabilities
that emergency care personnel need to make quick
and correct clinical decisions is clinical knowledge.
Unfortunately, some of our colleagues here don’t
have enough clinical knowledge. I mean, for example,
they don’t know much about the physiopathology
of diseases. How can you possibly make a
good clinical decision and take effective clinical measures
if you are ignorant about the causes and treatments
of diseases? (P10, 18 years of experience)
Another participant stated that:
Some of our colleagues have a lot of clinical experience
and can make a quick diagnosis at first glance
at a patient and then make the right clinical decision
accordingly. (P3, 16 years of experience)
Another subcategory of professional capabilities which
was found to have an impact on clinical decision-making
was clinical skills. One of the participants remarked:
There are people here who don’t have the required
clinical skills. For instance, they can’t do a proper
assessment of a patient’s status, or they don’t know
how to use the equipment. On many occasions, when
we were on a mission, one of my co-workers couldn’t
use the cardiac monitoring device or the defibrillator
the right way. If you can’t do a proper monitoring or
assess your patients, how can you make the right
clinical decision and do the right thing for them?
(P7, 9 years of experience)
“Teamwork skills” was another component of professional
capabilities referred to by many of the participants.
Based on the participants’ experiences, having
good teamwork skills can contribute to good decisionmaking
and, as a result, providing quality care. Sometimes,
the emergency care personnel encounter a large
number of patients or casualties and need to possess satisfactory
teamwork skills and time management skills to
make good clinical decisions. According to one of the
participants:
On some missions when we have to deal with a large
number of casualties, my colleagues and I get confused
and find it hard to make a good decision. In
my experience, this is because we are not skilled
enough in teamwork and time management. At the
scene of accidents, everyone wants to be boss and tell
the others what to do and that causes chaos which
wastes our time and puts a patient’s life at risk.
(P19, 12 years of experience)
Another aspect of professional capabilities with an impact
on clinical decision-making is clinical judgment.
From the participants’ experiences, good clinical judgment
plays an important part in making correct and reasonable
clinical decisions in all situations, especially in
emergency situations where a quick diagnosis is necessary.
As one of the participants pointed out:
A skillful and capable member of the emergency care
personnel should be able to analyze and interpret
the implicit and explicit symptoms of a patient and
use that information to make a proper clinical judgment
and clinical decision. (P12, 15 years of
experience)
Another participant stated that:
One of the major challenges and problems which I
have repeatedly seen in the clinical decision-making
of the emergency care personnel is poor clinical judgment.
Some of my co-workers don’t have the necessary
skills in this area and can’t come to a good
conclusion and decision based on the status of a patient
and analysis of their symptoms. And so they
make mistakes in their decision-making and I’ve
sometimes seen them put a patient’s life in danger.
(P8, 10 years of experience)
Psychological empowerment
Resilience is another component part of Psychological
empowerment which the participants’ experiences
showed to affect clinical decision-making. From the participants’
point of view, resilience means that the emergency
care personnel should be flexible, should be able
to adapt to the hard and unpredictable conditions of
work in pre-hospital emergency care, and should possess
great tolerance. One of the participants stated that:
Having a high tolerance threshold is an essential
quality in pre-hospital emergency care personnel.
I’ve witnessed cases where some personnel with good
professional knowledge and skills lost their patience
in critical conditions or when the number of the injured
was high. They couldn’t manage the scene of
the accident and make a logical clinical decision.
(P16,14 years of experience)
Another component of Psychological empowerment
which has an impact on clinical decision-making is emotional
stability. According to one of the participants:
Work conditions in pre-hospital emergency care are
very complicated and unpredictable. So it is necessary
for emergency care personnel to be emotionally
stable so they can manage the scenes of accidents
well, keep calm, make the right decision, and take effective
clinical measures. (P25, 2 years of experience)
Another participant remarked that:
Unfortunately, some of my colleagues do not have
emotional stability: they lose their temper easily and
can’t manage their anger. Sometimes we come across
patients who are very aggressive and irritable. If we
don’t manage our feelings and emotions, we can’t
make the right decision for them and may even put
their lives in danger. (P2, 10 years of experience)
Occupational and environmental factors
Another theme of the major challenges and barriers which
affect clinical decision-making is occupational and environmental
factors. This theme consists of the following categories:
Occupational factors and Environmental factors.
Occupational factors
Occupational factors consist of time of missions, location
of missions, Fatigue and occupational burnout and
patients’ status.
One of the occupational factors referred to by the participants
is the time of missions. At times, pre-hospital
emergency care personnel have to go on a mission at
night and in complete darkness or in bad weather conditions,
which circumstances can adversely affect the
speed and accuracy of the personnel’s decision-making.
According to one of the participants:
Many times, I’ve had to be present at the side of a
patient in unstable weather conditions, in foggy weather,
or at night. It is really hard to work in such circumstances
and to judge the situation and make the
right clinical decision quickly. I would rather go on a
hundred missions in one shift at day time than get
dispatched at night or in bad weather. (P5, 8 years
of experience)
Another occupational factor from the participants’
perspective is the location of missions in pre-hospital
emergency care. One of the participants mentioned that:
Serving in inter-city stations and rural areas is much
harder and more stressful than working in stations
located in the city. Since we have to drive long distances
and it takes much time to get to urban medical
centers, when patients’ conditions are critical,
we really get confused and can’t make the right decision
immediately and provide the necessary care.
(P9, 8 years of experience)
Patients’ status and the conditions at the scene of accidents
are other factors which affect clinical decisionmaking.
According to one of the participants:
Sometimes, the scene of an accident is very unsafe
and full of hazards and these conditions have a
negative impact on our decision-making. For instance,
I’ve occasionally had to appear at the scene
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 6 of 12
of a murder or shooting incident, or where there was
an ongoing fight, or where a house or a vehicle was
on fire. Well, under such unsafe circumstances, how
am I supposed to care for a patient when my own
life is in danger? (P11, 5years of experience)
Patients’ status one another of the occupational factors
which affect clinical decision-making is emergency care.
Another participant stated that:
Our decisions are also affected by the clinical conditions
of a patient. For example, sometimes, the patient
is unconscious or the patient is deaf or speechimpaired
and can’t communicate with us. At such
times, it is not possible to acquire reliable data
about a patient’s status and make the right decision.
(P6, 7 years of experience)
Another of the occupational factors which affect clinical
decision-making is emergency care personnel’s fatigue
and occupational burnout. As one of the participants
remarked:
Working in pre-hospital emergency care is really demanding
and there are not many who can bear the
pressure. Sometimes, I’ve had to go on about 30 missions
in a 24-hour shift. Work overload and shortage
of experienced staff have caused fatigue and burnout
in the personnel and these have negative effects on
our concentration, mental acuity, and decisionmaking.
(P13, 4 years of experience)
Environmental factors
Environmental factors consist of conditions at the scene
of accidents and spread of infectious diseases. According
to one of the participants:
“Sometimes, the scene of an accident is very unsafe
and full of hazards and these conditions have a
negative impact on our decision-making. For instance,
I’ve occasionally had to appear at the scene
of a murder or shooting incident, or where there
was an ongoing fight, or where a house or a vehicle
was on fire. Well, under such unsafe circumstances,
how am I supposed to care for a patient when my
own life is in danger?” (P11, 5 years of experience)
Spread of infectious diseases is another dimension of
the environmental factors. According to one of the
participants:
When there is an outbreak of a dangerous infectious
disease, like Ebola, H1N1, or COVID-19, sometimes
there is a conflict between the emergency care
personnel’s decisions and what the patients want.
Even if we judge a patient’s condition to be critical
and decide that he or she should be transferred to
the hospital, the patient or the patient’s family don’t
care about our decision and refuse to have the patient
transferred because of their fear of the epidemic.
(P15, 3 years of experience)
On a similar note, another participant stated that:
On a mission, I had to give care to a patient who
had symptoms of sudden cardiac arrest. Even though
I told the patient and his family that the patient’s
condition was serious, they ignored my decision and
said because of the spread of the coronavirus, they
wouldn’t have their patient taken to the hospital.
(P17, 5 years of experience)
Inefficient organizational management
Another theme of the major challenges and barriers in
clinical decision-making is inefficient organizational
management which consists of the following categories:
Structural challenges, and challenges of human resources
and medical equipment.
Structural challenges
Structural challenges consist of management’s failure to
support the personnel in the case of errors in decisionmaking
and legal troubles, inefficiency of the dispatch
center, management’s failure to conduct root cause analysis
and take corrective action in the case of errors in
decision-making, conflicts in the regulations and lack of
a clear operation manual.
Another component part of structural challenges from
the participants’ perspective is the managers’ failure to
support the personnel in the case of errors in decisionmaking
and legal troubles. Many of the participants
stated that they are not adequately supported by their
mangers if legal issues arise and the patients press
charges against the personnel. They also mentioned that
the mangers do not take any effective measures toward
analyzing the root causes of clinical errors and or take
corrective action.
According to one of the participants:
Unfortunately, in matters of legal issues and charges,
the managers don’t support the personnel as much
as they’re expected to. There are many cases in
which, because of a clinical error, patients’ families
have sued the personnel, but the management failed
to give enough support. If you do a good job on a
hundred tasks, they will tell you that you are just
doing your duties. But if you make a single mistake,
you’ll immediately get reprimanded. Out of this fear
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 7 of 12
of being reprimanded or sued by patients, some of
the personnel do not report the errors in their clinical
decision-making. (P24, 11 years of experience)
Conflicts in the regulations and lack of a clear operations
manual” was another issue referred by the participants.
In this relation, one of the participants stated that:
There is not a clear manual which describes the responsibilities
of the emergency care personnel. For instance,
according to the internal codes, the prehospital
emergency care personnel should not administer
intravenous medications and if they do and
their action puts a patient’s life in danger, they will
be held liable. Sometimes, we really don’t know what
the right decision is and what kind of action we
should take. When a patient is having a seizure,
should I administer diazepam to them or not? (P20,
15 years of experience)
Another participant remarked that:
Once, I had a 45-year old patient with severe chest
pains. Based on his symptoms, my diagnosis was cardiac
arrest and we transferred him to the hospital.
In the triage unit, the emergency medicine doctor
scolded me for not having given an intravenous
nitroglycerin injection to the patient. He said all we
know is how to transfer patients! I explained to him
that we’re not allowed to administer medicine intravenously.
(P1, 11 years of experience)
Inefficiency of the dispatch center is another aspect of
the structural challenges referred by the participants. One
of the participants’ comments in this relation is as follows:
The dispatch center is the brains and director of the
operations in pre-hospital emergency care. Unfortunately,
employment of individuals who lack the required
knowledge and skills in this field disrupts the
operations. For instance, one time, the personnel at
the dispatch unit announced that a patient had
signs of weakness and dizziness and could have
hypoglycemia. When we got to the patient’s side, we
realized he’d had cardiac arrest and that the
dispatch center had suggested hypoglycemia by mistake.
Misleading information from the dispatch unit
can prevent the personnel from making the right
diagnosis and, consequently, the right decision. (P4,
2 years of experience)
Challenges of human resources and medical equipment
Challenges of human resources and medical equipment
consist of employment of inexperienced and inefficient
personnel, shortage of equipment and not organizing
workshops for the professional empowerment.
Employing personnel who don’t have the necessary expertise
and skills in pre-hospital emergency care is another
component part of challenges of human resources
and medical equipment which the participants’ experiences
showed to affect clinical decision-making.
One of the participants’ comments in this relation is
as follows:
Employing personnel who don’t have the necessary expertise
and skills in pre-hospital emergency care is actually
gambling with people’s lives. Unfortunately, because
of organizational benefits and lack of budget, the senior
managers hire inexperienced individuals who don’t have
the necessary knowledge and skills in pre-hospital emergency
care. On many occasions, I’ve seen some of my
colleagues who lack expertise in making a diagnosis
make wrong decisions and put a patient’s life in danger.
When we object to the mangers, they say the budget is
limited and they can’t afford to hire skilled workforce.
(P23, 17 years of experience).
Not organizing workshops for the professional empowerment
is another component part of challenges of
human resources and medical equipment which the participants’
experiences showed to affect clinical decisionmaking.
According to one of the participants:
Unfortunately, the administration does not take any
special measures to update the knowledge and skills
of the personnel. Over the past there, not a single
workshop has been held and the knowledge of most
of the personnel is not up-to-date. We have repeatedly
asked for training courses in basic and advanced
CPR and trauma emergency care, but the
administration says it doesn’t have any budget for
workshops. How can the personnel make good clinical
decisions and do the right thing for their patients
when their knowledge and skills are not up-todate?
(P10, 18 years of experience)
Another issue under the category of challenges of human
resources and medical equipment is shortage of
equipment. One of the participants stated that:
Some of the ambulances in inter-city and rural emergency
stations lack such medical devices as suction
machines, cardiac monitors, pulse oximeter, and ventilators.
Even now that we have to deal with the
COVID-19 epidemic, we don’t have access to personal
protective equipment, like masks, gloves, and special
gowns, and our fear of getting the infection has a negative
effect on our diagnoses and, in turn, our decisions
and actions. (P24, 13 years of experience)
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 8 of 12
According to another participant:
When there is no heart monitor, pulse oximeter, or
ventilator inside the ambulance, how am I supposed
to diagnose a patient’s cardiac or respiratory problem
and make a proper clinical decision that won’t
be a threat to the patient’s life? (P18, 6 years of
experience)
Ethical issues
The final theme of the major challenges and barriers in
clinical decision-making is “ethical issues” which consists
of categories of respect for patients’ physical privacy and
respect for patients’ sexual privacy.
Respect for patients’ physical privacy
Regarding respect for patients’ physical privacy, in the
Iranian culture, it is important that patients’ physical
privacy be maintained and that their private parts not
seen by caregivers, especially opposite-sex caregivers.
According to a participant:
Sometimes, we must provide care to female patients,
especially young females, who have palpitations or
chest pains and are in need of immediate cardiac
monitoring. It is not ethical for the patients or even
for us who are in the Iranian culture to see the female
patient’s body. It is really a tough job to make
a decision at such times and the patients may get
very uncomfortable. (P13, 4 years of experience)
Respect for patients’ sexual privacy
The participants also mentioned that, considering the
dominant Islamic culture in Iran, showing respect for the
sexual privacy of patients is very important to patients and
their families. One of the participants stated that:
While we were transferring a pregnant woman, we
realized she had broken her water and was in labor.
The baby was coming and we had to help her deliver
it. The poor woman seemed very embarrassed and
uncomfortable. It is so hard to make a decision in
such conditions. After all, we are Muslim and our
ethical principles dictate that at such times, care
should be given by a person of the same gender as
the patient. But in Iran, there are no female staff
members in the pre-hospital emergency care. (P21, 3
years of experience)
Discussion
This study explored the major challenges and barriers
which affect clinical decision-making from the perspective
of EMS personnel. The analysis of the participants’
experiences showed that challenges and barriers of the
participants’ clinical decision-making consisted of four
areas: professional capabilities, occupational and environmental
factors, inefficient organizational management,
and ethical issues.
At the scene of accidents, the emergency care
personnel encounter various clinical challenges which
affect their clinical decision-making [18]. At the same
time, it is the ethical and professional responsibility of
emergency care personnel to provide quality care based
on code of ethics to victims at the scene of accidents
[19]. The findings of the present study concern prehospital
emergency care personnel’s perception of the
major challenges which affect clinical decision-making at
the scene of accidents.
Professional capabilities, including clinical knowledge
and skills, were found to play an important part in prehospital
emergency care personnel decision-making.
Similarly, in their study of the barriers to nurses’ clinical
decision-making in the university hospitals of the south
of Iran, Mousavi et al., report that having knowledge,
clinical experience, and clinical skills are essential to
making good clinical decisions—the clinical decisionmaking
mean score of the nurses who had poor clinical
knowledge, experience, and skills was unsatisfactory
[20]. Another important component of professional capabilities
which has a significant impact on clinical
decision-making is clinical judgment. According to the
study of Engebretsen et al., clinical judgment is a necessary
skill for all nurses, especially pre-hospital emergency
care nurses, as it enables them to make accurate diagnoses
and make proper clinical decisions [21]. Likewise,
the results of the study of Anderson et al., show that
clinical judgment and critical thinking play a key role in
making clinical decisions in all situations, in particular
the critical and complicated conditions which prevail in
pre-hospital emergency care [22]. In the present study,
the participants stated that some of their colleagues do
not have adequate clinical knowledge, skills, and experience
and cannot, therefore, make the right decision for
their patients. Similarly, the results of the study of Perona
et al., show that clinical knowledge and skills and
clinical experience are key factors in emergency care
personnel’s clinical decision-making. Lack of those capabilities
poses a challenge when the personnel should
make clinical decisions and adversely affects the quality
and safety of the care. Accordingly, it is necessary for
pre-hospital emergency care administrators to take measures
to improve the professional capabilities of their
personnel [23]. Emergency Nurses Association (ENA)
has always stressed that advances in technology, increase
in professional knowledge, and work specialization mean
that emergency care nurses’ clinical knowledge and performance
need to be improved regularly. Since emergency
care is an unpredictable area and, occasionally,
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 9 of 12
the personnel have to deal with a large number of patients
with various issues, it is necessary for the emergency
care personnel to possess such professional
capabilities as clinical knowledge and skills to be able to
make the right clinical decision and provide safe and
quality care accordingly [24]. The results of the study of
Aloyce, et al. show that the emergency nurses who lack
the required clinical knowledge and skills make mistakes
in their clinical decision-making and triage [25].
In the present study, “teamwork skills” was found to
be another important aspect of professional capabilities
which affects clinical decision-making. In Grover’s
qualitative-exploratory study of emergency nurses’ experiences
of teamwork in a hospital in Australia, the participants
stated that teamwork skills are among the
essential clinical skills which emergency nurses must
possess. The participants’ experiences showed that when
the emergency department is busy and a large number
of patients must be attended to, teamwork skills can significantly
facilitate clinical decision-making. The
personnel with poor teamwork skills get nervous and
confused at such times and cannot make logical decisions
for their patients [26].
Based on the participants’ experiences, the emergency
care personnel occasionally have to provide care to patients
who are very irritable and aggressive. If the
personnel fail to manage their own feelings and emotions
in such circumstances, they cannot make a good
clinical decision for the patients and may even take actions
which put the patients’ lives at risk. The results of
the study of Lin et al., show that emergency nurses must
possess high levels of resilience and tolerance so that
they can employ their capabilities in the critical conditions
of emergency situations and, by making quick and
correct clinical decisions, implement effective clinical interventions
[27]. Halpern, states that pre-hospital emergency
is a complicated, unpredictable, and stressful
environment. At times, patients or their companions,
who are under considerable stress, may behave in violent
and insulting ways. Therefore, it is essential for the
emergency care personnel to possess such psychological
qualities as resilience and emotional intelligence to be
able to control their emotions and make the right clinical
decision and, consequently, take effective clinical
measures. By holding workshops, pre-hospital emergency
care administrators can enhance the personnel’s
psychological capabilities [28].. Similarly, Gunnarsson
et al., report that emergency nurses must possess resilience
and emotional stability to be able to use their professional
abilities effectively and take proper clinical
measures at the time of an emergency. Although such
factors as fatigue from work overload, shortage of
personnel, and stressful work conditions in emergency
departments have an adverse effect on the performance
of emergency care personnel, nurses who are resilient
and can manage their emotions continue to provide
high-quality care [29].
Occupational and environmental factors constitute another
category of the major challenges and barriers
which affect emergency care personnel’ clinical decisionmaking.
According to the study of Li, et al. (2018),
shortage of experienced nurses in emergency departments,
increase in workload, and fatigue and burnout
are the most significant occupational factors which adversely
affect the personnel’ diagnoses and decisionmaking
and lead to patients’ dissatisfaction and poorquality
care [30].
Another category of the major challenges which affect
emergency care personnel’ clinical decision-making is inefficient
organizational management. According to the
study of Bijani et al., employment of inexperienced
personnel who lack the required expertise, lack of facilities
and equipment, inadequate support for the
personnel, absence of clear instructions, conflicts in the
regulations, and failure to hold workshops for the professional
empowerment of emergency nurses are the
most significant challenges which affect the quality of
triage in emergency departments [31]. These findings
are consistent with the results of the present study.
From the participants’ perspective, lack of an emergency
doctor to consult and lack of a set of standard
clinical guidelines are among the major barriers to satisfactory
clinical decision-making. Thus, it is recommended
that the senior management at emergency care
departments set standard evidence-based clinical guidelines
for the personnel to follow. Also, pre-hospital
emergency care personnel should have access to the
clinical consultation of an emergency doctor stationed at
the emergency care center. Likewise, Bashiri et al. report
that evidence-based clinical guidelines and instructions
and having access to advice from a doctor in emergency
care departments play a key role in improving the
process of clinical decision-making by emergency care
personnel and will result in higher quality care [32].
Another important category which was found to affect
emergency care personnel’ clinical decision-making is
ethical issues. Showing respect for the privacy of patients
and maintaining their human dignity are among the
most important ethical responsibilities of caregivers [33].
Accordingly, all caregivers are expected to maintain their
patients’ privacy and dignity [34].
In the present study, too, the views of the interviewed
pre-hospital emergency care personnel showed that one
of the key factors which influence clinical decisionmaking
is showing respect for the physical and sexual
privacy of patients. The dominant religious-cultural beliefs
and values in Iran dictate that the bodies of all individuals,
especially women, should be covered, in
Bijani et al. BMC Emergency Medicine (2021) 21:11 Page 10 of 12
particular their genitalia and breast area, and that there
should not be any physical contact between men and
women who are not related to each other. Thus, to respect
the privacy of patients and accident victims, even
in pre-hospital emergency care, it is necessary that patients
receive care from same-gender caregivers. But the
national laws of Iran forbid women from working in
pre-hospital emergency care. Therefore, there is need for
changes which will allow the employment of female
personnel in emergency care. On a similar note, the results
of the study of Torabi et al., show that, from the
viewpoint of pre-hospital emergency care personnel,
maintaining the physical and sexual privacy of patients is
among the key aspects of clinical and ethical decisionmaking
[35].
In pre-hospital emergency care, maintaining patients’
privacy according to the patient’s physical conditions,
personal life, and lifestyle is essential. These rights apply
to deceased victims, too [36]. In the study of Abelsson &
Lindwall, the participants state that covering the body of
a victim, e.g. keeping a patient’s body covered when electrodes
are being attached, is essential to maintaining his/
her privacy. Keeping a victim’s body covered in line with
the victim’s values and beliefs while emergency care is
being given to him/her at the scene is an ethical obligation
[37]. Maintaining patient privacy and patient dignity
are closely connected. Dignity is a social and cultural
concept and individuals’ perceptions of maintaining privacy
and dignity are influenced by their beliefs and values
[38]. As a result of the dominant religious and cultural
beliefs in Iran, women feel embarrassed when they remove
their clothing to be examined by a male nurse or
doctor and consider that situation to be unethical.
Therefore, EMS male personnel in Iran feel uncomfortable
when they should provide services to female victims
at the scene of accidents, but try to give care based on
their cultural and religious values and commitment to
professional ethics.
Strengths of the study
The present study is the first qualitative attempt at exploring
the challenges which affect clinical decision-making
from Iranian pre-hospital emergency care personnel’s
point of view and can be regarded as a significant accomplishment.
In addition, in the present study, a wide range
of the factors which have an impact on pre-hospital emergency
care personnel’s clinical decision-making were identified.
These findings can be employed to improve the
quality of pre-hospital emergency care services and the
personnel’s clinical decision-making skills.
Limitations of the study
One of the limitations of the study is that it only addressed
the views of pre-hospital emergency care
personnel and the ideas of patients, as the beneficiaries
of emergency care services, were not taken into account.
Also, due to differences between the cultural, social, and
economic conditions of Iran and those of other countries,
the results may not be completely transferable and
similar studies should be carried out in other countries.
Conclusion
In today’s healthcare systems, patients in critical conditions
usually receive their first care from pre-hospital
emergency care personnel. The more correctly, accurately,
and quickly these professionals act, the lower will
be the rate of fatalities and possible disabilities and the
more trust people can place in the services provided by
pre-hospital emergency care departments. The success
of these departments depends on a variety of factors,
one of the most important of them being the ability to
make good clinical decision-making. Therefore, it is necessary
that those challenges should be identified and
addressed in order for the quality of emergency services
to improve. The results of the present study show that
clinical knowledge, experience, and skills contribute to
emergency care personnel’s professional capabilities in
making clinical decisions. Good teamwork skills and
time management can prevent feelings of confusion
when the number of the injured to be attended to is
large. Effective clinical decision-making skills can not
only help the personnel make the right decision, but enhances
their resilience and enables them to adapt to
hard and unpredictable conditions. Professional factors,
organizational management, and ethical matters constitute
the other major factors which influence the clinical
decision-making of emergency care personnel at the
scene of accidents and determine the quality of their
clinical performance. Thus, it is essential that prehospital
emergency care managers improve the quality
of EMS personnel’s clinical decision-making skill.