Mental health problems are quite prevalent and pose a
heavy burden on a society. According to the Burden of
Disease study performed in Iran in 2003, mental and
behavioral disorders were ranked as the second in
intentional and unintentional injuries [1]. Moreover, the
latest national survey on mental disorders has shown
that a one-year prevalence of psychiatric disorders in
Iran is 23.6% [2]. A small but significant proportion of
these patients would need intensive care, sometime
during the course of their disease. In such a psychiatric
emergency, paramedics are in the front line of emergency
medical service (EMS) for assessing, managing
and transferring patients to the emergency wards of
hospitals. Therefore, the role of paramedics is critical in
rapid and accurate decision making.
Despite the vital role of paramedics in pre-hospital
management of psychiatric problems, little evidence
exists on the issue [3]. Paramedics have three major
needs for a good performance: knowledge, skill for an
appropriate clinical decision making, and organizational
factors [3]. Educational courses have been shown to
improve their knowledge, attitude, skill, and self-efficacy
in performing the job and also will help them in better
decision making on the scene [4–6].
Emergency paramedic may face many difficulties in
making decisions for emergency patients with mental
illness [7]. They should prioritize safety in the first place
and simultaneously assess the patients for possible physiological,
psychiatric, pathological, socio-cultural, and legal
aspects to reach an accurate diagnosis and also manage
plans [8, 9]. Additionally, they are frequently exposed to
the aggressive behavior of violent patients [10] and
inappropriate management of aggressive behavior can
have severe consequences. In the case of highly aggressive
patients, chemical and physical restraint should be performed
very cautiously [11] under clinical guidelines [10].
Emergency staffs are at the risk of cumulative stress
because of the high amount of stress they experience;
and if it is not adequately addressed, emotional trauma
and its related dysfunction would appear [12]. Paramedic’s
workloads for mental illness are growing and
their ability for decision making in the complex situation
of psychiatric emergency should be amended [4]. Furthermore,
their ability to triage patients with psychiatric
problems is limited and, in some cases, paramedics
admitted the necessity of assessment tools and training
courses for maintaining the capability of emergency services
[4, 6, 12, 13]. Therefore, they will benefit from educational
courses and rapid clinical protocols that would
help them with their clinical decision making [6]. This
article is a report of the process of designing a rapid and
effective guide for paramedics who take care of patients
to answer increasing demands in a pre-hospital setting.
Methods
This project was conducted at the request of the
Technical Assistance and Operations Department of the
Iranian Emergency Organization. Firstly, the relevant
literature was reviewed. To prevent bias and to enrich
resources, in addition to the chapters on managing
patients with acute psychiatric symptoms in psychiatric
textbooks, more specialized resources in the field of
emergency psychiatric patient’s management were also
reviewed. We also searched for recent related articles in
PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Knowledge databases.
We combined keywords related to emergency situation
including “psychiatric emergency”, “behavioral emergency”,
“agitated behavior”, “agitation”, “violence”, and
“aggression” with terms of “management”, “protocol”
and “prehospital care”. Mesh terms, expert opinion, and
some keywords from the existing literature review were
used to select these keywords. Then, we screened the
retrieved articles and removed the unrelated articles.
17 documents out of 56 primitive cases were selected
which their information has been presented in Table 1.
The criterion for omitting the articles was decided by research
team based on the critical appraisal using peer review
checklist for protocol recommended by Cochrane
Community [14].
Finally, we extracted the topics in the remaining related
articles. The extracted topics were then classified
based on seven criteria as follows: 1) Order of execution
(at what stage they should execute), 2) first encounter
with the patient and maintaining safety, 3) Evaluation
and taking a medical history, 4) The primary differential
diagnoses, 5) Behavioral and drug therapy and management,
6) Decreasing life-threatening risks in patients,
and 7) Repeatable rate in different sources. Based on
these categories, an early draft of the protocol was written.
The draft was sent to 10 psychiatrists who expert in
emergency psychiatry and their initial feedbacks were
collected. Some changes were made in the protocol,
according to the experts’ comments. In the next step, an
expert panel was held.
The panel included experts from psychiatry, forensic
medicine, clinical psychology, emergency medicine, Emergency
Technical Assistant (deputy) and a general physician.
In the panel, each expert commented on each of the
items and stages according to the following questions:
1. To what extent is it necessary?
2. To what extent is it clear to the emergency
technician?
3. To what extent is it generalizable to similar
symptoms in other emergencies (e.g., acute
restlessness in non-psychiatric patients)?
4. To what extent can it be done according to the
equipment and situation of our society?
5. To what extent has patient safety been considered
at this stage?
6. To what extent has the safety of emergency
technicians been considered?
7. To what extent is the safety of the patient’s relatives
and those present at the scene taken into account?
8. Considering the current law, how legal is any of the
actions of emergency technicians?
Each item was scored using a Likert scale from very
low [1] to very high [9]. After adding the scores based
on the expert’s decisions, Items with a mean score 6 and
higher, remained unchanged in the protocol and those
with a mean score of 3 and lower were eliminated from
the protocol. Other Items were discussed once more and
were finally agreed upon with some minor changes.
The above case was presented in a meeting of 60
emergency technicians (with more than 15 years of working
experience) from different cities of Iran. Applicability,
clearness and comprehensibility of items were discussed.
The ambiguities of the protocol were addressed, and the
implementation issues of the protocol were identified. The
protocol was finalized in 2 pages that were applicable in
an ambulance for reviewing important points when
confronting with psychiatric patients.
Shirzad et al. BMC Emergency Medicine Results
Based on the findings from the literature review and discussed
issues in the expert panel, important topics for
managing psychiatric patients were categorized in three
levels: 1) Patient safety and security issues, 2) Patient
status assessment and diagnosis and 3) Patient management
(medical, behavioral management, and referral to a
treatment center).
Primary actions
The first step is to ensure the safety of the patient, technicians,
and people on the scene [15]. This stage includes:
a) pre-scene assessments of site security, escape
routes, and safe locations in the event of violence from
the patient, b) assessment of patient’s access to weapons
and equipment that could threaten his/her own life,
technicians or attendees [16], C) Assessment for risk
and need for back up and the presence of police, which
includes anticipating their entrance method and
avoidance of entering the place alone, D) using family
capacities to provide security [16] and E) Assessment
of risk factors for violence and predicting it
Symptoms of imminent aggression include: 1) Motor
restlessness and agitation, 2) The loud and threatening
tone of voice, 3) Threatening behavior and
gestures, 4) Verbal Threats, 5) Staring and angry face
mode, 6) Sudden behaviors (He throws the object in
his hand suddenly), 7) Bizarre behavior due to delusion
and hallucination.
Patient assessment
Patient evaluation includes the following: A) Urgent
physical needs by evaluating vital signs (Airway, presence
of respiratory distress, and pulse), B) Obtaining a
targeted mental health history of the patient from his or
her family including: Demographic characteristics (sex,
age, occupation), history of psychiatric illness, history of
physical and primarily neurological diseases, history of
drug abuse, history of violence or suicide [15], C) Differential
diagnoses (psychological causes versus physical
causes of symptoms) and physical risk factors (sudden
onset of symptoms without previous history, age younger
than 12 years and older than 60 years, known neurological
diseases such as seizures or dementia, existence
of neurological symptoms such as ataxia, nystagmus and
complex drug regimen (Table 2) [17] D) Considering
cultural and spiritual aspects of patients which can effect
on symptoms and how to help them.
Patient management
Patient management includes: a) behavioral management,
b) pharmacological management, c) patient family
management.
a) Patients’ behavioral management includes following
recommendations on how to behave and speak to
the patient:
 Speak to the patient in a calm, measured and
confident tone
 Reduce external stimuli, such as the noise and the
provocative behavior of others [18]
 Reduce internal triggers like hunger and thirst, and
offer water and food to the patient whenever
possible.
 have empathic and non-judgmental attitudes and
behaviors
 accept the patient’s hallucinations and delusions
appropriately
 Don’t make a false promise to the patient
 Use short, simple sentences and repeat the
sentences if necessary
 Listen to the patient
 Use patients’ words as much as possible
 Reassure the patient that you understand the
problem
 Encourage the patient to provide information to
those who can help
 Attempt to meet the patient’s spiritual needs
(include general spiritual principles in the
patient-therapist relationship, showing compassion
and unconditional acceptance to the
patient)
 Encourage the patient to provide information to
those who can assist him/her.
In case of aggression, in addition to the mentioned
points, Keep the patient at least 2m away, tell the patient
that aggression is unacceptable, offer medication
and in order to prevent harm themselves or others, use
physical restraint if s/he continues [19].
b) Pharmacological management: There are several
important principles to consider in drug
administration. The aim of emergency medical
treatment should be to calm down the agitated
patient as quickly as possible without reducing the
patient’s level of consciousness. Like all
emergencies, oral drugs are preferred to injectable
ones. The drug should be selected based on the
onset of action and availability. Short-acting drugs
are preferred over long-acting drugs. Medicines
with fewer side effects are also preferred. Thus, in
the first step, oral medications such as benzodiazepines
or lorazepam with or without typical antipsychotics
such as risperidone may be used.
In the second line, other antipsychotics such as haloperidol
may be administered. If the patient’s condition
does not improve or he/she does not cooperate in the
treatment, intramuscular antipsychotics such as Amp
haloperidol 5 mg along can be used. If necessary, these
medications can be repeated with cardiac and blood
pressure monitoring. Other medicines such as promethazine
or injectable benzodiazepines may also be
used to increase the effectiveness of the administered
drugs [19–21] (Table 3).
Restraints may use with the pharmacological methods.
This treatment option is used as the last choice in
patients who are uncooperative and physically dangerous
and may harm themselves or others, and when nonpharmacological
and primary pharmacological methods
are ineffective. In these cases, special care should be
taken to protect the patient from life-threatening situations
(Table 4).
In addition to the above-mentioned points, consider
the Contraindications of restraining which include the
followings [22, 23]:
Cases in which patients used Phencyclidine (PCP)
based on the family history
 Patients with recent surgery in the eye or central
nervous system (Because of an increase in intracerebral
or intraocular pressure)
 patients with a low level of consciousness or with
delirium
c) Intervention in the patient family including having
empathy and understanding of the critical situations
and psycho-education about the conditions and
places that they can attend [24].
Management of suicide emergencies requires special consideration.
The expert panel suggests that suicide emergencies
need a separate protocol. Moreover, while drug and
alcohol poisoning and deprivation have similar symptoms
with psychological emergencies, they have a completely
different treatment, and they need another protocol.
Discussion
A psychiatric emergency refers to any disturbances in a
patient’s thinking, emotions, or behavior that requires
immediate intervention. This disruption usually puts
patients in critical conditions, which can put them, their
family, and people around them in danger. These emergencies
include hurting others or themselves, aggression,
restlessness, acute behavioral symptoms caused by drug
poisoning, depression, and severe anxiety [15].
It is essential to distinguish between the physical and
psychological causes of these symptoms because it completely
changes the course of treatment. In some reference
books and articles, there are general protocols for
managing psychotic patients [25]. But in most of the
previously written protocols, the management of a
symptom such as aggression or agitation has been considered
[24–27]. Allen, et al. recommended different
pharmacological and behavioral interventions inpatient
with agitation in different situations [24, 28].
Gargia et al. suggested several recommendations on the
assessment of agitation emphasize the importance of identifying
any possible medical cause [29]. Most of the existing
protocols are related to patient management in the
hospital emergency department, and less attention has
been paid to earlier stages, such as the pre-hospital stage.
In the current protocol, the first thing is the safety of
technicians, their patients, and people who are in the
scene. Almost all references related to acute psychotic
symptoms consider the existence of a safe environment
as the necessary precondition for patient management
[15, 16]. These include the safety of the environment
and the management of patients’ behaviors that may be
harmful to themselves and others. Therefore, this protocol
as well as predicting such behaviors and managing
them according to international protocols is also
considered.
Because of the legal aspects, police presence was also expected
in the case of using mandatory treatments. This is
also important for the safety of the technician, and it has
been addressed in previous protocols [30]. Also, considering
the priority of saving a patient’s life, early assessment
of his/her vital signs is a priority [31] which we put in the
primary steps of treatment. Because of the importance of
diagnosing physical disorders that have symptoms similar
to mental disorders, we placed making a differential
diagnosis after examining vital signs.
The second point in the present protocol is to consider
the overlap of many symptoms of physical illness
with psychiatric disorders and to consider the differential
diagnosis. Therefore, vital signs and evidence of lifethreatening
disorders should be examined. Impairment
of the judgment and lack of co-operation in psychiatric
patients can worsen the situation according to the
cultural conditions in Iran.
In majority of patients’ cases, living with families and
intervention of families in the process of the treatment
as well as utilizing the capacity of families in the evaluation
of the patient can be very helpful, which is highly
considered in the present protocol. Also, in addition to
the common spiritual principles associated with each patient
(such as empathy, complete acceptance and being
non-judgmental, etc.) paying attention to the specific
religious and spiritual cultures and areas of each region
that affect the therapeutic relationship with the patients
is of great importance [32].
In the current protocol, like previous ones, nonpharmacological
management is preferred over pharmaceutical
methods. Calming the patient without medication
is the priority, and drug therapy is the next priority. At the
time of drug administration, in compliance with the general
principles of pharmacological therapy, the priority is
with the minimum dose and the oral administration root.
Injectable drugs are the next priority [29]. The goal of
drug therapy is to calm agitated patients without decreasing
their level of consciousness [33]. However, based on
available drugs and their side effects, and the possibility of
drug abuse, we chose different types of drugs for the
protocol. Lorazepam can be a useful drug, given the short
time in the pre-hospital emergency and the need to calm
the patient down with the least side effect. Lorazepam can
be used in mild to moderate emergencies and in patients
who are more cooperative [34].
Injectable benzodiazepines and antipsychotics such as
olanzapine (considering its interaction with lorazepam
and the possibility of cardiovascular collapse), ziprasidone
and haloperidol are the last lines of treatment [19, 35, 36].
The use of injectable midazolam as recommended in
other protocols [37] was not approved by experts despite
its rapid and practical effect on sedation, because of the
risk of abuse. Other antipsychotics such as aripiprazole
were not approved in previous protocols like our protocol
and are not recommended [29]. The use of physical restraint
is proposed for patients who have not responded to
primary treatments and may harm themselves and others.
In some protocols, special beds with certain height are
recommended for physical restraint. Given that these beds
do not exist in Iran, restraint with ordinary beds and wide
and leather straps was recommended. Indications, safety
recommendations, and limitations for using physical restraint
in our protocol are consistent with other protocols.
The use of physical restraint should be accompanied by
chemical restraint (use of medication to calm the patient)
[22, 23]. Special attention for patients with delirium is
similar to previous protocols [23].
Study limitations
The study has several limitations. Firstly, a systematic
review of the study has not been conducted and only a
review of existing articles was undertaken. And secondly,
Due to the limited availability of medicines in the
emergency room of Iran, the suggested treatments may
not necessarily be the best choices.
Conclusion
It seems that, given the lack of similar protocols in our
country in the past, this protocol can be a solution to
improve emergency technician training. Such summarized
protocols can be used for rapid reviews immediately
before being exposed to a patient with an acute
psychiatric condition.

