Road traffic injuries (RTIs) have become a major health
problem in many low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs) [1]. RTI is the leading cause of injury death,
worldwide, among those ages 15–29 years [2, 3]. This is
in part because road transport is the main mode of
transport worldwide [4]. In Tanzania, the site of the
present study, road transport accounts for three quarters
of all types of transport [5]. Because most economic
activities involve movement from one place to another,
people in the economically active age groups have
increased exposure to RTIs.
The impact of RTIs on economic development is substantial.
The increased number of deaths and disabilities
among people of reproductive age has become a global
public concern [1, 6–8]. Disabilities from injuries always
interfere with victims’ economic activities and affects
their overall quality of life [9]. Furthermore, victims who
survive often require long-term health care if they are to
recover. Hence, RTIs increase the burden on the health
care system, which in many countries is already overwhelmed
by other health problems [10]. As well, the
families of RTI victims can become impoverished by the
need to expend increased resources to cover treatment
costs. The World Health Organization (WHO) has
found that on a global basis, about 5% of gross domestic
product (GDP) is spent on goods and services related
to RTIs [2]. However, it is now agreed that the
impact of RTIs can be minimized if post-crash care is
maximized [11].
Effective post-crash care is supposed to include
prompt communication with and activation of the emergency
medical system (EMS), if one is available; a
prompt response from the activated system; and assessment
and treatment of the victim on site, followed by
expeditious transport to an appropriate health facility
[12]. The care that RTI victims receive from prehospital
providers ranges from no care at all to high-quality care,
depending on the knowledge and skills of the providers.
Because a minute can make a difference between life
and death in the prehospital environment, intervention
should be appropriate for the best outcome. Studies
show that interventions range from basic life support
(BLS) to advanced life support (ALS) [13]; although ALS
includes more components, it has been shown to be
complicated, to be an inefficient use of resources, and to
be no better than BLS measures at saving lives at the
crash scene [14].
While most high-income countries (HICs) have an advanced
EMS [15], few LICs have any system-level form
of emergency medical services; further, it has been found
that even where such systems exist in LICs, 98% of individuals
who use them are not satisfied with the care
providers [16]. Tanzania is one of the great majorities of
LICs where an EMS is not available. Hence, in most
cases, RTI victims are transported to the hospital by
untrained first responders who, at best, can provide little
initial care to stabilize their condition [17, 18].
Regardless of whether an ambulance is available for
evacuation, police officers have been shown to arrive at
the crash scene first, becoming, in effect, the first responders
to RTI victims [19]. Other key responders
commonly involved in evacuating and transporting RTI
victims to the hospitals are relatives and taxi and motorcycle
drivers [20]. However, in most cases police become
involved in post-crash care directly or indirectly by providing
instructions to other responders and coordinating
transport for RTI victims. Despite the role of the police
as key first responders in post-crash care, evidence
shows poor outcomes for victims who receive direct
physical care from police before reaching the hospital
[21]. The findings of a recent study show that these poor
outcomes are due to poor knowledge about post-crash
care provision and poor post-crash care skills [22]. Although
the study found that 99.1% of officers had a positive
attitude toward caring for RTI victims, the officers
reported performing many incorrect interventions during
immediate post-crash care that could endanger victims’
lives.
Regarding prehospital care in Tanzania, at least one
study has focused on the prehospital experiences of
injured victim [23], yet little is known about the experience
of first responders in providing initial post-crash
care to victims of RTIs. Therefore, in the present study
we aimed to explore the experiences of traffic police officers
in regard to the provision of care to RTI victims in
the prehospital environment, including the role of traffic
police upon arriving at the crash scene, the challenges
they face, and their opinions about how to improve care
to RTI victims.
Method
Study design
We selected a qualitative explorative study design in
which we used individual interviews and focus group
discussions (FGDs) with traffic police officers in Dar es
Salaam Region, Tanzania.
Setting
The present study was conducted in Tanzania’s Dar es
Salaam Region, which has an area of 1590 km2. The
region consists of three districts: Ilala, Temeke, and
Kinondoni. The city of Dar es Salaam is a major commercial
seaport and Tanzania’s largest city, with an
estimated population of more than 5.7 million [24]. Dar
es Salaam Region, which is coextensive with the city of
Dar es Salaam, was selected as the setting for the present
study because, according to a 2015 report by the national
government, it had the nation’s highest number of
road traffic incidents, accounting for more than a third
of all such incidents [25]. Also, traffic police in the city
have been shown to transport RTI victims to the hospital
by using police patrol cars or private cars. However,
it has been found that more than 50% of victims transported
by the police die before they arrive at the hospital
[21]. While we could have conducted a study in any jurisdiction
in Tanzania, Dar es Salaam is the only region
in the country with a designated public trauma hospital:
Muhimbili Orthopaedic Institute.
Sampling methods and data collection
Using a designed interview guide, we conducted individual
interviews and FGDs in three phases from December
2017 to June 2018. In the first phase (December 2017),
initial exploratory individual interviews were conducted
with four traffic police officers about their experiences
with post-crash care. These interviews resulted in the
emergence of issues related to the officers’ responsibilities,
challenges they faced, and ways, going forward, to
reduce challenges and provide better care that warranted
further exploration. In the second phase (March–April
2018), six more traffic police officers were individually
interviewed. During phase three (May–June 2018), three
FGDs were conducted; two FGDs had 10 participants
while the third had 11 participants. Participants were selected
from traffic police officers who had participated
in a recent survey study [22]. Those traffic police officers
who said they had cared for more than six trauma
patients in the previous year were selected as key informants
for the study. To ensure maximum variation, we
included 10 police constables, eight corporals, 11 sergeants,
seven assistant inspectors of police, and five
inspectors of police.
Before data collection, the researcher briefed the selected
traffic police officers about the study. The officers
were also told that the study had received an ethical
clearance from the MUHAS Senate Research and Publication
Committee. Permission to interview traffic police
officers was granted by the Office of the Inspector
General of Police (IGP), Tanzanian Ministry of Home
Affairs, after submission of the MUHAS letter of ethical
clearance. Lastly, the officers were informed that participation
was voluntary. From the response the researcher
received, all traffic police officers who were selected and
invited wanted to be part of the study. Before the interview
started with each traffic police officer selected for
the study, written informed consent was obtained.
Data were collected and stored on a password-protected
laptop computer. One in-depth interview or one FGD was
conducted per day lasting 40–50 min. All interviews were
tape-recorded.
Data analysis
Content analysis was used to analyse the data [26]. The
first author started by listening to the audiotaped interviews
and transcribing them verbally before translating
them from Swahili to English. The transcripts were analysed
by reading and re-reading them to become familiar
with the data. Transcripts from individual traffic police
interviews and FGDs were analysed for identification of
meaning units related to informants’ perspectives on
experiences during the provision of post-crash care.
Further, meaning units relating to the officers’ role when
it came to helping RTI victims, challenges the officers
faced when fulfilling their role, and their opinions on
how to approach those challenges were also identified.
Then, codes were extracted from these condensedmeaning
units. The codes from the text were further
analysed in order to distinguish similarities and differences.
Then, similar codes were grouped together to
form categories reflecting the manifest content of the
text. Lastly, the text and the categories were read again
to capture their underlying meaning.
Results
There were 41 traffic police officer, working from three
districts in Dar es Salaam region who were interviewed
for this study. The mean age of the participants was 37
years. Participants differed in terms of sex/gender where
by 27 where men and 14 women. The working experience
as a traffic police officer ranging from 3 year to 32
years, while about half (48.7%) of them aged between 30
and 39 years old.
It was found that traffic police officers are the first responders
on the crash scene in most situations; as they
step onto the scene, they experience the role of rescuer
as well as that of a traffic police officer. A strong inner
fear of touching individuals who are injured arises, the
officers said, but they reported that they find courage,
and calm themselves in order to fulfil their duties of
clearing the scene, maintaining safety (their primary
role), and meeting others’ expectations of transporting
injured victims to the hospital and providing some initial
help when possible. Doing work that is not easy even for
professional rescuers, the officers are further challenged
by limited access to training and technical equipment;
this creates a difficult environment that puts their lives
and those of the victims who receive care from them at
increased risk. With the aim of reducing these challenges,
traffic police officers raised suggestions about
possible ways of reducing the challenges and ensuring
that they would be safer while managing a crash scene.
From analysis of descriptions of initial post-crash care of
RTI victims from the injury scene to the hospital, three
themes emerged: Maintaining safety while saving injured
victims’ lives and facilitating access to the health facility
refers to the officers’ perceived role of maintaining personal,
bystander, and victim safety, as well as helping
victims all the way from the scene to the hospital. Overwhelmed
while working with limited resources and support
illustrates how the traffic officers face challenges in
fulfilling their role of providing post-crash care. Improving
support system and empowering frontline personnel
refers to the officers’ views on actions that should be
taken to support their role of providing initial post-crash
care of RTI victims (Table 1).
Theme 1: maintaining safety while saving injured victims’
lives and facilitating access to the health facility
The traffic police officers said that in addition to their
primary role of maintaining safety, they also provided
some initial management and helped injured victims
reach the health facility for proper care.
Providing initial help to the injured victim
The participants reported several initial actions they
took to help RTI victims. Once they arrive at the
scene, the first thing the police officers do is to remove
the injured victim(s) from the vehicle and crash scene
and place them out of harm’s way under a shady tree
or at the side of the road. Although it was described
that participants placed the victims on their back, the
officers could not explain clearly why they did so.
However, one participant described that this position
helps the victim to breathe, and in case of respiratory
difficulty the victim’s face can be fanned easily to increase
ventilation. Despite mentioning the provision of
first aid to victims, the participants were not clear
about what type of first aid they normally provided.
They further noted that they did not know what to do
for first aid; most of time they rushed victims to the
hospital for such services.
“I am supposed to provide first aid to injured victims,
but it always depends because you might be busy
doing something to a victim, thinking that you are
helping; instead, you are worsening the victim’s
condition..... That is why I always rush them to the
hospital, which I believe is a safe place for them”.
(FGD2, Participant 4)
Sorting out victims while ensuring safety
Apart from providing initial help to injured victims, participants
reported that they ensured safety at the crash
scene by cordoning off the scene area to alert other road
users that there had been a crash and that they should
not themselves become victims (or worsen the state of
already-injured persons) by intruding onto the scene,
whether in a vehicle or on foot. Personal safety was
mentioned as the top priority before helping the victims
and the main reason they cordoned off the scene. Participants
also reported that upon arrival at the scene they
sorted out victims, identifying them by name for official
records, whether the victims were dead or alive, and
took the surviving victims immediately to the hospital.
Those who died would be taken to the mortuary later.
“I have to identify quickly who died and who is still
alive. This helps to know who needs quick transport
to the hospital and who can wait”. (Participant 8)
It was also noted that traffic police officers are responsible
for notifying next of kin, either personally, by
phone, or through social media, to make it easier for
relatives to visit their loved ones at the hospital or to
confirm the identity of a deceased relative’s body at the
mortuary.
Transporting RTI victims to the hospital
The officers reported that transporting RTI victims to
the hospital was a crucial responsibility. This responsibility
was taken as a priority regardless of the condition
of the injured person; private cars and sometime police
patrol cars were mentioned as means of transport used
to take victims to the hospital. Police officers reported
using different approaches, including begging Good
Samaritans who owned a car to take victims to hospitals,
or forcing a private car owner to take victims to the hospital,
especially when nobody agreed to help.
“Most times, drivers do not want to carry injured
victims at all, especially if an injured person is
profusely bleeding. That is why we normally apply a
little bit of force”. (Participant 5)
Additionally, some participants reported using their
own money to pay a taxi driver in order to take a victim
to the hospital, especially if others refused to do so.
“I always hate begging behaviour. This is because you
might ask for help in the first car and the driver
comes up with a lot of excuses.... In that case I take
my own money, hire a taxi, and ask the driver to rush
the victims to the hospital”. (Participant 9)
Theme 2: overwhelmed while working with limited
resources and support
Participants reported experiencing challenges in providing
care to injured victims. These challenges were related
to resources, infrastructure, and lack of support.
Working with scarce resources for helping victims
Participants claimed to have no first-aid kit or other
first-aid materials like stretchers in the police cars or at
the police posts that could be used for initial care. The
officers reported using victims’ or bystanders’ clothes to
prevent direct blood contact when helping victims.
Others reported using plastic bags as protection against
direct blood contact, especially in the presence of profuse
bleeding. Although this method was mentioned by
several participants, some declared that the method was
not effective and that it did little to prevent crossinfection.
Some participants reported helping bleeding
victims with bare hands due to a lack of protective gear,
which created the possibility of exposure to blood-borne
infections such as HIV and hepatitis.
“We are using plastic bags; however, they don’t even
fit the hand and you find you are busy caring for a
victim and the plastic bag has dropped off or even if it
is there, you have already contacted the victim’s
blood; we are really working in a difficult
environment, and sometime it’s even a shame to tell a
person that we use plastic bags”. (Participant 2)
Difficulty facilitating victims’access to health facilities
Concern was expressed that even if a traffic police officer
arrived early at the scene, the injured victim would
still be unable to get to the hospital quickly. The situation
is even worse if a crash happens at night because
many motorists do not even stop when police officers
try to pull them over, and if they stop, most of them do
not agree to carry injured victims, especially those who
are bleeding. Badly potholed roads, sometimes filled with
water, were also mentioned as a cause of delay in getting
an RTI victim to the hospital.
“There is no system which enables an ambulance to
take injured people from the scene, though from what
I believe this is what it supposed to happen; taking
injured people from the scene to the hospital … It’s
really painful, whereby you have toiled enough using
other means to make sure the injured person reaches
the hospital, just to find that there are three
ambulances parked at the hospital. This is unfair and
a misuse of resources”. (Participant 3)
Overwhelmed and exhausted by responsibilities
Some participants, especially those with high rank in
their working area, reported having a lot of responsibility,
which overwhelmed them and kept them from
having any resting time at all. It was noted that the
workload increased when a crash happened because
during that time traffic police officers were required to
continue fulfilling their legal responsibilities while
dealing with newly emerged caring and transporting
responsibilities.
“When I receive a call about an accident, that is
where the stress starts exactly … . It reminds me of
other accidents that I don’t even want to remember at
all. It also increases stress because I know that even
after my arrival, I have nothing to do apart from
taking them to hospital”. (Participant 7)
Participants further reported feeling demoralized because
they received so little recognition for their efforts
to help RTI victims, especially from bystanders who
ended up blaming the traffic police officer for not arriving
at the scene on time and not delivering care at the
scene the way they thought it should be done.
Lack of a support system at the scene and at health
facilities
The officers related that once a crash occurs, bystanders
crowd the scene without offering any assistance to the
police in helping the victims. Instead, they take photos
of the victims or steal their property Another challenge
the officers reported was the experience of arriving with
victims at the hospital and waiting a long time before
care was given.
“I don’t know what is wrong with our hospital’s
admission system. It’s normal to arrive with an
injured victim and you are asked to go and open a
patient file and do all the other procedures which are
required for admission. This can take up to three
hours, and I consider it as a waste of time with no
reason because that is not my work. I was just a
rescuer”. (FGD 3, Participant 2)
Theme 3: improving the support system and empowering
frontline personnel
Participants expressed their views on strategies that
could be employed to address challenges encountered as
they provide initial post-crash care to injured victims.
Strengthening the emergency care system
Almost all participants expressed the need to have an
established emergency care system in Tanzania. Moreover,
they suggested having ambulances parked in hot
spots along main roads where crashes commonly occur.
Participants also suggested that once such an emergency
care system was in place, both traffic police and community
members around hot spots should be given an
emergency telephone number to call in case of a crash
or any other road emergency. It was proposed that all
hospitals have a special number, as the police do, that
would be known by community members and used to
call for help when an emergency occurred or to request
an ambulance from a nearby health facility. Moreover,
participants suggested that having good communication
between the on-scene rescuer and the hospital would
help hospital staff prepare for emergency arrivals and
reduce unnecessary delays.
“Hospitals should have an emergency number to call
as one of their services, as police do.... Anybody who
has an emergency should be encouraged to call that
number, and that will help to release ambulances
stationed in the hospital to the scene and save lives”.
(Participant, 1)
Availability of resources and emergency medical support
system
The participants proposed that first-aid materials be distributed
to their police posts and their patrol cars. They
argued that if first-aid materials could become available,
they could even ask bystanders to help with rescuing injured
victims, as opposed to what is currently happening,
because no one is ready to work without protection. It
was also noted that, as police patrol cars are few and
ambulances are not in place, increasing the number of
patrol cars would mitigate the problem of transporting
victims to the hospital. They also suggested that once
the number of police patrol cars was increased, a few
could be specifically identified and reserved for transporting
victims. The need to employ more police officers
who would be trained in first aid and who would be
specifically available for caring for injured victims was
also expressed.
“ Our patrol cars need to be specified, which one is
for injured victims and which one should do the rest
of activities … . I remember one day we arrested a
person with illegal dirty car oil and we put them in
the patrol car and when we were on our way to the
police station, we found an accident and we had no
way other than to take the injured victim in an oildirty
car”. (Participant 10)
Training for police and drivers on victims’ first-aid care and
road safety
First-aid training would help both police and drivers,
especially bus and taxi drivers, deliver better care to
RTI victims. The officers mentioned training as an important
issue because most of them declared that when
they arrived at a crash scene, their main role was to
facilitate transport of the victim to the hospital. This
often-meant recruiting taxi drivers or using their own
patrols cars; in either case, little or no first aid could
be given to the victim. Based on the expression of the
need for training, suggestions for workshops on how to
initiate care of ill and injured victims were highlighted.
Participants were of the view that such training would
improve how they provided care and reduce needless
fatalities. Furthermore, most of them reported being
influenced by the command-driven nature of their
work, which is opposite to what care need. Finally, participants
pointed out that some drivers ignored road
rules and regulations, causing crashes. Therefore, they
suggested mandatory refresher courses on road rules
and regulations as a way to reduce the number of RTIs.
Some police officers liked the idea of the proposed
training, while others were against it, as they perceived
post-crash care as an extra activity that was not their
responsibility.
“You know everybody has specialized in a certain
work. My work is not to care for injured victims, you
[the interviewer] are the people who are trained about
that. Asking me to initiate care to injured victim is
like increasing extra work to me, but I have no way
out”. (FDG 3, Participant 10)
Discussion
We have explored the experiences of traffic police officers
in regard to the provision of care to RTI victims.
These findings provide useful insights into post-crash
care provided by this group of responders, as well as
areas that need improvements in Tanzania’s emergency
care system. On the basis of our findings, we
recommend that the following issues relating to traffic
police post-crash care of RTI victims be given special
attention:
 Maintenance of safety during provision of post-crash
care at the scene and on the way to the hospital
 Assurance of availability of resources and support
for optimal post-crash care
 Improvement of the post-crash care support system
and empowerment of frontline personnel
Maintenance of safety during provision of post-crash Care
at the Scene and on the way to the hospital
Prehospital care differs worldwide in term of level and
provider’s knowledge and skills. For countries where an
EMS is not in place, the advice is to build it via the identified
first responders [12, 27]. Regardless of level, studies
show that an EMS is an important service that can
save injured victims’ lives and reduce disability [28, 29].
In countries where an EMS is in place, the rate of RTI
deaths is 25% lower than in countries without EMS [30].
This is because provision of post-crash care via an EMS
is organized, timely, and safe, and its delivery is done by
trained personnel using well-equipped ambulance for
transporting victims [30, 31].
In the present study, traffic police officers reported
that one of their responsibilities after arriving at the
scene was to provide some initial injury management
and other aid to victims and facilitate their transport
to the hospital. Although this was considered “an initial
care to injured victims,” the study found that the
concept of first aid is not well understood by traffic
police and that for them, the provision of first aid
basically involves interventions such as extricating
victims from the scene and transporting them to the
hospital for further management. However, it was not
clear from the study how the traffic police ensured
initial forms of management of injured victims such as
bleeding control, neck immobilization, and splinting of
fractured bones measures that optimize outcomes.
Providing initial help without applying such safety
principles could expose victims to further injury or result
in permanent disability or even a decreasing their
survival time. This could be why victims who are cared
for at the scene and/or transported by police to the
hospital are more likely to die than those attended by
emergency medical personnel or other first responders
[21, 32]. Describing the initial interventions without
mentioning application of safety principles, as was the
case in many interviews in the present study, indicates
a lack of proper knowledge and skills for providing
care to RTI victims on the part of traffic police. Poor
knowledge and skills in regard to the provision of care
to RTI victims by first responders has been demonstrated
in other studies to be the main reason for inappropriate
intervention during care provision [22, 33].
This situation calls for immediate remedies; otherwise,
the police officers who are first at the scene will continue
to be of no help to victims, except to rush them
to the hospital with poor outcomes afterward [34].
Several studies done elsewhere reveal that most crash
scene care providers perform no intervention at all, or
even impede the provision of proper care due to limited
knowledge and skills [35]. Working with limited knowledge
during lifesaving time not only decreases chances
of survival for injured victims but also increases the risk
of a care provider becoming a victim immediately or in
the near future [36]. Most officers are aware of the risks
associated with care provision to RTI victims; therefore,
they tend to fear helping victims, hence hinder care
provision. It has been suggested that proper handling of
the victim increases confidence that one will perform
well in a subsequent similar event [37].
Assurance of Availability of resources and support for
optimal post-crash care
Traffic police work has been reported to be annoying,
and even to be one of the most challenging jobs in the
world [38]. The situation gets worse when traffic officers
are attending a crash scene with limited or no resources
for care provision to injured victims [39]. Despite not
having appropriate equipment for care provision, they
are required to provide care as its within their job description,
and is stipulated as part of their responsibilities.
It is not well planned, because the police officers
are left in in a dilemma: to take the risk and try to save,
or not try to save. Therefore, officers are forced to save
for humanitarian reasons as well as to fulfil their obligations,
by improvising available materials like using
personal cars for transport, plastic bags as gloves, and
clothes in order to avoid direct blood contact. Unavailable
equipment and supplies not only limits officers’
ability to provide quality care to RTI victims, but also
puts them at risk of suffering biological, physical, chemical,
and even psychosocial problems [36].. Moreover, regardless
of whether or not care is provided at the scene,
transporting victims to the hospital has been reported to
be an issue because of inaccessible ambulances. The unavailability
of ambulances to evacuate RTI victims leads
police officers to commandeer private cars to evacuate
victims from the scene to the hospital. Such vehicles are
not designed to carry victims, and in case of spinal cord
injury, further damage to the spine is more or less a
guarantee. The situation of not having ambulances for
victim evacuation was also found in many other African
countries [27]. Those people who are forced to convey
victims to the hospital in their private cars do not have
knowledge about transporting and caring for injury
victims; furthermore, their cars are not designed to carry
these victims [17, 34]. When inappropriate vehicles
driven by unauthorized and/or ill-qualified persons are
used to transport victims to the hospital, the probability
of getting there safely is low [21].
Additionally, it was not good to hear from the officers
interviewed for the present study that their efforts were
sometimes for naught because of delays in the hospital
admission process.
Poor infrastructure, especially bad roads, was mentioned
as another challenge officer encountered when
transporting victims to hospitals. Potholes and other
forms of roadway damage not only slow transport, they
also increase the likelihood of further injury because victims
are not properly secured in the car. These findings
align with a systematic review study on LMICs that
showed that challenges that the confront prehospital
providers at the scene are lack of ambulances, poor infrastructure,
poor communication and coordination, and
unavailable equipment and personnel [40].
Most of the challenges mentioned by the officers could
be reduced or eradicated by coordination between government,
prehospital providers, and hospitals. It is important
to recognize that these challenges can be tackled
by either short- or long-term planning. The government
should make sure that a conducive environment is
created for the provision of post-crash care by traffic officers
and other identified prehospital providers [41, 42].
This would consist of developing, funding, implementing,
and enforcing policies to enhance provision of the
best possible care at the crash scene. Moreover, the EMS
should be strengthened through effective coordination of
personnel, resources, and activities, as well as clear
delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the team,
with effective mechanisms of accountability throughout.
Improvement of the post-crash care support system and
empowerment of frontline personnel
Lack of training in prehospital care for first responders
has been identified as a barrier to the provision of prehospital
care [40]. To overcome this barrier, formal
training in prehospital care should be impacted to
officers to establish EMS [12] and meet health system
standards and regulations which many LMIC countries
are yet to establish [27]. The focus of training should be
on basic lifesaving skills; such training is cheap and easy
to implement [31]. The training should not be limited to
traffic officers; other identified prehospital providers,
such as taxi drivers, should also be considered for
training [43]. The training has been shown to be costeffective:
Similar training has been done in other countries,
and participants have shown retention of skills
and knowledge to a significant level [44], with improved
patient outcomes the result [28].
Improvement of infrastructure will hasten the arrival
of the rescuer to the crash scene and reduce the time
spent getting to the hospital. Improved infrastructure
will also increase the preparedness of hospital providers,
with quicker reaction times saving lives. Lastly, medical
care organizations can better satisfy their responsibility
to save lives by placing care providers closer to potential
crash scenes and increasing collaboration with the police
officers who have been identified as, in many cases, the
first responders.
Implications of the study
We explored experience of police officers in provision of
initial care to RTI victims at the scene. Findings of this
study revealed the important role of police officers in
providing care to RTI victims at the scene. For effective
outcome of post-crash care, such care needs to be appropriate,
timely and safe. To equip police officers better
for that role, lifesaving skills and basic principle of postcrash
care should be an inclusive topic in police training
curriculum and one of the competencies to be acquired
during their initial training. To ensure Traffic Police Officers
effectively fulfil this role, the government, through
the Ministry of Internal Affairs in collaboration with
Ministry of Health, should provide police with necessary
equipment that can be utilized in provision of basic
post-crash care to RTI victims at the scene. To facilitate
easy access to formal hospital care and ensure maximum
outcome to RTI victims, these findings suggest the need
for government efforts of establishing an organized EMS
that ensure safe and appropriate continuum of care from
the scene to the hospital.
Limitations of the study
We explored traffic police experiences of providing postcrash
care, trying to understand officers’ role, challenges,
and opinions about improvements. We acknowledge that
similar insights can be acquired from taxi drivers, truck
drivers, and community members, who have been found
to be the main first responders in other studies [34, 44].
In future studies, it will be interesting to capture their
perspectives and contrast them with those of the traffic
police who, apart from being involved in providing initial
care directly to victims, have legal responsibilities at the
scene. It is also important to know how traffic police
officers perceive their caring role and the challenges to
optimal post-crash care, as they are also involved in direct
initial care and play a key role in supporting victims’
access to health facilities.
Ten interviews and three FGDs were conducted for
the present study, which might seem a small sample.
However, during the last interviews, the same issues
emerged repeatedly, and the variety of informants from
a range of educational and police ranks allowed us to
gather information derived from diverse perspectives
and experiences.
This study triangulated method by in-depth interviews
and focus group discussion to enhance credibility. Interviews
were conducted in Swahili and then translated to
English; we acknowledge that some of the meanings of
the participants might have been lost in the translation
process. However, two authors with Swahili as their
native language were involved in the translation process.
Trustworthiness
When the study findings are worth believing, the study
is said to be trustworthy [45]. In a qualitative study,
trustworthiness is assessed on the basis of four criteria:
credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability
[46]. In the present study, credibility was ensured
through triangulation of participants with various experiences
who shed light on the research question from a
variety of aspects. To enhance credibility and dependability,
the data collected from individual interviews were
triangulated with those from FGDs during the analysis
process [47–50], and selected codes, categories, and
themes were shared among the co-authors, who gave
critical comments and suggestions based in large part on
their diverse backgrounds and degrees of familiarity with
the setting. To confirm that the findings reflected the
informants’ experiences rather than the researchers’ understanding
of the problem, the presented findings were
supported by codes and quotes. Transferability was
enhanced by describing the study context and the processes
for data collection and analysis in order to show
that the results can be used in other contexts and among
other traffic police officers.
Conclusion
Traffic police are key post-crash care providers for
RTI victims. However, lack of appropriate lifesaving
knowledge and skills among traffic police results
provision of unsafe interventions, minimizing the
chances of surviving of RTI victims. Working with
scarce resources and being overwhelmed by other
legal responsibilities keep traffic police officers who
serve RTI victims from providing optimal care. A lack
of specified means of transport for injured victims delays
timely access to health facilities, increasing the
chances of death and disabilities resulting from delayed
interventions. For optimal post-crash care delivery,
efforts should be made to improve the post-crash
care support system and empower frontline personnel,
including traffic police. Government and other relevant
authorities should ensure that traffic police and
other first responders are well trained in basic skills
for delivery of post-crash care at the scene. Furthermore,
the government should invest in establishing a
trauma prehospital care system, which would consist
of accessible, available, and properly equipped ambulances
and trained traffic personnel. However, more research will
be needed to determine the acceptability and efficacy of
such a system in the Tanzanian context.
