Public awareness is of great importance, especially for
life-saving information and skills. Globally, many countries
emphasize related topics in educational institutions
and workplaces. Death from sudden cardiac arrest remains
very common worldwide [1, 2]. Approximately
50,000 people per year can survive until professional
help arrives when basic life support (BLS) measures are
performed properly. Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest
(OHCA) causes 350,000 deaths each year in Europe [3].
In the US, the mortality rate due to OHCA is more than
90%, causing 276,000 deaths annually [4]. When the first
person to witness OHCA uses an automated external
defibrillator (AED), the chance of survival doubles. However,
this instrument is used in only 4% of cases [5, 6].
The performance of BLS is usually done in chains that
can be improved by educational programs. The success
rate of BLS can be improved when it is performed by lay
people before professional help arrives. This is usually
motivated and enhanced by increasing public knowledge,
attitudes and understanding of the application of the
BLS techniques. Different studies have been conducted
worldwide to ascertain the general level of knowledge,
attitudes, and awareness about BLS in community settings.
The rate was approximately 70% in Slovenia,
which was considered a high percentage, reflecting a
particular policy whereby training is an obligatory part
of learning to drive in the country [7]. However, the percentage
of this country’s population with up-to-date
knowledge was very low at 2%. On the other hand, the
rate was 78% among teachers in Belgium, demonstrating
the impact of teaching [8].
BLS training rates vary worldwide, including the following
rates: Washington, DC 78% [9], Poland 75% [10],
West Australia 64.1% [11], Japan 58% [12], Turkey 40.3%
[1], Ireland 28% [13], New Zealand 27% [14], and Hong
Kong 21% [15]. The rates also differ according to the
specific area where the study was done. For example, in
an urban region of Arizona, the rate was 63.2%, but this
dropped to 55.4% in a rural region [16].
Studies evaluating knowledge, attitude and awareness
about BLS in Middle Eastern countries, including
Jordan, are limited. In a study evaluating knowledge and
attitudes towards cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
among university students in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, it
was found that 31% did not have prior CPR knowledge
[17]. Of those with previous knowledge, 85% felt that it
was inadequate. The most common sources of information
were television and movies. Approximately 13% of
individuals had encountered a situation that required
the use of CPR, while only 14% of them performed it.
This was mostly due to lack of knowledge (48.2%). Overall,
88% of students would have liked to learn how to
perform CPR. The authors concluded that the general
attitude towards CPR was positive, but the knowledge
on the topic was insufficient [17]. Thus, more focus
should be placed on the improvement of CPR skills. In
addition, more studies are needed to assess knowledge
and attitudes towards CPR in the community.
Methods
The purpose of the current study was to evaluate public
awareness, knowledge and attitudes towards BLS in
Jordan.
Research Questions: (1) What is the level of awareness
among Jordanian lay people regarding BLS? (2)
What is the level of knowledge Jordanian lay people have
about BLS? (3) Do Jordanian lay people have positive attitudes
towards BLS? (4) Does previous training about
BLS have an effect on the level of awareness, knowledge,
and attitudes towards BLS?
Design, Sample, and Setting: A cross-sectional design
with a convenience sampling method was used in
this study. The participants who met the following inclusion
criteria were included: (a) Jordanian nationality, (b)
aged 18 years and above, (c) able to read and write
Arabic, (d) signed informed consent, and (e) not graduated
from or studying at any medical field colleges
(medicine, pharmacy, nursing, dentistry, and laboratory).
Those individuals were excluded because their university
programs have mandatory courses about BLS training.
Data were collected from three major cities in the
northern, middle, and southern areas of Jordan to be
representative of the country as a whole. Three research
assistants collected the data, one for each area. They
approached the participants every day from 8 am to
8 pm in shopping malls and public areas, which are
similar in the three cities. The research assistants explained
the study and the purposes to the participants,
and if they agreed to participate, they signed the informed
consent form and answered the questionnaire.
To make sure that the sample size was sufficient, a
power analysis was performed using an online G*power
sample size calculator. Research questions 1–3 were answered
by descriptive statistics. Research question number
4 was answered by chi-squared test. Using this
information and the assumptions of a power of .8, type 1
error of 0.05, and a medium effect size, the sample size
needed was 107 participants. Therefore, we recruited
300 participants to allow for attrition and dropout.
Measurement
The researchers designed a questionnaire specifically for
this study. This questionnaire was based on the latest
American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for BLS
and was written in Arabic [18]. The questionnaire included
two parts. Part one collected information about
participants’ sociodemographic characteristics (i.e., age,
gender, marital status, education, and employment). Part
two assessed their knowledge, attitudes and awareness
about BLS. This latter part consisted of 22 questions
about signs and symptoms of cardiac arrest, previous
CPR experience, compression location and rate, if the
participants were concerned about making mistakes
when performing CPR, and people to whom they would
provide CPR (Additional file 1).
Procedure of data collection and ethical consideration
The study was approved by the Institutional Review
Board committee at the Applied Science Private University
(Faculty 018). The principal investigator met with all
research assistants and explained the purpose of the
study and the questionnaire. Research assistants explained
the study to the participants. They also ensured
the participants that they had the right not to participate
and to withdraw at any time. After this explanation, if
the participants agreed to participate, they were asked to
sign an informed consent form and to complete the
questionnaire. The study was completely anonymous
and no identifiers were required. Data were coded and
entered into a password-protected computer, accessible
only to the principal investigator and co-investigators.
Data analysis
Data analysis was done using SPSS version 21. Description
of the sample was performed by descriptive statistics,
including n (%) or mean ± SD. A chi-squared test
was used to determine if there were differences between
those who received training and those who did not regarding
the identification of cardiac arrest, action performed
when witnessing cardiac arrest, and practical
application of CPR. Any p value < .05 was considered
statistically significant. All statistically non-significant results
were reported as not significant (NS).
Results
Demographic characteristics
A total of 400 participants were invited to participate, of
whom 300 agreed and filled out the questionnaire completely,
comprising the sample of the study. The participants
were distributed between males and females, with
a mean age of 33.55 years. More than half of the sample
was married and had a high school and university degree.
A detailed description of the participants’ characteristics
is presented in Table 1.
CPR training
Among the whole sample, only 87 participants (29%)
stated that they had received CPR training. Most of
those received their training at school (n = 33, 37.9%),
followed by university (n = 26, 29.9%), and the media
(television and internet) (n = 20, 23%).
Signs of cardiac arrest
The response rates for the signs of cardiac arrest are
presented in Table 2. The highest rates were for (1) chest
pain (n = 129, 43%), (2) respiratory standstill (n = 119,
39.7%), (c) loss of consciousness (n = 114, 38%), and (d)
difficulty breathing (n = 107, 35.7%).
Recognizing cardiac arrest
Table 3 shows comparisons between those who had received
training about CPR and those who had not regarding
cardiac arrest signs, including (a) consciousness
evaluation, (b) respiratory evaluation, and (c) circulation
evaluation. Based on the table, participants who received
training were more likely to know the three signs of consciousness
evaluation than those who did not. For respiratory
evaluation, the number of participants who
received training and did not know that “no steam coming
up in front of the mouth of the victim” was an incorrect
answer was lower than the number of participants
who did not receive training and did not know this answer.
For circulation evaluation, the number of participants
who had CPR training and could correctly feel a
pulse in the vessels of the neck was higher than the
number who did not receive training and could feel a
pulse.
Seventy participants had witnessed a sudden cardiac
arrest (23.3%). Among those, 42.8% called the ambulance,
20% told someone to call for help, 10% gave chest
compression, 10% gave mouth-to-mouth breathing, 8.6%
gave both chest compression and mouth-to-mouth
breathing, and 8.6% just watched and left. The number
of participants who received training and performed
chest compression, mouth-to-mouth ventilation, and
both massage and ventilation was higher than the number
who performed these actions and did not receive
training (Table 4).
Australia [11], Poland [10], and the US [9] were higher,
with percentages of 58, 75 and 79%, respectively. In general,
Jordan has a lower percentage of trained people in
comparison to other countries, indicating that more
focus is needed to train the public in life-saving skills to
bring Jordan in line with international norms.
The results of this study reflect that the main sources
of information and training are schools, followed by universities,
and finally, the media (i.e., television and the
internet). Studies conducted in nearby countries, such as
Saudi Arabia, indicate that the most common sources of
information on CPR are television and movies [17]. Although
schools and universities are of great importance
to increase information, the media can reach a broader
population and can also cover a large number of people
to raise more awareness. Inclusion of such simple training
programs by trained personnel could have positive
outcomes for public health and communities.
Participants in this study who received training were
knowledgeable regarding the evaluation of the three
signs of consciousness. Regarding respiratory evaluation,
the number of participants who received training and
did not know that “no steam coming up in front of the
mouth of the victim means they have stopped breathing”
is an incorrect answer was lower than that among those
who did not receive training. For circulation evaluation,
the number of participants who received CPR training
and knew how to correctly feel the pulse in the vessels
of the neck was higher than the number with this knowledge
who did not receive training. These results highlight
the importance of training programs and ensuring
that necessary information is both fully understood and
practiced by trainees.
The response rates for the signs of cardiac arrest
showed that the highest rates were for chest pain, respiratory
standstill, loss of consciousness and difficulty
breathing. Similar data were reported in a study conducted
in Turkey, in which respondents indicated that
the highest rates were for signs of cardiac arrest (60.7%),
followed by 49.3% who answered cessation of circulation,
and finally cessation of breathing (40.7%) [1].
Therefore, chest pain and circulation are given first priority
by lay people, who then look for respiration. This is
in line with the new guidelines of the AHA (to perform
chest compression, then attend to breathing, and finally
circulation).
In this study, the participants who witnessed sudden cardiac
arrest comprised 23.3% of the total sample. Among
those, nearly half stated that they called the ambulance,
and the rest with equal or lower percentages responded
that they called for help, gave chest compression, and gave
mouth-to-mouth breathing. The lowest responses were for
chest compression and mouth-to-mouth breathing and
‘just watched and left’. These results reflect the nature of
Jordanian culture and how people are willing to help each
other, especially during emergency situations. However, it
is culturally insensitive to give mouth-to-mouth breathing,
especially between men and women.
In this study, the numbers of participants who received
training and mentioned that they performed chest
compression, mouth-to-mouth ventilation, and both
massage and ventilation were greater than those who
performed these actions and did not receive training.
The majority of the respondents (74.3%) indicated that
they can give both chest compression and ventilation.
The number of participants who received training about
CPR and knew the correct answers regarding the meaning
of chest compression, heart rate, and the massage/
ventilation ratio was higher than the number who knew
the correct answers and did not receive training. Training
sessions were beyond the scope of the current study;
we merely asked participants if they had attended
training or not. However, such information forms the
basics of any CPR training course, even if it is learned
through the media. These results indicate the importance
of training programs, which empower people to
provide help in emergency situations.
A high percentage of participants in this study showed
no hesitation to provide CPR to their family members;
the next highest percentage was to friends and finally, to
neighbors. Concerns regarding CPR applications for
family and strangers were classified in priority order. For
family members, the highest percentage of concern was
making mistakes (61.7%), and the lowest was punishment
because of legal reasons (15%). Concerns regarding
performing CPR on strangers were classified in priority
order from making a mistake, to concern of punishment
because of legal reasons (59%), with the least concern
about causing a bone fracture (18.3%). The lowest priority
concern for performing CPR to both family and
strangers was contamination by blood or vomit. This indicates
that life-saving attempts for family members and
strangers will be given high priority, with apprehension
about making mistakes being the most important concern.
These results indicate the high necessity of education
and training programs for the community.
Chair et al. [15] mentioned that people with full-time
jobs and higher levels of education were more likely to
have received CPR training. Respondents stating they
had received CPR training were more willing to try it if
needed at home (odds ratio = 3.3; 95% confidence interval,
2.4–4.6; P < 0.001), and on strangers in the street
(4.3; 3.1–6.1; P < 0.001) in case of emergencies. Overall,
the CPR knowledge of the respondents was low (median
= 1, out of 8). More than 90% of the sample in this study
was employed, and more than half of the sample also
had diplomas and higher degrees of education. These
characteristics support the idea of a greater willingness
to conduct CPR among educated and employed people.
In their study, Chen et al. [19] described the concerns
regarding CPR applications for family members and
strangers. The questionnaire included individual information,
current status of bystander CPR training, and
individuals’ willingness and attitudes towards performing
CPR. The authors found that 25.6% of lay people received
CPR training, the majority (98.6%) of whom
would perform CPR on their family members, but fewer
(76.3%) were willing to perform it on strangers. Most respondents
(53.2%) were worried about legal issues.
When laws were implemented to protect bystanders
who give first aid, the number of laypersons who were
not willing to perform CPR on strangers dropped from
23.7 to 2.4%. Although the number of people in China
who knew CPR was increasing over time, CPR training
was still much less common than in many developed
countries. The barriers as mentioned by the authors
were that laypersons were not well trained, and they
feared being prosecuted for unsuccessful CPR. The authors
also recommended a need for more accredited
CPR training courses, and they noted that laws should
be passed to protect bystanders who provide assistance.
There are some centers providing CPR training for lay
persons in different areas in Jordan, including in the
north, middle, and south. However, to date, there is no
legislation on the part of the Ministry of Health and the
Ministry of Interior to protect laypersons in case they
perform CPR on victims and mistakes occur. For this
reason, some people will hesitate to provide CPR if the
victim is not one of their family members. The relevant
government bodies should be informed about such results
in order to improve outcomes and decrease mortality
and morbidity after cardiac arrest, especially OHCA.
Conclusion and recommendations
The results of this study indicate the importance of continuing
to train the population in CPR knowledge and
skills; specifically, CPR education programs and evaluations
of their effectiveness are needed. The media can
play a role in increasing the knowledge of the public,
hence the authors recommend promoting the training
programs in the media, utilizing cheap and effective
technologies such as social media to reach the general
population, as well as providing more formal instruction
through schools and universities. In addition, national
bylaws should protect those who provide assistance to
people with heart failure in such cases.
Limitations
The major limitation of this study was the use of a
cross-sectional design with a convenience sampling
method. Moreover, we used the 2010 AHA criteria and
did not ask about the timing for when participants received
their training.