The World Health Organization (WHO) emphasizes the
importance of emergency medical services (EMS) systems
which are usually the first point of contact with healthcare
systems for acute conditions like injuries, chest pain or
acute presentation of chronic conditions like diabetic coma
in diabetic patients [1]. Many high-income countries
(HICs) have well-developed pre-hospital emergency systems
which employ modern patient monitoring equipment
and have paramedical staff trained to provide pre-hospital
care in accordance with the patient’s condition [2]. Since
numerous acute conditions such as chest pain and hemorrhage
are time-sensitive, established pre-hospital services
play a crucial role in overall patient outcomes [3].
The situation is different in many low-and middleincome
countries (LMICs) where there is lack of ambulance
services and many patients present to acute healthcare
facilities on their own. It is important to note that
more than one-third of all deaths in LMICs are preventable
with early intervention during the pre-hospital phase
[4]. Up to 90% of injury-related mortality occurs in
LMICs and in the presence of an adequate EMS system;
this burden can be reduced by 45% [1,5]. However, due
to lack of funding and trained personnel, emergency services
in LMICs are a low priority and are often limited to
providing basic transportation facilities without efficient
triage services. There is also a general lack of public trust
in ambulance services in LMICs [6]. The lack of prehospital
care services in Pakistan has been a cause of
great concern over the years [4,6-9].
The aim of this study was to determine the frequency
of ambulance use by patients coming to the major emergency
departments (EDs) of Pakistan. It will also compare
the characteristics of patients coming by ambulances and
those coming by other modes of transportation, such as
public and private vehicles or walk-in patients to the EDs.
Methods
Study setting
The Pakistan National Emergency Departments Surveillance
(Pak-NEDS) was a pilot active surveillance conducted
in seven major tertiary care emergency
departments in six main cities of Pakistan between
November 2010 and March 2011. The EDs included the
Aga Khan University (Karachi), Jinnah Post-Graduate
Medical Center (Karachi), Mayo Hospital (Lahore),
Sandeman Provincial Hospital (Quetta), Lady Reading
Hospital (Peshawar), Benazir Bhutto Hospital (Rawalpindi),
and Shifa International Hospital (Islamabad). Five
of the participating hospitals were public hospitals and
two were private hospitals. All the hospitals are tertiary
care teaching hospitals and one is a referral center. Ethical
approval was obtained from all participating hospitals.
There are several ambulance services operating in various
regions of the country which include philanthropic
organizations such as the Edhi Foundation (nationwide),
and Chippa Welfare Association (Karachi) [10,11]. The
Aman Foundation is another non-profit organization in
Karachi which deals with healthcare, education and
skills, and nutrition for underprivileged [12]. A few EMS
services arose due to efforts of provincial governments
such as Rescue 1122 [13]. However, these ambulance
services currently work in Pakistan at the local level and
are not part of an integrated emergency care system.
Pak-NEDS did not collect data from any of the above
mentioned ambulance services.
Study procedure
Data collectors were specifically hired and trained for
Pak-NEDS. They worked in three shifts providing 24/7
coverage. Data was collected from patients or the next
of kin and ED records. A one-page standardized tool
was developed based on an ambulatory care survey tool
developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
USA and on previous surveillance work done in
Pakistan [14,15]. The tool gathered information related
to patient demographics, presenting complaints, treatment
and management provided in the ED, provisional
diagnosis and disposition from the ED. For this study,
we looked at the mode of arrival to the ED of all the
patients enrolled in Pak-NEDS. The mode of ED arrival
was categorized into two groups; ambulance and nonambulance.
Non-ambulance group comprised of patients
who presented to the ED through other means of transport
like private vehicle.
Data management
Data was entered at AKU using EpiInfo version 3.3.2, and
SPSS version 19 was used for analysis [16,17]. For the
purpose of analysis, six age categories were developed;
less than 5 years, 5-12 years, 13-18 years, 19-25 years,
26-45 years, and more than 45 years. Pak-NEDS recorded
up to three presenting complaints. In this analysis, presenting
complaint is used as a multiple response variable.
All presenting complaints were categorized into two
major categories, injuries and non-injury.
Injuries included unintentional and intentional injuries.
The types of injuries recorded were falls, burns, drowning,
poisoning, road traffic injuries and firearm injuries.
Non-injury included general presenting complaints like
fever, fatigue, weakness, swelling and complaints based
on the body organ involved; for example, chest pain was
grouped under cardiovascular system, rectal bleeding as
part of gastrointestinal system. Other systems in this
category were respiratory, central nervous system, musculoskeletal,
head and neck, and uro-gynecology. Cities
were grouped together by geographical location of
participating hospitals: Aga Khan University and Jinnah
Post-graduate Medical Center in Karachi; Mayo Hospital
in Lahore; Benazir Bhutto Hospital and Shifa International
Hospital in Rawalpindi/Islamabad; Lady Reading
Hospital in Peshawar; and Sandeman Provincial Hospital
in Quetta.
Data analysis
Comparison of patient factors was done between ambulance
and non-ambulance groups using Pearson’s Chisquared
test for categorical variables and independent
sample t-test for continuous variables with level of significance
set at 0.05. We also looked at the use of
ambulance as an outcome variable. Univariate and multivariate
logistic regression was carried out to look at
the factors associated with ambulance use. A multivariate
model was developed with independent variables
including gender, age group, city, hospital type, presenting
complaint and disposition.
Results
Out of 274,436 patients enrolled into Pak-NEDS, the
mode of arrival to the ED was documented for 94.9%
(n = 260,378). Out of these, 4.1% (n = 10,546) were
brought to the ED via ambulances; the rest of the
patients (n = 249,832, 95.9%) were brought by means
The adjusted odds of admission among patients in the
ambulance group were 3.0 times higher compared to
patients in the non-ambulance group (p-value < 0.001).
Patients brought to the ED by ambulance were 7.3 times
more likely to die in the ED than non-ambulance patients,
after adjusting for gender, age groups, cities, hospital type
and presenting complaint group (p-value < 0.001).
Discussion
This study shows that only 4.1% of the patients coming
to the major EDs in Pakistan use ambulance services.
There are no global standards for appropriate utilization
rate for ambulances. Many factors are likely to play a
significant role in the utilization rate including availability
of ambulances, cost of the service, differences in the
disease burden and severity of illnesses, age distribution
of population, geographic spread and availability of
alternate methods of seeking care. Nevertheless, the utilization
rate from Pakistan is lower then reported from
high income countries which have reported percentage
of ambulance use between 14.2% and 30% for patients
coming to the emergency department [18-20]. An even
higher percentage of 67.3% was reported in a recent
study from India [21]. A study done over 15 years ago
in the city of Karachi, Pakistan reported ambulance use
of 16%, though that study only looked at patients
admitted to the hospital where the acuity, and therefore
ambulance utilization, was expected to be higher than
all who came to the emergency department [22]. This
low use of ambulance in Pakistan has previously been
attributed to poorly equipped transportation facilities,
lack of proficient staff, and lack of pre-hospital care, all
of which breed a lack of trust in the EMS system [4].
There is lack of trust in EMS by the public which augments
uncertainty about the adequacy of EMS in Pakistan
to provide pre-hospital care [6]. Pak-NEDS shows
that patients coming to the ED were likely to be elderly
patients, those with injuries especially head injuries, and
those who were likely to die in the ED. We did not find
significant association between ambulance use and gender
after controlling for other variables in the model.
This study shows that patients more than 45 years of age
are more likely to come to ED via ambulance and most of
the older patients present due to non-injury complaints.
This is consistent with previous studies on ambulance utilization
[23-25]. This could be because elderly patients
have chronic diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular disease
and acute deterioration of a chronic illness, which results
in frequent ED visits. Also due to functional restraints, it is
likely that ambulances are used to transport older patients
to a nearby health facility for acute care [23]. In comparison
to older patients, injury was the common reason for
transporting younger patients to ED via ambulance. This
might be due to quick response of ambulances in urban
centers to such incidents.
A higher proportion of patients brought into the ED via
ambulances died in the ED or were admitted to the hospital,
compared to those who used other modes of transportation
to the ED. Most of the deaths in the ambulance
group were seen in patients presenting with chest pain or
shortness of breath. This indicates the need for the establishment
of pre-hospital emergency services, which
encompass the provision of patient monitoring devices,
basic and advanced life support, and trained paramedics
in accordance with the availability of resources [1].
A study done in Canada reported that older patients with
myocardial infarction who used ambulances were sicker
when compared with their counterparts who did not use
ambulances to come to the hospital [26]. Triage and prehospital
care by paramedic staff remains an important
constituent of emergency care. This is especially true for
patients with time-sensitive conditions like myocardial
infarction, stroke (hemorrhage/ischemia), sepsis, cardiopulmonary
arrest and trauma, where prompt identification
and treatment results in markedly improved patient
survival and outcomes [27-31].
Limitations
There are several limitations in this analysis. There was
missing data in Pak-NEDS related to ambulance use. As a
result, logistic regression was done on 56% of the patient
for whom data related to all variables was available. The
data lacked in information related to type of ambulance
(transport vehicle, basic life support or advance life support
vehicle) used for transportation of the patient, ambulance
response time, transportation time and interventions
done during the pre-hospital phase, if any, to the patients
who came through ambulances. Our study recorded information
related to different types of presenting complaints;
for example, chest pain, injuries, and stroke. However, it
lacks information on severity of these time-sensitive conditions.
This hampers analysis related to disease severity and
outcome. We did not have follow-up information on the
patients to determine outcomes such as 30-day mortality
or length of hospital stay, which would help determine the
effectiveness of care provided in the emergency department
as well as in the ambulance, if any. This study also
lacks population level estimates related to ambulance use
and hospital catchment area.
Conclusion
This study shows that the use of ambulance services in
Pakistan remains quite low overall. Patients older than
45 years of age and those who have injuries are more
likely to be transported via ambulance. Patients coming
to ED by ambulance have higher likelihood of death in
the ED or admission to the hospital for further care. We
propose that increasing utilization of a pre-hospital
emergency care system integrated with overall
healthcare system could potentially reduce mortality and
improve outcomes. This needs further studies to see
association between ambulance and better outcome.