Background
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a complex, multifactorial
disease driven by the cumulative and interactive
modular effects of gene–gene, gene–environment and
epigenetic interactions [1]. Notwithstanding intense
investigation in the postgenomic era, the fundamental
biological pathways underlying the multidecade process
of atherosclerotic formation and chronic inflammation
in CAD have not yet been addressed [2]. The need
for unraveling the molecular and genetic underpinnings
of CAD at a deeper level is stressed nowadays, due to
exceptionally high mortality rates of CAD, despite the
expanded arsenal of precision medicine [3]. Therefore,
defining CAD will enable the treatment of patients
on the basis of a better understanding of their clinical
presentations.
The potential for genotype-guided precision medicine
is pointed out by recently emerging evidence from
large scale studies investigating various gene expressions
in patients with CAD. Hitherto, several Genome-Wide
Association Studies (GWAS) have mapped more than
150 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) potently
implicated in CAD pathogenesis [1, 4–7]. These candidate
variants are not yet established though and as Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) becomes the heart of
high-throughput genotyping technologies, several plausible
genetic variants linked with multifactorial traits of
CAD might be discovered, shedding light on the road
of personalized medicine [8]. Meanwhile, significant
therapeutic implications emerge from the integration of
genetic data into predictive risk scores. Specifically, several
studies have been envisaged, in order to correlate
distinct genetic variants with modulation of the risk for
CAD occurrence or progression [9–11]. In those studies
the severity of CAD has been assessed via clinical,
laboratory or imaging parameters, but not with the Synergy
Between Percutaneous Coronary Intervention With
Taxus and Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery (SYNTAX)
score yet [12–15].
The SYNTAX score is the best-known scoring algorithm
to evaluate CAD complexity as a comprehensive
angiographic grading tool taking into consideration
anatomic risk factors [16]. According to the extent of
CAD, this score facilitates the objective guidance of decision-
making between coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) surgery and percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI). Despite, the SYNTAX score relies on invasive
coronary angiography findings and the discovery of risk
stratification algorithms that facilitate non-invasive estimation
of CAD complexity could alter the prognostic
plan in patients with CAD.
The rationale behind this prospective study is to associate,
for the first time, the severity of CAD, as assessed
by the SYNTAX score, with patients’ genomic profile
in a real-world setting of patients undergoing coronary
angiography [16]. The desirable goal is to corroborate
genomic and pharmacogenetic research on CAD exploring
the potential clinical association of 228 selected SNPs
with CAD and individualized response to clopidogrel and
statin therapy, which could disentangle gene expression
alterations in blood of patients with CAD. Ultimately,
the GESS trial aspires to develop a genetic SYNTAX
score that could non-invasively enable the identification
of patients with complex and severe CAD after a bloodbased
gene expression analysis. This study is designed
to contribute to recent calls for implementing genotype-
guided precision medicine decisions, by aiding the
clinicians to achieve improved prediction and therapy
outcomes for CAD patients [3].
Methods
Study design and population
GESS (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03150680) is an
ongoing prospective, single‐center, cohort study enrolling
patients undergoing coronary angiography.
Ethical approval was obtained from the Scientific Committee
of AHEPA University Hospital (reference number
309/11–05-2017). Written informed consent will be
obtained from each patient prior to study enrollment and
the trial procedures conform with the Declaration of Helsinki
[17].
GESS study is designed to enroll 1080 consecutive adult
patients admitted to AHEPA University Hospital of Thessaloniki,
Greece and undergoing coronary angiography
for clinical purposes. Coronary angiography can be performed
either on an emergency basis or scheduled. For
the purpose of this research, patients with history of
prior percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary
artery bypass grafting and patients unwilling to provide
informed consent will be excluded from the study. The
selection criteria of the study are presented in detail in
Table 1.
Pre-specified clinical data, including demographic
characteristics, medical history, medication and clinical
presentation will be recorded for the entire study
population by research study coordinators under standardized
methods. Accordingly, study participants will
be classified into 3 main subsets, based on their clinical
presentation: 1. patients undergoing preoperative coronary
angiography without symptoms suggestive of CAD,
2. patients with chronic coronary syndrome, and iii.
patients with acute coronary syndrome.
Moreover, all enrolled patients will undergo selective
coronary angiography, which will be performed through
radial or femoral artery approach in the cardiac catheterization
laboratory of the hospital. Images obtained will be
assessed by experienced interventionalists (GS1, GS2),
blinded to the study protocol, who will be in charge of
calculating the SYNTAX scores. According to their SYNTAX
score, patients will be categorized into the following
groups: i. low SYNTAX score (0–22) group, ii. intermediate
SYNTAX score (23–32) group, and iii. high SYNTAX
score (> 32) group [16].
Additionally, peripheral blood samples will be drawn
on the enrollment day- prior to coronary angiography—
for genomic profiling. The vials of drawn blood will be
aliquoted and stored as whole blood, plasma, serum, and
buffy coat.
The first participant of the study was enrolled in February
2019 and 783 patients have been recruited through
November 2020. Completion of patient enrollment is
expected until June 2021.
Telephone follow-up will be systematically carried
out for every study subject at 1 year after enrollment,
in order to document the incidence of CAD symptoms,
major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events
(MACCE-need for coronary revascularization, myocardial
infarction, stroke/ transient ischemic attack or
all-cause mortality) and bleeding complications (Bleeding
Academic Research Consortium classification score
[18]).
Genotyping and bioinformatic analysis
Peripheral whole blood will be collected and labeled with
a unique barcode to ensure anonymization and unbiased
assessment. High quality genomic DNA will be extracted
using commercial kits (Qiagen) and will be quantified
by spectrophotometry using Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo
Fisher). Ultrasensitive targeted NGS of extracted DNA
(40 ng) will be performed using custom QIAseq Targeted
DNA Panel (Qiagen) containing primers for the enrichment
of the 228 SNPs of interest. The produced molecularly
barcoded libraries will be quantified by Qubit 3
Fluorometer (Invitrogen) and real time PCR (QIAseq
Library Quant Assay kit). Sequencing will be performed
by sequencing by synthesis (SBS) chemistry on MiniSeq
Platform of Illumina using the MiniSeq Mid Output Kit
(300-cycles). The generated NGS data (in fastq format)
will be analyzed with the CLC Genomics Workbench
(Qiagen) bioinformatics software and the genotype of
each SNP will be determined.
Biostatistics and disease ontology enrichment analysis
We sought to identify genes whose coding sequence
and/or expression levels are affected by the selected 228
SNPs studied here. To this end, data mining was performed
from dbSNP database using reutils [19, 20]. In
addition, further information on genes, associated with
the selected SNPs through GWAS, were retrieved from
HumanMine database [21] using InterMineR [22]. Our
approach led to the formation of a list with 127 genes
that have been associated with the selected SNPs. Next,
enrichment analysis was performed to identify statistically
significant disease terms, whose involved genes
are overrepresented in our gene list. Enrichment analysis,
with Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p-value < 0.001,
was performed using clusterProfiler [23] and DOSE [24]
(Figs. 1 and 2).
Statistical considerations
Sample size estimation and endpoints of the study
The primary endpoint of the study is to discover
potential correlations of the SYNTAX score with
patients’ genomic profile and create a blood-based
gene expression test (genetic SYNTAX score) which
could accurately identify patients at high risk for CAD
of moderate or high severity. For the estimation of the
sample size the G*Power [25, 26] and Epi Info (Stat-
Calc) [27] software tools were used. To this regard,
we made use of the exact sampling distribution of the
squared multiple correlation coefficient implemented
in G*Power assuming 250 predictors, a two-tailed test,
power of 0.9, significance level of 0.05, ρ2 = 0.13 and a
ratio of unexposed to exposed equal to 2 (based on a
pilot study on 100 patients). The initial sample size was
finally increased by 10% because of the possibility that
some patients might be lost to follow-up. Hence, we
aim for a total sample of 1080 patients.
Secondary endpoints of the study are the development
of a panel of genetic markers that, in conjunction with
clinical parameters, could strongly predict the occurrence
of MACCE or any bleeding events during follow
up.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive analysis will be used to summarize the data.
Specifically, results will contain statistics as mean, standard
deviation, median, minimum and maximum values,
whereas for categorical variables the frequency distribution
tables with number of cases and percentage distribution
will be presented. Statistical hypothesis testing
procedures (Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk)
will be conducted for continuous variables to check,
whether they satisfy the normality assumption. Given
the fact that the response variable (SYNTAX score) presents
a heavily-skewed and non-normal distribution with
an excess number of zeros, non-parametric statistical
hypothesis tests will be used for the investigation of the
main effects of categorical variables on the population
median values of the response variable. More specifically,
the Mann–Whitney and Kruskal–Wallis followed by pairwise
comparisons through Mann–Whitney test using
Bonferroni’s correction will be conducted. The investigation
of the relationship between SYNTAX score and the
set of continuous variables will be performed using the
non-parametric Spearman’s correlation coefficient.
The model building process will be based on Hurdle
Models that are a class of modeling techniques able
to handle excess zeros and overdispersion of SYNTAX
score variable. Describing briefly, the Hurdle Model has
two parts: (i) a zero hurdle part which models the rightcensored
outcome SYNTAX score variable indicating
patients with a zero-count ( Y = 0 ) or patients with a positive
count ( Y = 1 ), where all values larger than zero are
censored (i.e. fixed at one) and (ii) a truncated count part
modeling the total number of SYNTAX score for patients
presenting a non-zero count ( Y > 0 ). Regarding the identification
of the best set of predictors for each part of
the model, a feature selection search strategy based on
Akaike Information Criterion will be utilized, in which
the set of predictors are included in the full model and at
each step of the iterative process, a predictor is dropped
out. To assess the fitting performance of the final model,
well-known evaluation metrics for regression (e.g. mean
and median squared, absolute and percentage errors) and
classification tasks (accuracy, F-measure, G-mean, precision
and recall) will be used, whereas for the evaluation
of the prediction performance of the model, data-generating
schemas (i.e. holdout and k-fold cross-validation)
that split the available dataset into training and test sets
will be performed. In addition, graphical evaluation of
model’s performance will be assessed through appropriate
visualization methods, such as Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) and Precision-Recall curves for
the zero-hurdle part and Regression Error Characteristic
(REC) curves for the truncated count part.
Survival analysis methods will be also performed for
examining patients at follow-up period. More specifically,
the non-parametric Kaplan–Meier analysis will be conducted
for graphically evaluating the survival function of
patients, while log-rank tests will be conducted for investigating
effects of different factors on survival distribution.
Finally, Cox Regression analysis will be performed
to build a multivariate regression model between several
predictors and the survival time of patients.. Statistical
analysis will be performed via the R statistical programming
language. In all tests a difference will be considered
as statistically significant when p-value (significance) will
be less than 0.05, while all conducted tests will be twotailed
(non-directional).
Discussion
GESS is a prospective ongoing study designed to determine
the impact of the presence of several genetic variants
on CAD severity. The aim of this study is to further
understand the pathogenesis of CAD by utilizing 3 fundamental
pillars: (1) invasive coronary angiography and
standardized SYNTAX score calculation; (2) revolutionary
NGS technologies; and (3) systems biology-based
bioinformatics. To our knowledge, hitherto, this is the
first study designed to establish a prognostic blood assay
for the association of the presence of a large number of
SNPs with CAD severity, as evaluated via the SYNTAX
score.
Endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress and inflammation,
which are the products of a multifactorial interplay
between inherited and environmental risk factors, are
established determinants of the atherosclerotic burden
and CAD prognosis [4, 28]. Large GWAS have been conducted
in order to locate CAD-associated variants (SNPs)
and decipher the underlying genetic fundament of the
disease [6, 29–35]. To date, a great number of susceptible
multi-SNP loci have been identified with some of them
reaching the stringent level of significance [6, 32, 34, 36,
37]. More specifically, more than 150 SNPs, in over 100
candidate genes have been annotated as CAD-relevant
with specific loci, such as 9p21.3, 6q25.1, 2q36.3, showing
the strongest association with disease phenotypic
variance [5, 8, 38, 39]. The CARDIoGRAMplusC4D Consortium
has carried out a meta-analysis in a total sample
size of over 190.000 patients and demonstrated a highly
significant correlation of 36 SNPs with CAD [6]. Furthermore,
Liu et al. reported that the most studied multi-loci
genes are those of angiotensin I converting enzyme, lipid
and lipoprotein metabolism [1]. Hence, individual GWAS
and meta-analyses have confirmed the speculated deterministic
role of genetic predisposition in occurrence,
progression of atherosclerosis and coronary plaque calcification,
with multiple converging pathways, including
cardiac muscle contraction, glycerolipid metabolism, and
glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis [5, 32, 37, 40].
Nevertheless, GWAS have only provided populationattributable
risk data and could not be transferred to an
individual with CAD. During the last decade, the advent
of NGS has enabled researchers to perform parallel analyses
of hundreds of genes in an unbiased approach [8].
This is attracting widespread attention enhancing CAD
translational study and aiding to close the gap between
genotype and phenotype. In 2013 the CARDIoGRAMplusC4D
Consortium reported that targeted sequencing
with NGS can discover rare variants with high sensitivity,
rendering NGS an essential genetics approach in the
post-GWA study era [38].
Apart from genetic mapping, GWAS and NGS studies
have also explored the clinical utility of genetic biomarkers
for the creation of genetic risk scores [10, 11, 36,
41]. These algorithms would ideally predict the severity
of CAD and the subsequent adverse outcomes aiming to
identify patients with potential benefit from preventive
care. For their development, researchers have examined
the prognostic value of blood-based genetic panels, in
comparison with imaging (myocardial perfusion imaging
or coronary computed tomography angiography),
angiographic (visual or quantitative assessment of coronary
artery stenosis or Gensini) or clinical (GRACE) predictive
scores [12, 15, 42–44]. COMPASS and PREDICT
trials created 2 gene-expression scores outperforming
clinical factors and non-invasive imaging in discriminating
patients with > 50% stenosis [45, 46]. Despite, Labos
et al. reported that the addition of their developed polygenic
risk score to the GRACE risk score could not significantly
improve risk classification in acute coronary
syndrome admissions [42]. Moreover, weighted multilocus
risk scores have been created to predict recurrent
vascular events or statin efficacy and atherosclerotic burden
alterations in CAD populations [10, 47–49]. Nevertheless,
limited data exist about the utility of genetic risk
scores for the prediction of MACCE [11–13, 41].
To the best of our knowledge, GESS is the first study
yet to investigate the association of such a large number
of candidate SNPs (228) with SYNTAX-score-based
CAD complexity. To this end, GESS emerges as a part of
a research project aspiring to complement traditional risk
factor assessment with panels of significant metabolomic
and genomic biomarkers [50, 51]. The co-evaluation of
novel risk factors and the complexity of CAD could significantly
expand the concept of cardiovascular precision
medicine.
Admittedly, the GESS trial is subject to some limitations
that merit discussion. First, the single-center character
of the study and the enrollment of patients from a
Greek-based population may limit the generalizability of
our findings, even if our sample will represent a broad
spectrum of patients with CAD. Furthermore, patients of
different age groups will comprise the study population,
which might affect the rate of genetic influence in CAD
severity, since the genetic component of variability is
conceivably more common among younger individuals.
Future studies should explore the combination of proposed
genetic risk scores from multi-ethnic populations
with panels of metabolomics, transcriptomics or proteomics,
to achieve the desirable transition from “omics”
to “panomics” [44]. Therefore, we could define CAD
at the deepest level and clinical cardiologists would be
guided in decision-making via an absolutely personalized
approach.
Conclusion
In conclusion, genotyping of patients presenting with
CAD symptoms could potentially disentangle genetic
risk variants implicated in CAD progression. The development
of a panel with genetic markers combined
with clinical and angiographic characteristics might
contribute to implementing accurate risk stratification
algorithms in CAD populations, with the potential to
predict the emergence of CAD as well as the hazard
for subsequent adverse events and modify therapeutic
strategies. Besides that, the design of the study creates
an interdisciplinary infrastructure that allows the
clinical translation of molecular knowledge to guide
decisions for individual and/or CAD patient groups.
Importantly, such direction contributes to the establishment
and application of processes that successfully
implement genomics knowledge in the clinical setting
within the concept of pharmacogenomics and precision
medicine.