Food insecurity, defined as insufficient access to enough
food for an active, healthy life [1], is a common problem
for individuals with diabetes mellitus [2–5]. Approximately
one in five individuals with diabetes report food
insecurity, and this prevalence rises among those with
hemoglobin A1c > 9.0%, a common threshold indicating
poor glycemic control [4]. Food insecurity represents an
important barrier to diabetes management as dietary adherence
is central to diabetes care [6]. Food insecurity is
associated with higher risk for diabetes complications,
such as coronary heart disease and chronic kidney disease
[7, 8]. Perhaps for these reasons, food insecurity is
associated with substantially higher healthcare use and
costs in individuals with diabetes [9, 10].
Food insecurity has been viewed as a prominent intervention
target in the clinical care of diabetes [11, 12],
and evidence supporting strategies that can successfully
reduce food insecurity and improve health outcomes
continues to grow [11]. Among these promising strategies
is medically-tailored meal delivery (MTM): home
delivery of fully prepared meals specifically tailored to
the medical needs of the individual — including not only
diabetes but other comorbidities, such as congestive
heart failure or end-stage renal disease [13, 14]. Compared
with other food insecurity interventions, such as
referrals to community human services resources or
provision of a healthy ‘box’ of ingredients at a food pantry,
MTM offers additional potential benefits. By delivering
fully prepared meals, MTM addresses barriers such
as lack of transportation, and lack of time and/or knowledge
needed to prepare meals that adhere to complex
diets.
Emerging research shows that MTM can lead to improved
dietary quality [14, 15], and is associated with
improved healthcare use and cost [13]. However, as use
of these programs in the healthcare context is new,
much remains to be learned regarding how best to
design the programs to maximize their clinical benefit.
In this study, we used a qualitative research approach
to query participants in a randomized clinical trial regarding
their experience with MTM. Our goal was to
understand elements of the program that worked well,
and elements that could be improved, in order to foster
greater clinical benefit and facilitate more widespread
implementation.
Methods
Data source and study sample
Participants in this study were drawn from the Community
Servings: Food as Medicine randomized crossover
clinical trial (NCT02426138). The trial has been previously
described in detail [15]. In brief, this was a 24-
week randomized crossover trial that evaluated the effect
of receiving 12 weeks of home delivered medicallytailored
meals on dietary quality, conducted from June
2015 to July 2017. Eligible participants were adults (age >
18 years) diagnosed with type 2 diabetes who had a
hemoglobin A1c > 8.0% in the last year and reported
food insecurity as assessed by the 2-item ‘hunger vital
sign’ (n = 42) [15]. The ‘hunger vital sign’ is a validated
2-item indicator of food insecurity status, which asks an
individual whether “Within the past 12 months [they]
worried whether [their] food would run out before [they]
got money to buy more” and whether “within the past
12 months the food [they] bought just didn’t last and
[they] didn’t have money to get more.” [16, 17] Meals
were prepared from scratch at Community Servings
(https://www.servings.org/), a not-for-profit,
community-based, medically-tailored meal delivery
organization. Frozen and/or refrigerated fully-prepared
meals were delivered weekly by delivery truck, with their
composition determined by a registered dietician nutritionist
to be appropriate for the medical needs of the individual.
Ten meals, representing approximately half of
the weekly food intake of the participant, were provided
each week as single delivery. An example of a day’s
worth of meals is provided as Additional file 1: Table S1.
Because this trial was designed to test the effect of meal
receipt itself on dietary quality, nutritional education
was not provided, though it is a component of typical
MTM programs outside of clinical trials. After completing
the 12 weeks of medically-tailored meals (MTM)
provided in the trial, individuals were invited to participate
in a qualitative telephone interview to discuss their
experience with receiving MTM. Interviews were
conducted from April to July 2017.
The study protocol was approved by the Human
Research Committee at Partners HealthCare. Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants for
trial participation, and verbal consent for participation in
the qualitative telephone interview was obtained
separately.
Availability of data and materials
Because this study relies on transcripts of oral interviews
reflecting personal experiences, and thus cannot be deidentifed
without fundamentally altering the data itself,
data cannot be made publicly available. Data are available
from the authors on reasonable request and with
the agreement of the study institutional review board if
assurances of protection of participant confidentiality
can be made.
Qualitative data collection and analysis
Our goal was to conduct structured in-depth interviews
with a sufficient number of trial participants to receive
adequate feedback regarding their experience with an
MTM intervention. We first developed an interview
guide (Additional file 1: Table S2) using an iterative
process that incorporated the perspectives of study team
members and participants, and drew from past work in
this patient population [18]. The interview guide was designed
to assess participants’ experience and satisfaction
with the program and to identify areas of improvement.
We then conducted semi-structured telephone interviews
with study participants, using purposeful selection
to enhance age, gender, and racial/ethnic diversity of
those interviewed. We continued contacting participants
until content saturation was reached. We anticipated
content saturation would be reached after interviewing
approximately 1/3 to 1/2 of intervention participants
[19]. As described below, coding of interviews occurred
during data collection, to determine whether new codes
were being added. As we approached 20 interviews, the
number of new codes added per interview decreased
substantially, leading us to conclude content saturation
had been reached. The interviews queried the participants
about the meals received and their perceptions of
the influence of the meals on diabetes management. We
sought suggestions regarding how the meals could be
improved and alternative resources that may assist with
diabetes management for individuals with diabetes and
food insecurity. Interviews lasted approximately 20 min
(range: 15 to 40 min). The interviewer (NS) used reflective
probes to motivate participants to elaborate on their
comments. Interviews were audio-recorded with permission
from participants, and recordings were transcribed
verbatim. We provided participants with a $20 store gift
card for their participation.
Quantitative data
In addition to collecting qualitative data, we extracted
sociodemographic and clinical information from the trial
baseline examination and questionnaire to better describe
the study sample. Details of these assessment procedure
have been previously described [15]. We
measured height, weight, and blood pressure using calibrated
instruments and a standardized measurement
technique; we also performed phlebotomy for laboratory
assessment of hemoglobin A1c and serum lipid levels.
Data Analysis
Transcripts were coded and analyzed using the content
analysis approach [20]. We used an integrated inductivedeductive
technique to construct our coding framework
[21]. The interview guide and an initial review of the
data were used to create a preliminary list of codes and
sub-codes. This approach allowed us to produce an organized
framework, while giving us the flexibility to include
new codes as they emerged. Each transcript was
coded, using NVivo 11 software (QSR International,
Melbourne, AU), independently by two investigators: the
interviewer and the principal investigator of the study.
The two coders met weekly to ensure consistency and
transparency in the coding. Discrepancies were resolved
through reflection and dialogue until consensus was
reached. Relevant quotations were selected to illustrate
key points within each theme.
Results
Participant characteristics
We reached content saturation after interviewing twenty
individuals from the Community Servings: Food as
Medicine randomized crossover clinical trial
(NCT02426138). This represented approximately half of
the total number of trial participants. The mean age of
the included individuals was 58 (SD: 13) years, and
60.0% were women (Table 1). Twenty percent of the
participants were non-Hispanic black, and 15.0% were
Hispanic. The mean of the participants’ income,
expressed as a percentage of the federal poverty guideline
for their year of study enrollment and household
size, was 147% (SD: 54%; as an example, for a single individual
in 2016, the federal poverty guideline income
threshold was $11,880). The mean duration of diabetes
among participants was 13 (SD: 10) years, the mean
baseline hemoglobin A1c was 8.0% (SD: 1.6%) and mean
body mass index was 34.7 kg/m2 (SD: 6.2 kg/m2).
Satisfaction and experience with MTM
Overall, participants reported being satisfied with the
MTM program (illustrative quotes are in the main text
with additional quotes in Table 2). One participant said
“I was glad that I was able to participate, and that the
drivers provided the ease with the meals, and it’s exciting
to get meals weekly. It kind of alleviated the headache of
either buying or cooking. You know? And when you knew
it was a delivery day, you had peace of mind for the rest
of the week [laughter].” Participants noted positive interactions
with the study staff. Regarding meal delivery,
many participants were pleased with the convenience of
home-delivered, medically-tailored meals, though a small
number expressed difficulty coordinating meal deliveries
due to their work schedule. Of note, this program did
not require participants to be homebound. Most participants
were satisfied with the amount of food they
received over the course of the study, stating the food
typically lasted for 5 days, the intended amount of time.
Regarding the amount of food for a given meal, most
participants found the portion size adequate and
reported feeling full after finishing a meal.
Food preferences and cultural appropriateness
Most participants enjoyed receiving medically-tailored
meals. Many of the participants were satisfied with the
quality of the food offered during the intervention, often
describing their meals as “healthy” and “balanced”. One
said, “I thought they were very well prepared. They were
tasty and they were healthy, obviously. And it just helped
to be able to get a full healthy meal all in one, with one
thing. Like, “Here’s everything you need for one healthy
meal [laughter].” Participants also reported being pleased
with the variety of food options that were provided
throughout the intervention.
Participants emphasized certain aspects of the meals
that promoted acceptability. In particular, participants
favored familiarity, selection, and healthfulness of the
meals. Most participants recognized that the meals provided
were appropriate for those with diabetes. However,
some did not, which underscores the importance of nutritional
education in conjunction with MTM. One participant
said, “Some of the meals, I didn’t even know
what they were. Even though it gave you the name, I
didn’t know really what it was. I think it was some of the
grain meals, and it was a meat and it was lamb or something.
There were a few things I didn’t like because I
don’t eat.”
Given the diversity of the study sample, we explored
whether the meals met the cultural needs of the participants.
Most participants reported that meals were acceptable,
but some expressed interest in receiving meals
representative of their country of origin or cultural background.
Overall, participants emphasized the importance
of having food options that reflected their culture and
thus felt familiar and appropriate, with one noting “As I
said I am from Haiti. Sometimes some food they gave me,
I eat them, they’re good for my body. But I think maybe if
they can maybe add a little bit more island food, that
would be much better.” Participants reported that culturally
acceptable meals may facilitate sustaining adherence
to a healthy diet after MTM participation ends, as this
would make it easier to incorporate healthier food into
their usual diet.
Diabetes management and awareness
Participants reflected on how the medically-tailored
meals allowed them access to nutritious meals they
otherwise would not have been able to afford. One
summarized, “I understand that it does better on this
diet. But these are foods that I would not be able to
afford to make for myself, or be physically capable of
making for myself. The question’s a little more complicated
than that. I mean, I understand diabetes and I
understand what foods work and what don’t work.
But being that I have a spinal cord injury and can’t
really cook a lot for myself, and shop a lot for myself,
and don’t have an income, I guess the answer is yes
[the question being asked is if the program helps the
individual adhere to a healthy diet], but it’s not like I
don’t know what foods are appropriate. I can see these
foods and the foods that I’m eating are appropriate
for fighting diabetes and keeping it under control. But
I wasn’t unaware of that, I just needed someone to be
able to help me to do this.”
Furthermore, they described an element of ‘modeling’
such that having experience with diabetesappropriate
food helped them to understand appropriate
portions and food components in a healthy meal.
One participant noted “Well, I really like how much
food they give it to me and they teach me how much
I have to eat every single time I have to eat,” while
another said, “I liked the portion control because there
was everything that you needed on that plate, and it
wasn’t a big portion but it did make you full. And
that’s what I liked best about it. And it taught me
how to go out and buy certain things that were on the
plate so that I could eat separately.”
Participants commented on multiple sources of expense
in their lives, including both diabetes-specific expenses
such as medication and supplies, along with basic
necessities such as housing. Participants reported that
participation in the medically-tailored meal program was
helpful for overcoming these barriers, since they did not
have to allot as much of their own resources to food.
This meant that they could better budget for other elements
of diabetes management, such as affording medications,
or simply other household necessities. “Oh, you
don’t know, honey, you don’t know. I was down. I cut out
a lot. I cut out the channels on the television, the computer
because we’re living on limited income, and they
take a third of it for our rent, a third of it for if you have
half the package with the Internet and everything. So it
did help me. At the end of the month, I could put my
hand in my pocket and have $10. And that’s a good feeling.”
Participants also reported that the support of the
program reinforced their efforts in diabetes selfmanagement,
and may have augmented self-efficacy.
Participants noted several benefits they perceived from
program participation, aside from diabetes management
itself. Participants were relieved of the stress and burden
of following a complicated diet. Also, since they no longer
had to worry about obtaining nutritious food, participants
reported being better able to manage other
responsibilities in their lives, and to allocate their attention
to managing diabetes.
Regarding diabetes management, participants reported
improvements in weight, and in biomarkers of diabetes
control, such as hemoglobin A1c, with one saying, “So
what I’ll tell you was when I started my [A1C] level was
so high. And when I started this program they had to
teach me how much food I have to eat and all the protein
I have to get. And then through the program my
A1C went down. And my PCP, they tell me everything
that was perfect and that she’s so happy, and I’m so
happy right now I know how I have to eat.” Despite these
benefits, some participants continued to struggle with
other obstacles that made it difficult to manage their
diabetes, including physical disability, medication regimens,
and financial pressures not alleviated by MTM.
Attempts to address these additional barriers will likely
be important components of future interventions.
Suggestions for improvement and co-interventions
Participants had several suggestions regarding how to
make MTM programs effective, and how to combine
MTM with other interventions to help manage their diabetes.
Participants strongly emphasized the importance
of having food that reflects their cultural background
and preferences regarding seasoning and palatability. Beyond
meal provision, individuals believed combining
MTM interventions with diabetes self-management education
or lifestyle intervention could have a synergistic
effect on improving diabetes management. Diabetes support
groups and adding physical activity and fitness
components were also suggestions for future interventions.
Finally, assistance with other financial barriers to
diabetes management beyond food – in particular medications
– was noted as an important area for future
programs.
Discussion
Semi-structured interviews of medically-tailored meal
delivery program participants revealed that participants
perceived several positive effects, including improved
quality of life, ability to manage diabetes, and stress
reduction. Participants also had suggestions of improvement
for future interventions. Participants suggested
combining MTM and diabetes self-management education,
or a lifestyle intervention, and providing additional
financial assistance, particularly with medications.
Regarding the meals in particular, participants emphasized
the importance of receiving food that was culturally
appropriate with acceptable taste and familiar
ingredients.
This study is consistent with and expands our knowledge
of medically-tailored meal delivery programs and
corresponding health outcomes. Prior studies have suggested
that meal delivery programs can improve dietary
quality [14, 15], reduce aspects of distress related to living
with illness [14], and improve symptoms [22], largely
based on quantitative assessments of these features. This
study adds a qualitative understanding of the results of
MTM participation. In addition, it offers direction for
those looking to enhance MTM programs by making
them more effective for achieving clinical outcomes.
This study has several implications for future research.
Critically, it highlights the opportunity for joint intervention,
particularly in combining MTM with education
and/or lifestyle interventions. These types of joint interventions
may offer a more comprehensive package to
those individuals living with diabetes and food insecurity.
The skills learned in the lifestyle component of the
intervention could potentially enhance the sustainability
of intervention effects after conclusion of meal delivery.
The study also highlights substantial financial barriers
those with food insecurity face, even apart from access
to food. Addressing the multitude of health-related social
needs faced by these individuals offers additional avenues
to improve health and diabetes outcomes. Two
key areas for investigation that were not discussed by
participants include social isolation and the duration of
intervention. With regard to social isolation, prior work
on non-tailored home meal delivery, which typically includes
daily meal delivery with a home visiting
component, has shown reduced loneliness as a benefit of
the intervention [23, 24]. For MTM programs, which
typically have less frequent (e.g., once weekly) delivery
and may not have an explicit home visiting component,
it is unclear if these same effects occur. The appropriate
duration of intervention for MTM is also unclear. Prior
work from our group has shown that, when limits are
not imposed, participation occurs for approximately 12
months [25]. Whether shorter or longer durations would
be beneficial remains to be determined. Finally, responses
from this study highlight the need to examine
patient-reported outcomes in MTM program evaluation.
Focusing solely on clinical biomarkers or healthcare
utilization likely overlooks important benefits perceived
by the participants. Whether current instruments that
assess patient-reported outcomes are adequate to this
task, or instruments specific to the circumstances of the
patient populations that receive MTM interventions are
required, is an important question for future study.
The results of this study should be interpreted in light
of several limitations. This study only analyzed a portion
of participants in one MTM program, from a circumscribed
geographic area. Though sufficient to reach content
saturation and diverse in racial/ethnic background,
these results nevertheless may not generalize to other
settings. Additionally, while the experience with the
intervention reported in the interviews was strongly
positive, with concerns raised primarily about food preferences,
those who had more negative experiences may
not have wanted to be interviewed. However, we regard
these findings as hypothesis generating for future studies.
A key factor that this study did not fully address was
the effect of MTM on households, as opposed to individuals.
In this study, the majority of participants lived
alone, but because food insecurity is experienced at the
household level, the experience of other household
members is certainly relevant. Effects on the household
may be especially relevant when members are caring for
young children. These limitations were balanced by key
strengths, including in-depth qualitative examination of
a participants in a novel intervention program, and direct
feedback from participants to improve future MTM.
Though further research, particularly longer and
larger-scale randomized trials, is needed to demonstrate
the effectiveness of MTM interventions for health outcomes,
it is also important to consider how widespread
implementation may be achieved if effectiveness is established.
Recent innovations in healthcare financing provide
a pathway to sustainability as a covered health
insurance benefit [26]. Medicaid demonstration projects
in several U.S. states are incorporating MTM into their
programs [26–28], and recent changes to the Medicare
Advantage program also offers opportunities to make
MTM more available to beneficiaries [29].
Conclusions
Medically-tailored meal delivery programs are a promising
approach to managing a difficult clinical problem—
how to improve health in those with both diabetes and
food insecurity. Medically-tailored meal programs offer
the potential to improve not only biomarkers, but also
patient-reported outcomes that are important components
of quality of life. Themes identified in this qualitative
evaluation can be incorporated in future
interventions to help improve health in vulnerable individuals
with diabetes.