Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the most common cause of
secondary hypertension and affects approximately 10% of
patients with essential hypertension [1]. In resistant hypertensive
cohorts, the prevalence of PA is approximately
20% [2]. In addition to its high prevalence, patients with
PA have higher cardiovascular morbidity and mortality
than are reported in patients with essential hypertension
and the same degree of blood pressure (BP) elevation
[3, 4]. Furthermore, specific treatments are available
that can cure hypertension and ameliorate its complications
[5]. Therefore, early and accurate diagnosis is
imperative.
A previous study demonstrated that in China, the
overall prevalence rate of PA in adults with resistant
hypertension was 7.1% [6], which is not the highest
among those previously reported in other ethnic populations
outside China [7, 8]. However, China has a large
general population with a prevalence of hypertension of
29.6% [9]. It is challenging to accurately and quickly
diagnose PA in such a large population. Hence, convenient
diagnostic processes with a high efficiency for identifying
PA are currently urgently needed in China.
Confirmation tests are a crucial step in the process of
obtaining a functional diagnosis of PA. The Endocrine
Society’s guidelines for PA recommend 4 confirmatory
tests, including the fludrocortisone suppression test
(FST), saline infusion test (SIT), captopril challenge test
(CCT), and oral sodium loading. Among these confirmatory
tests [1], the CCT is easy-to-conduct and is considered
to have the same diagnostic efficiency as the other
tests [1]. However, there is no consensus on how the results
of the CCT should be interpreted [1, 10, 11]. The
Endocrine Society guidelines recommend that a post-
CCT suppression percentage < 30% confirms PA, but this
threshold has not been verified in studies [1]. However,
other groups prefer to use the post-CCT aldosterone
renin activity ratio (ARR) or post-CCT plasma aldosterone
concentration (PAC) to diagnose PA [12–15]. Diets
and genetic susceptibilities are different between Chinese
and Western populations [16], and previous studies have
suggested that Chinese and Western individuals perform
differently on the SIT [17]. Therefore, the best approach
to using and cutoff value for the CCT in Chinese
patients have not yet been defined.
The present study aimed to investigate the usefulness
of, optimal interpretation approach to, and cutoff value
for the CCT in diagnosing PA in Chinese patients.
Furthermore, the correlation between estimated sodium
intake and CCT performance was also assessed.
Methods
Subjects
The present study was conducted in the Nanjing Drum
Tower Hospital. All subjects provided informed consent.
We retrieved data from hypertensive patients who were
referred to our unit from January 2011 to December
2016 with a suspicion of PA because of resistant hypertension,
spontaneous or diuretic-induced hypokalemia,
or the finding of an adrenal mass. Potassium-wasting or
-sparing diuretics were discontinued at least 4 weeks
prior to testing. Other drugs, including β-blockers,
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin
receptor blockers, were withdrawn for at least 2
weeks. Patients with severe hypertension were prescribed
α-blockers, and long-acting calcium channel
blockers were prescribed if necessary. Dietary sodium intake
was unrestricted. Patients with hypokalemia were
given adequate oral or intravenous potassium supplements
to maintain serum potassium levels higher than
3.0 mmol/L before the study was begun.
Data representing normal controls were retrieved from
healthy volunteers who participated in the study and had
a BP below 140/90 mmHg and no history of hypertension
and were not receiving any medication. Finally, we
included 110 PA patients, 163 primary hypertension
(PH) patients and 40 normal controls (NC).
Biochemical measurements
Sodium and potassium levels in blood and urine were
measured using fully automated instrumentation. Plasma
renin activity (PRA) was measured by radioimmunoassay
using a commercial kit (Atomic hi-tech Co., LTD,
Beijing, China). The intra- and inter-assay coefficients of
variation (CVs) for PRA were 10 and 15%, respectively.
PAC was measured by radioimmunoassay with commercial
kits (Northern Technical and Biological Institute,
Beijing, China). The intra-assay and inter-assay CVs for
this assay were 5.6 and 6.2%, respectively.
Diagnostic procedures
Blood samples for PRA and PAC were obtained in all
patients between 0800 and 0900 h after overnight fasting
and at least 2 h lying in a supine position and then again
after 2 h of keeping in an upright position. The CCT was
performed in the morning. Patients received 50 mg of
captopril orally after they were upright (sitting, standing,
or walking) for at least 2 h and seated for 5–15 min.
Blood samples were drawn to measure PRA and PA at
time 0 and at 2 h after challenge. The patient remained
seated during this period.
All hypertensive patients underwent an enhanced
adrenal computed tomography (CT) scan with fine cuts
(3 mm). Adrenal vein sampling (AVS) procedures were
performed between 0800 and 1200 h by one radiologist
using the bilateral simultaneous technique without
cosyntropin stimulation. According to previous recommendations,
successful cannulation was considered a selectivity
index (SI) ≥ 2, and lateralization of aldosterone
secretion was defined as a lateralization index (LI) ≥ 2.
PH was defined as a systolic and diastolic BP greater
than 140/90 mmHg according to the established criteria
and excluding secondary hypertension, such as renal
parenchymal hypertension, renovascular hypertension,
endocrine hypertension, aortic coarctation, sleep apnea
syndrome, and drug-induced hypertension.
Identification of PA required all of the following
criteria: (1) ARR ≥ 25 and PAC > 12 ng/dL in addition to
(2) at least one of the following additional endocrine
alterations: a. upright PRA < 1.0 ng/ml/h, b. ARR post-
CCT ≥ 20 or post-CCT PAC suppressed less than 30%.
Identification of aldosterone-producing adenoma
(APA) was based on the following criteria: (1) evidence
of PA as defined above, (2) lateralization of aldosterone
secretion at CT and/or AVS, (3) evidence of adenoma at
CT and/or surgery and/or pathology, and (4) demonstration
of normokalemia and hypertension cure or
improvement or normalization of PAC and PRA at
follow-up after adrenalectomy.
Identification of idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA)
was based on the following criteria: (1) evidence of PA
as defined above, (2) bilateral adrenal lesions on CT scan
and/or aldosterone secretion at AVS, (3) demonstration
of normokalemia and improvement of hypertension after
treatment with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists.
Statistical analysis
Normally distributed data are expressed as the means ±
standard deviation, and abnormally distributed data are
expressed as a median (interquartile intervals 25–75%).
Values between groups were compared by one-way
analysis of variance for parametric data and the
Kruskall-Wallis test for nonparametric data. The diagnostic
accuracy of post-CCT PAC suppression (as a percentage),
PAC and ARR for identifying PA was assessed
with a receiver-operated characteristic (ROC) curve and
the area under the ROC curve (AUC). The best cutoff
and both sensitivity and specificity are provided. A value
of P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
Most statistical analyses were performed using the
software package SPSS 21.0 for Microsoft Windows
(SPSS Inc.). The ROC curve comparison was performed
with MedCalc software 15.2.2 (MedCalc Software).
Results
Clinical characteristics of patients with PA
We recruited 110 consecutive patients with PA. Of these
patients, 82 had an APA, and 28 had IHA. The clinical
characteristics of each group are summarized in Table 1.
There was no significant difference among the groups in
age, sex and BMI. Systolic blood pressure (SBP) and
diastolic blood pressure (DBP) were higher in the PA
and PH groups than in the NC group (P < 0.01). BP was
higher in the APA group than in the PH group (P < 0.01).
Compared to the NC and PH groups, patients in the PA
group had lower serum potassium and higher serum
sodium and urine potassium levels (P < 0.01). PAC was
markedly higher and PRA was significantly lower in the
PA group than in the PH and NC groups (P < 0.01). The
ARR was consequently much higher in the PA group than
in the PH and NC groups (P < 0.05). The prevalence of
hypokalemia was higher in the APA group than in the
IHA group (92.7% vs 75%). Compared to patients with
IHA, those with APA had higher PAC (P < 0.01). No other
significant differences were detected between the APA
and IHA groups.
Captopril challenge test in the normal control and
patient groups
In the NC and PH groups, PRA was higher and PAC
was lower after CCT (P < 0.05). As a result, ARR was
lower post-CCT than pre-CCT (P < 0.01). However, the
mean post-CCT suppression percentage of PAC was only
approximately 9.3%, and only 11.7% of the patients with
PH showed a post-CCT decrease in PAC greater than
30%. In PA patients, the CCT increased PRA and lowered
PAC slightly. After CCT, PAC remained higher and
PRA was lower in the PA group than in the PH and NC
groups (P < 0.01). As a result, ARR remained higher
post-CCT higher in the APA and IHA groups than in
the PH and NC groups (P < 0.01). The post-CCT PAC
was still higher in the APA group than in the IHA group
(P < 0.05). No other differences were detected in the
indexes between the APA and IHA groups after CCT
(Table 2).
Effects of sodium intake on CCT performance
We divided our subjects according to daily urinary
sodium excretion to investigate the effect of sodium
intake on CCT performance. Patients were divided into
Zhu et al. BMC Endocrine Disorders (2019) 19:65 Page 3 of 7
low and high sodium intake groups according to median
daily urinary sodium. There were no significant differences
between the PA and PH patient groups and the
NC group in either pre- or post-CCT PAC, PRA and
ARR values. Neither the PAC suppression percentage
nor the PRA incretion percentage differed among the
PA, PH and NC groups (Table 3).
Diagnostic accuracy of the CCT
According to the Endocrine Society Clinical Practice
Guidelines, a post-CCT PAC suppression percentage less
than 30% is recommended to confirm PA.1 Other association
guidelines recommend the use of post-CCT ARR
or PAC for diagnosing PA [10, 11]. Using ROC curves,
we investigated the efficiency of different diagnostic
criteria in the CCT for diagnosing PA. The AUC of the
PAC suppression percentage was only 0.606, which
suggests that the post-CCT PAC suppression percentage
is of no value for diagnosing PA in our population.
However, when the post-CCT ARR or PAC was used,
the AUC of the CCT increased to 0.994 (95% CI,
0.987–1.000, P < 0.001) and 0.754 (95% CI, 0.699–
0.809, P < 0.001), respectively. The AUC of the post-
CCT ARR was larger than that of the post-CCT PAC
(P < 0.01) (Fig. 1). The optimal cutoff value for the
post-CCT ARR for diagnosing PA was 20, with a
sensitivity and specificity of 94.0% (95% CI, 88.58–
97.39%) and 99.4% (95% CI, 96.63–99.98%), respectively.
The optimal cutoff for the post-CCT PAC was set at 13
ng/dL, which yielded a sensitivity and specificity of 70.1%
(95% CI, 61.64–77.74%) and 72.4% (95% CI, 64.86–79.1%),
respectively. These values were lower than those for the
post-CCT ARR (P < 0.001).
Discussion
Four testing procedures (oral sodium loading, SIT, FST,
and CCT) are recommended by the Endocrine Society’s
2008 and 2016 clinical guidelines for PA confirmation
diagnosis [1, 18]. Until recently, insufficient direct evidence
was available for recommending any one of these
tests over all others. The choice of confirmatory test for
PA diagnosis is commonly determined after considering
cost, patient compliance, routine laboratory tests, and
local expertise, as suggested by the guidelines [1].
Because it is safe, cost-effective, and feasible to perform,
the CCT is widely used for PA diagnosis in China. The
results of the current study reveal that the post-CCT
degree of PAC suppression below 30% recommended by
the Endocrine Society is ineffective in diagnosing PA in
Chinese patients with hypertension. Compared to post-
CCT PAC, post-CCT ARR is a more reliable metric for
diagnosing PA in Chinese populations.
The diagnostic efficiency of the CCT varies substantially
among previous studies [12–15, 19–21]. This may
be because of differences in the doses of captopril (25 or
50 mg), in the time point for blood draws (i.e., 60, 90, or
120 min after captopril administration), in the method
used to interpret the results (i.e., PAC suppression percentage,
post-CCT PAC, or post-CCT ARR), and in the
criteria used to diagnose PA. The Endocrine Society’s
clinical guidelines concluded that CCT has the same
diagnostic efficiency as other confirmation tests and suggested
using the PAC suppression percentage as a clinical
diagnostic approach. PA is diagnosed by CCT when
the PAC is not suppressed by captopril (< 30%) [1, 18].
The results of the present study showed, after CCT, the
PAC decreased by 3.8% in the APA group, 3.4% in the
IHA group, 10.6% in the PH group and 10.2% in the NC
group. These differences in the percentage suppression
of the PAC among the four groups were not significant.
These findings indicate that using a suppression percentage
of 30% as the approach cutoff may cause many
hypertensive patients to be misdiagnosed. Two recently
published studies support our results. Both found that
the percentage suppression in the PAC after CCT was
low in Chinese patients [22, 23]. Given that our study included
patients recruited from areas of China different
from those in the other two studies, our data provide
additional new evidence supporting the conclusion that
using a post-CCT PAC suppression percentage > 30% as
a criteria is not appropriate for diagnosing PA in Chinese
patients.
In addition to our study, other data collected in
China have demonstrated that PAC suppression in
the CCT or SIT is lower in Chinese than in Western
patients [17, 22, 23]. The mechanism underlying this
variation between Chinese and Western populations
has not been clarified. A high salt intake has been
postulated to inhibit renin-angiotensin system activity
and to thereby alter the results of confirmation tests
used to diagnose PA [24–26]. Rossi et al. showed that
the accuracy of the CCT for PA diagnosis was
affected by sodium intake. The optimal aldosterone cutoff
value for PA diagnosis was elevated in individuals with a
higher median daily sodium urinary excretion [15]. The
Chinese diet is high in sodium. Our and other studies
performed in China have demonstrated that 24-h urine
sodium excretion (widely used to estimate daily sodium
consumption) is higher in China than in Western countries
[16, 27]. It is logical to speculate that a long-term
high salt diet might be one of the factors that contributes
to the lower response to the CCT observed in Chinese
subjects. However, when we split our patients according
to the median daily urinary sodium, we found that plasma
aldosterone and PRA values were not different between
low- and high-sodium intake patients. Li et al. confirmed
the same phenomenon in their study [17]. They found no
evidence that the lower response of the renin-angiotensin
system (RAS) to the SIT was related to high-salt intake
[17]. Some possible explanations for the fact that sodium
intake had no effect on RAS activity in our and other
studies include the following: 1) a single 24-h urine sodium
excretion measurement will not accurately reflect
long-term sodium intake levels and may therefore bias the
results; 2) Our and Li’s studies were all conducted in hospitalized
patients. It is difficult to identify differences
among patients consuming almost the same relative highsodium
diet. Further studies with a crossover and
prospective design are needed to evaluate the effects of
low- and high-sodium intake on CCT or SIT performance.
In addition to sodium intake, other factors, such as
genetic susceptibility, that might be related to the observed
discrepancies in performance on PA confirmation
tests between Chinese and Western populations should
also be considered.
The principle the captopril test is based is the suppression
of the serum concentration of aldosterone and an
increase in the level of PRA when angiotensinconverting
enzyme is inhibited in patients without autonomous
aldosterone secretion [1]. Previous studies
and two newly published studies performed in China
have recommended using the post-CCT PAC to confirm
a diagnosis of PA, but they have suggested using various
cutoff values [14, 22, 23]. Other groups prefer post-CCT
ARR for PA diagnosis [12, 13, 15]. The Japan and Taiwan
Endocrine Society recommend the use of post-CCT
PAC or post-CCT ARR for PA diagnosis [10, 11]. We
compared the performance of these two approaches in
our study. The results showed that post-CCT ARR was
superior to post-CCT PAC (AUC = 0.994 vs 0.754),
inconsistent with the study by Song et al., who found
that while post-CCT ARR is useful, post-CCT PAC has a
higher sensitivity than does post-CCT ARR in PA diagnosis
[22]. Our and Song’s studies both detected only a
small amount of post-CCT suppression in PAC but a
dramatic increase in post-CCT PRA or PRC in normal
and PH patients. Therefore, it is reasonable to suspect
that post-CCT ARR is a more sensitive marker than
post-CCT PAC for differentiating PA patients from
normal or PH patients. The possible reasons for the
discrepancy between our results and those of Song et al.
may include the following: 1) Song et al. used FST
instead of a conclusive PA diagnosis as the reference
standard, and this may have biased their data interpretation;
and 2) the plasma renin concentration (PRC) was
measured instead of PRA in Song’s study, and their ARR
was different from ours.
The optimal post-CCT ARR cut-off value is variable
among studies that support the use of post-captopril
ARR as a PA diagnostic tool. The divergence in cutoff
values may be associated with the assays and techniques
used to measure aldosterone and PRA. Consistent with
the guidelines of the Japan Endocrine Society, we found
that the best cutoff for the post-CCT ARR was 20, which
yielded relatively high sensitivity (94.0%) and specificity
(99.4%) in this study. Therefore, we found that the post-
CCT ARR is a reliable marker for diagnosing PA in a
Chinese population.
Conclusion
In summary, in this study, we demonstrate that CCT is
a reliable functional test for confirming a PA diagnosis.
Compared to Western populations, Chinese populations
exhibit lower degrees of post-CCT PAC suppression. As
a result, the post-CCT PAC decline below 30% recommended
as a threshold by the Endocrine Society is
ineffective for diagnosing PA in Chinese hypertension
subjects. Compared to the post-CCT PAC, the post-
CCT ARR is a better approach when used with an optimal
cutoff of 20 for interpreting the results of the CCT
in Chinese patients. Furthermore, there was no relationship
between high salt intake and lower RAS responses
in this study. Further study is needed to identify the
factors underlying this variation between Chinese and
Western populations.