Background
Epistaxis describes different forms of nasal blood loss
and is a common symptom that occurs in medical practice.
The lifetime prevalence of epistaxis is estimated to
be 60%, but as only up to 10% of patients require contact
with the health care system, the prevalence might be
underestimated [1–4].
Cases of epistaxis vary from an easily controlled bleeding
to a highly acute event with life-threatening blood
loss. The majority of epistaxis originates from the area
of the anterior septum [5, 6]. Bleeding in this respect can
be stopped with a few simple methods - in about 65% of
cases, compression of the anterior septum and application
of decongestant nasal drops are sufficient [2].
In Germany, both, general practitioners (GP) and specialists
are involved in the outpatient care of patients.
Patients with epistaxis may be treated by GP, pediatricians
or ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialists, however,
the consultation of an ENT specialist does not always
seem to be necessary [1].
In the inpatient medical setting, care is provided by the
emergency departments and the ENT departments of the
hospital.
Germany has a dual public-private health care system
financed by monthly statutory contributions (statutory
health insurance (SHI)) and top up state cover (private
health insurance), if requested. Germany has one of
the highest healthcare expenditure relative to the gross
domestic product (GDP) in Europe [7]. The contributions
cover most of the costs. Due to the free choice of
physicians (formal gatekeeping is missing), the number of
consultations per patient in Germany is very high in an
international comparison [3, 4]. With the introduction of
the “practice fee” (10 euros per 3 months (quarter) of a
year), which those insured by the SHI had to pay once a
quarter when visiting a physician, an attempt was made
to reduce the high consultation rates.
In addition to cost savings, the practice fee aimed to
strengthen the function of the GP as the first point of
contact. After an initial decline in patient contacts in the
first years after its introduction in 2004, no sustainable
effect could be demonstrated in the following years [8, 9].
The practice fee was abolished on 1 January 2013.
Aim of the study
As there is little data on outpatient treatment of patients
with epistaxis in Germany [10], we aimed to assess its
frequency of occurrence, the use of outpatient care and
its distribution among groups of physicians (e.g. GP
or pediatrician versus ENT specialist) on the basis of a
large patient population over a period of 10 years. Furthermore,
we analyzed the value of the practice fee as an
instrument for allocation in patients with epistaxis.
Finally, taking epistaxis as a model disease - high occurrence
rate and affection of all age groups – we wanted to
assess the efficiency of primary care.
Methods
Underlying data and case definition
The study was based on SHI data of the years 2007–2016
from the Allgemeine Ortskrankenkasse (AOK) Lower
Saxony. In 2016, 2.5 million persons were insured with
the AOK Lower Saxony, representing around 36% of all
those insured by the SHI in the German federal state of
Lower Saxony [11].
The study population comprised all insured persons
who had at least one outpatient diagnosis of epistaxis
between 2007 and 2016. Consequently, all outpatient
cases of epistaxis (R04.0 according to ICD-10, German
modification, diagnostic certainty “secured”) were
included along with the specialty of the diagnosing physician
(GP, ENT, pediatrician or another specialist group).
Since outpatient diagnoses are reimbursed on a quarterly
basis in Germany (i.e. four three-month periods
per year), each case was allocated to a diagnosis quarter.
Consultations with the same case number (referring to a
specific patient, case, physician and quarter) were considered
only once. Vice versa, a patient could become a case
more than once if he or she received multiple epistaxis
diagnoses by different physicians and / or in different
quarters during the study period.
Further details on the database and results on differences
between the outpatient and inpatient groups are
published elsewhere [12].
Diagnoses, medication and fee positions
For all epistaxis patients, the data provided demographic
information such as age and sex. Further, all outpatient
diagnoses were available for the respective quarter in
which the epistaxis was diagnosed. Only diagnoses coded
with the diagnostic certainty “secured” were considered.
These diagnoses were examined on two levels: (i) we
assessed predefined comorbidities coded in the same quarter
as the epistaxis (i.e. recorded by all physicians consulted
by the patient in the respective quarter), (ii) we determined
predefined conditions and the number of different ICD
codes (on the 5-digit level) recorded with the epistaxis (i.e.
with the same case number as described above).
Antithrombotic agents (B01 according to the anatomical-
therapeutic-chemical (ATC) code) prescribed and
reimbursed by the SHI were available for all epistaxis
cases. Based on the prescription date and the prescribed
number of defined daily doses (DDD), an epistaxis case
was considered being currently treated with antithrombotic
agents if he or she had respective medication on at
last 1 day of the quarter of the epistaxis diagnosis.
Lastly, we assessed predefined fee positions according
to the uniform fee position regulation (EBM) coded with
an epistaxis case (i.e. with the same case number).
Statistical analysis
Analyses were first conducted on the case level. We characterized
epistaxis cases by age, sex, diagnoses, medication
and fee positions stratified by the specialty of the
physician diagnosing the epistaxis. Cases were further
displayed by the years of the epistaxis diagnoses.
Second, analyses were conducted on the patient level
stratifying patients by the age of their first epistaxis diagnosis
during the study period. We determined which
diagnosing physician group was consulted at least once.
We further assessed whether a patient consulted a GP and
an ENT specialist (i) at least once during the study period
or (ii) during one quarter or two consecutive quarters.
Using the date of the abolition of the practice fee, we last
displayed the number of patients consulting the respective
physician groups at least once before and since 2013.
We displayed case and patient characteristics using
descriptive statistics (median, interquartile range (IQR)
and percentages).
The data analysis was performed with SAS (Version 9.4,
SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).
Ethics
As the article used anonymized secondary data,
patient-informed consent was not required by German
regulations.
Results
Epistaxis cases: characteristics, treatment and involved
medical specialists
A total of 302,782 outpatient epistaxis cases (overall
160,963 patients) were recorded between 2007 and 2016.
Most cases were seen by ENT specialists and GPs, followed
by pediatricians and other specialists. About 8% of
cases could not be assigned to a physician specialty. With
the exception of those treated by pediatricians, the cases
seen by GPs and ENT specialists were comparable with
regard to the age and sex distribution (52 versus 49 years
and 54.1% versus 55.9% men; see Table 1).
With regard to the comorbidities recorded in the quarter
of the epistaxis diagnosis, there were no differences
between GP and ENT consultations, except for slightly
more frequent diagnoses of arterial hypertension and atrial
fibrillation/flutter (no testing for significance). Antithrombotic
therapy was recorded in 20,417 cases (corresponding
to 18.5%) seen by the GP and in 19,855 cases (corresponding
to 16.7%) consulting an ENT specialist.
Respiratory infections were the most frequently codiagnosed
diseases (with the same case number) among
GPs, pediatricians and other specialists. Chronic rhinitis
and nasal septum deviation were most common among
ENT specialists (22.1%). The latter recorded the highest
proportion of traumatic and malignant tumors as codiagnoses;
however, absolute numbers were low. Hypertensive
urgencies were far more often recorded by GPs
than by ENT specialists (1.9 vs 0.1%).
The median number of co-diagnosed diseases
recorded by the GP was higher than the records by
ENT specialist (median 1 by the ENT specialist, 5 by
the GP and 3 by the pediatrician). The ENT specialist
did not record any other disease besides the epistaxis in
around 30% of the cases.
Table 2 shows the fee positions related to epistaxis.
They are restricted to ENT specialist treatment only
and not open for GP. It was found that a tamponade
was only invoiced in 4.5% of all cases treated by the
ENT specialist, while the additional fee position for the
“treatment of acute, difficult to stop nose bleeding” was
charged in 19.7% and the lupe laryngoscopy in 26.5% of
all ENT-consultations due to epistaxis. Minor surgical
interventions were invoiced in 12.1% (09360) and 13.7%
(09361), respectively. The fee position of “minor surgical
intervention in infants, toddlers and children” was
invoiced in 1.2% of all epistaxis cases.
Figure 1 shows the use of outpatient care and its distribution
among the various specialist groups during
the years 2007–2016. The proportion of GPs recording
an epistaxis ranged from 38.1% in 2013 to 41.0% in
2010, whereas ENT consultations varied between 41.1%
(2016) and 44.2% (2013).
Patients with at least one epistaxis diagnosis
during the study period: number of diagnoses, involved
medical specialists and impact of practice fee
On the patient level, 98,351 of the 160,963 persons
(61.1%), had only one epistaxis diagnosis during the
study period. Of those patients with multiple diagnoses,
nearly 30% were diagnosed more than once during one
quarter or two consecutive quarters (data not shown).
Overall, 23,118 patients (14.4%) received epistaxis
diagnoses from a GP and an ENT specialist during one
quarter or two consecutive quarters (Table 3).
Looking at the distribution of epistaxis cases according
to the patient’s age at first diagnosis of epistaxis, the
youngest patients (0–10 years) consulted most often a
pediatrician. From the age of 11 years on, the frequency
of visits to the GP and ENT specialist was almost equal.
The older patient population (61–80 years) consulted
the ENT specialist most frequently (see Table 3). The
ranged between 6 and 12%.
As illustrated by Table 4, during the practice fee
remuneration (10 Euro per quarter in the years before
2013) there were only minor differences in the use of
specialist groups compared to the years following its
abolition.
Discussion
Summary
Epistaxis was responsible for 302,782 cases corresponding
to 160,963 persons insured with the AOK Lower
Saxony. The cases seen by GP and ENT specialists were
comparable with regard to age and sex distribution.
Hypertension, atrial fibrillation/flutter and an antithrombotic
therapy were slightly more common among cases
consulting a GP. The GP recorded more co-diagnoses
than the ENT.
The use of outpatient care and its distribution among
the groups of physicians fluctuated scarcely between
2007 and 2016. Twenty-three thousand one hundred
eighteen patients (14.4%) had been diagnosed by both
ENT and GP during a relatively short time period.
The practice fee remuneration had no impact on the
consultation of the physician groups.
Consideration regarding patient allocation
The present study shows that epistaxis is a common
symptom and has a high and rising impact on the German
health care system. In contrast, population-based
data on the epidemiology of epistaxis is scarce. Most
studies in literature were either limited to a hospital setting
or to specific populations like infants [13–17]. Next
to differences in health care systems, this hampers comparisons
in an international context. In a recent study
using the same data basis, the prevalence of epistaxis
treated in the in- and outpatient setting increased
from 8.6 (2007) to 9.3 (2016) per 1000 insured persons
(+ 21%) [12].
The patient groups seen by GPs and ENT specialists did
not substantially differ in their age structure and comorbidities.
This indicates that specialist i.e. ENT medical
treatment is not only limited to severe epistaxis. This
observation is confirmed by the analysis of the invoiced
fee positions. Thus, a missing allocation of patients, i.e.
a lack of gatekeeping, can be documented during the
entire observation period of 10 years. The allocation of a
patient to a GP, ENT or emergency department based on
the severity of disease is not always reasonable. A recent
cross-sectional study in an out-of-hours primary care
center in northwestern Germany showed a remarkable
high proportion of younger patients with non-urgent
complaints [18]. In addition to differences in the access
to these facilities, the assessment of urgency and the role
of the primary care physician also differs between the
countries.
The practice fee did not prevent the patient population
of this study from visiting a specialist, thus the practice
fee was not a useful instrument for cost-effective patient
allocation in our study population. Whether patients’
own co-payments sensibly control the use of medical
services is controversially discussed [19, 20]. We assume
that a deductible has a controlling effect if medical services
are demanded more often than actually necessary.
In case of epistaxis the patient can rarely estimate the
actual amount and seriousness of blood loss and the controllability
by the patient’s own co-payment is limited.
Furthermore, it is likely that 10 euros do not constitute
a significant burden for many people. In addition, the
waiting times for an appointment with an ENT specialist
in Germany are comparatively short [3, 21].
The influence of the SHI Care Strengthening Act, also
known as the Appointment Service Act, could not be
conclusively examined in this study due to its introduction
at the end of the study period (16.07.2015). The proportion
of ENT consultations remained relatively stable
during 2016 (see Fig. 1).
Consideration regarding patient care
With regard to the care epistaxis patients received in the
present study, it is striking that from the age of 20 years
onwards a similar number of patients were treated by
GP and by ENT specialists. Why is the GP involved in
only about 36% of the cases, when 90–95% of all anterior
epistaxis cases are proven to be easily treatable [10,
22] and a specific epistaxis therapy was only billed by the
ENT specialist in every fifth patient? We assume that
most patients directly consulted the ENT specialist without
visiting the GP first or at all.
The German Society for General and Family Medicine
(DEGAM) defines the responsibility of the GP as the first
medical contact and basic care provider for all patients
with physical and mental health disorders in emergency,
acute and long-term care as well as areas of prevention
and rehabilitation [23].
The present study cannot provide a conclusive assessment
of the quality of GP care. However, the small number
of patients (14.4%) who visited an ENT specialist
and a GP in the same or two consecutive quarters suggests
that primary care was successful in most cases
and/or a referral to an ENT specialist was only necessary
in every seventh patient. In addition to being easier
to reach and thus providing faster emergency care,
GPs are usually more familiar with the patient. Hypertensive
urgencies, for example, were far more often documented by GPs than by ENT specialists. This is
interesting in the sense that high blood pressure can be
the cause of epistaxis. Further, low blood pressure can
be a sign of high blood loss. Whether these measurements
were performed as an assessment of the patient’s
condition in an emergency situation or as a search for
possible causes of epistaxis cannot be derived from
the data. The average (median) number of recorded
co-diagnoses, which suggest causal components, was
also substantially higher among GPs than among ENT
specialists.
Only malignant tumors were mainly recorded by the
ENT physician due to the diagnostic value of the endoscopy.
However, these were rather rare diagnoses.
Regardless of the severity of epistaxis, the ENT specialists
consider their medical therapy as optimum care
[10, 24]. The reasons for this are the incorrect assessment
of blood loss and thus the severity of epistaxis by nonspecialist
physicians – in this case GP and pediatricians
– and the frequent lack of basic emergency care [25, 26].
The latter statements are based on studies published 1993
and 2005, respectively. To our knowledge, there are no
more recent studies.
Future impact and possible improvements
The outpatient treatment of epistaxis constitutes a considerable
burden. Due to the demographic development
with an increase of age-related diseases and the associated
increase in multimorbidity, a further increase of
epistaxis is to be expected [26, 27]. This is further aggravated
by the reduction in the number of specialists, especially
in rural areas [28]. Primary care provided by GPs is
likely to be sufficient for most epistaxis cases. We recommend
studies to examine and, if necessary, optimize the
quality of primary care for epistaxis.
The practice fee did not lead to better patient allocation
between primary and secondary care. Thus, GP-centred
care might be necessary to reach the goal of directing
patients to primary care first [29]. It better addresses an
adequate allocation of resources, providing specialists
more time to consult on serious cases.
By means of targeted performance management and
controlled allocation of (expensive) diagnostics, a managed
care model allows holistic care in the sense of “disease
management” [30]. On the one hand, this will lead
to an improvement in efficiency, quality and continuity of
care, on the other hand to possible cost savings by avoiding
unnecessary examinations [31].
Taking epistaxis as a model disease its low cost-effective
treatment may be reflected in the treatment of other
conditions. We recommend population-wide studies
regarding possible cost savings in the treatment of common
diseases in the primary care sector.
Strengths and limitations of the study
The major strengths of this study are the large database
and the long time period of 10 years.
However, the present study is limited by the nature of
the data of a single statutory health insurance. It is known
that insurances differ with respect e.g. to demographics,
socio-economic status and morbidity, which limits the
generalizability of the results [32].
Furthermore, it was not possible to determine
whether the patients first visited the GP and then, e.g.
due to a referral, the ENT specialist, since the diagnoses
could only be assigned to a quarter, but not to a specific
date within this quarter. Possible budgetary reasons (e.g.
total time budget at the end of the quarter), which could
have influenced the billing of the ENT physician, could
not be excluded either. Finally, the role of institutions
such as ambulatory out-of-office-hours services which
were probably included in the 8% of cases not linked to
a physician specialty, could not be further evaluated.
Nevertheless, we considered the collected data to be
relevant to analyze the outpatient care of epistaxis in
Germany.
Conclusion
The outpatient treatment of epistaxis, based on the
results of this study, constitutes a considerable medical
and economic burden in Germany. The present study
indicates that the use of resources in common diseases
such as epistaxis can be optimized. Strengthening the
primary medical sector (GP-centered care) is necessary
to reach the goal of initially guiding patients to primary
care and reduce the impact on public health balance
sheets.
