Background
Uncomplicated urinary tract infection (uUTI), or cystitis,
is among the leading reasons for infectious disease consultation
in primary care [1]. Nearly half of women report
at least one episode of uUTI during their lifetime [2].
There is no standard definition of uUTI internationally
accepted. In France, uUTI in women is defined as an
acute urinary tract infection in adult under 75 years-old,
without signs of pyelonephritis or risk factor for more
severe disease (pregnancy, urogenital abnormalities, immunodeficiency,
frailty).
Acute cystitis affects several facets of women’s life: social
and intimate relationships, self-esteem, and ability to
work. Depending on the situation, the impact can vary
from a woman to another: from small discomfort to severe
disability impacting personal and/or professional
life [3, 4]. Nonetheless, cystitis can resolve spontaneously
[5] with a rare risk of pyelonephritis [6]. In this context,
some patients prefer either to discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of antibiotics with their physicians [7]
or even to avoid antibiotic uUTIs treatment [8]. This
lead several authors to suggest a shared decision-making
approach in uUTI [9, 10].
Currently, the systematic and immediate prescription
of empiric antibiotic treatment is often recommended to
reduce symptoms [11], even though physicians tend to
overestimate patients’ desire to take antibiotics [8].
First line antibiotic treatment often differs from one
country to another [12]. In France, the French-Language
Infectious Pathology Society (Société de Pathologie Infectieuse
de Langue Française) recommends fosfomycin
[13], but it is important to note that, frequently, the antibiotic
prescribed empirically does not match pathogen
sensitivity on the microbiological results [14]. The effectiveness
of a systematic antibiotic strategy on the infection
must be put into perspective with potential adverse
effects like mycosis, headache, dizziness and digestive
disorders, and with the risk of resistance emergence
[15]. In France, fluoroquinolones resistant E. coli are
found in 3 to 7% of UTI in primary care [16, 17]. The
resistance rate of bacteria responsible for uUTI is higher
during the year following the prescription of an antibiotic
for urinary tract infection in the primary care setting
[18, 19]. Additionally, research indicates that
compliance with prescribed treatment is variable [4].
Few countries already recommend other strategies
such as delayed treatment. Thus, in the United Kingdom
and the Netherlands, guidelines for uUTI suggest that
physicians discuss the options with the patient to delay
antibiotic treatment [20, 21].
Patient decision aids (PtDAs) are defined by the International
Patient Decision Aids Standards (IPDAS) as
“tools designed to help people participate in decision
making about health care options”, providing
“information on the options” and helping patients “clarify
and communicate the personal value they associate with
different features of the options” [22]. They make the
process easier to inform patients, explore different treatment
options [23] and have a positive effect on the diffusion
of information, clarifying the patients’ values, risk
perception, and involvement in the decision-making
process [24]. These PtDAs are particularly relevant when
linked to clinical recommendations [25].
A Dutch study reported that general practitioners who
used shared decision-making with their patients prescribed
fewer antibiotics in women under the age of 40
consulting for UTI [26]. In accordance with its guidelines,
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) published a decision aid to help health
care professionals to explain and discuss antibiotic treatment
options to patients with uUTI, [27]. However, this
decision aid does not incorporate all the dimensions recommended
by the IPDAS [22], such as help to clarify
values, visual presentation of numeric probabilities or
guidance in deliberation and in communication. In
addition, to date, there is no PtDA available for the
treatment of uUTI for a French-speaking person.
The objective of this study is to develop a patient decision
aid for shared decision-making for the treatment of
uUTI in primary care setting.
This PtDA is part of a research project that aims to compare
antibiotic consumption 14 days post-randomization
between current practice and the use of a PtDA in the
management of uUTI.
Methods
IPDAS reviewed the development process of PtDAs to
provide some empirical pragmatic guidelines [28]. They
recommend documenting each step in an iterative
process involving both physicians and patients, and to
give a checklist to help future PtDAs developments.
The development of our PtDA was conducted according
to these recommendations (Fig. 1). This study focused
on the first four stages of development: scoping,
steering group, design and alpha testing, in order to acquire
enough information to launch the beta-testing
phase. This last step of development has to be carried
out in clinical practice and therefore requires another recruitment
and study.
Initial design
Literature review
Two researchers (GC, YMV) conducted a preliminary
literature review on antibiotic prescription in uUTI in
primary care settings, using MEDLINE (see annex) for
search strategy) and in the Cochrane databases. The results
were screened using the title and abstract, followed
by full text assessment. Selection criteria were
randomised controlled trials comparing an antibiotic treatment
with either another antibiotic, a placebo, or symptomatic
treatment in the primary care settings or meta-analysis
including primary care settings, the description of efficacy,
side effects and risks with or without antibiotic treatment.
This review aimed to define the decision targeted in the
PtDA, its relevance and the risks for patients. Further relevant
studies were included after inspecting the reference
lists in selected studies. This literature review was then updated
by a third researcher (AF), targeting the outcomes
identified by the steering group after the design phase and
after the alpha-testing phase. These outcomes were the natural
history of uUTI, the duration of symptoms with antibiotics,
the complication rate, the side effects rate, the
recurrence and resistance rate, the alternative treatment options
and the patient’s acceptance of health care. These elements
were summarised in a table and presented to the
steering group. The type of the study, date of publication,
the type of population with inclusion criteria, and the type
of treatment were also summarised, and relevant figures
were added.
We finally searched for examples of PtDAs on the
internet with inventories of such tools, like the Ottawa
hospital [29] and the Université Laval [30]. We completed
this work with clinical practice guidelines in
countries with care settings similar to France, to determine
the first line treatment and the association of
guidelines with PtDAs.
Focus groups
We used a qualitative method with focus groups [31].
The objective was to explore and clarify patients’ expectations
regarding the pieces of information and the format
and design of the patient decision aid in the context
of uUTI.
Participants The inclusion criteria were adult women,
with or without a history of uUTI. We used a purposive
sampling approach, in order to maximise variation on
socio-demographic criteria. The criteria for variation
were the participants’ place of residence, socioprofessional
status, and age. The initial recruitment was
carried out in patient support and community groups.
This did not result in a sufficient number of patients to
form focus groups. Additional recruitment was then
conducted in rural and urban private practices, during
consultations, or with posters. Four focus groups were
created, each including between four and six women.
Interview guide A semi-structured interview guide was
developed by the four investigators, based on the SUNDAE
checklist [32], exploring the following elements:
 knowledge and experience of uUTI
 the physical, emotional, and social impact of uUTI
 knowledge and expectations regarding different
treatment options
expectations on the format, terms, and presentation
of the PtDA
Open questions, created based on the literature review,
were asked to encourage the emergence of idea.
Implementation of focus groups The focus groups
took place in general practices outside the health care
setting or on the premises of patient support and community
groups. They were audio-recorded. Prior to the
focus group, the participants were asked to fill out a
short questionnaire to obtain socio-demographic data,
including their age and professional status. Each focus
group began with a brief presentation to the participants
of the concept of shared decision-making and of the
purpose of the study. Exchanges during focus groups
were facilitated by a moderator experienced in conducting
such interviews (GC and YMV, then AF and CB).
The moderator was seconded by a researcher in charge
of noting non-verbal communication and ensuring that
no theme or participant was overlooked by the
moderator.
Inductive analysis The focus groups were entirely transcribed
and anonymised. The data analysis was carried
out with the R software (version 3.5.1, RQDA package).
We followed an inductive content analysis approach,
using grounded theory as described by Kitzinger et al.
[31, 33]. After a global reading of the verbatims, the
minimum meaning units were identified. They were then
coded according to the different aspects relevant to patient
decision-making and were labelled using shortened
titles. Double coding was carried out independently by
two researchers (AF and CB). Doubts or disagreements
were discussed before pooling the final analysis. These
meaning units were grouped into categories using thematic
analysis, and then presented and discussed during
steering meetings in order to establish the specifications
of the PtDA.
Ethics Before each focus group, participants signed an
informed consent agreement. They were informed of the
objective of the research project. The anonymity and
confidentiality of the data were ensured by anonymizing
the recordings during transcription and then by deleting
the recordings at the end of the study. The project received
a favorable opinion from the National Commission
for Data Protection (Commission nationale de
l’informatique et des libertés) on 13 March 2018.
Draft version of the prototype
The steering group consisted of four physicians (the researchers)
and three patients. The patients were recruited
through patient support and community groups
and general practices. Their written consent and sociodemographic
characteristics were collected.
The group used the checklist established by IPDAS
[22, 34] and examples of PtDAs. The content and design
of the PtDA were then defined based on the main categories
which emerged from our focus groups and further
supplemented by the results of the literature review.
These elements were discussed by the steering group.
The draft specifications were then defined and sent to a
graphic designer who produced a draft version of the
prototype.
Alpha-testing
The draft version of the prototype was presented to patients
in two focus groups (composed of respectively
three and four participants), supplemented by two individual
patient’s interviews. Three individual interviews
with general practitioners independent of the study were
also conducted. We used the same interview guide for
individual interviews and focus groups. The interview
guide explored content, design and practical use, allowing
every participant to question each element on the
tool. Written consent was obtained from the participants.
The interviews were recorded, transcribed, and
analysed according to the method described above.
Final version of the prototype
The steering group met a second time to discuss and
validate the adjustments suggested during the alphatesting
phase. This information was transmitted to the
graphic designer.
The graphic designer produced the final version of the
prototype from two versions that were identical in content
but different in appearance. These two versions
were submitted to the members of the steering group
who validated the final version.
Results
Initial design
Literature review
We found 408 references with the search strategy. We
selected 34 references. The literature review identified
five randomized trials comparing antibiotic versus placebo
in uUTI [5, 35–38]. These five trials were all included
in a meta-analysis published in 2009 [6].
We selected four randomized trials comparing the use
of an antibiotic to a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) in uUTI [9, 10, 39, 40] and four monocentric
studies describing the natural history of uUTI
[14, 41–43].
We selected four examples of available PtDAs: three
PtDAs regarding anti-infectious treatment decisions in
outpatient settings [29, 30, 44] and a fourth blank PtDA,
which could be used for any shared decision-making
situation.
Symptom duration Untreated uUTI healed spontaneously
in 50–70% of cases. Symptoms could last up to
several weeks [42]. Mild to severe symptoms improved
after 4.94 days in women not taking antibiotics [43].
Symptoms in women not taking an antibiotic lasted 50–
60% longer than in women treated with an antibiotic to
which the bacterium was susceptible [43]. Clinical resolution
of symptoms was more likely in patients treated
with antibiotics, with an odds ratio of 4.67 [2.34–9.35] [6].
After three days, the proportion of complete resolution
of symptoms varied across studies, from 37% in patients
treated with nitrofurantoin versus 20% in patients
treated with placebo [5], 44% in women treated with fosfomycin
versus 24% in women treated with ibuprofen
[13], and 80% in women treated with norfloxacin versus
54% in women treated with diclofenac [40].
Risk of complications The risk of pyelonephritis was
not significantly different between patients taking an
antibiotic and those taking a placebo (OR 0.33; CI
[0.04–2.70]). The incidence of pyelonephritis ranged
from 0 to 2.6% [6]. There was no reported case of sepsis.
The French guidelines describe the risk of pyelonephritis
as very low [13].
Three out of the four trials comparing antibiotic use
with an NSAID in uUTI reported more pyelonephritis in
women taking a NSAID compared to women taking an
antibiotic [9] [10] [40].
Adverse reactions The occurrence of adverse events
was significantly higher in antibiotic-treated patients
compared to placebo-treated patients [6].
In the case of pivmecillinam, 5–8% of adverse events
were reported [38]. In a multinational trial conducted in
primary care and hospital settings, patients taking single
dose fosfomycin had a 6% rate of adverse events versus
8% in patients taking nitrofurantoin. The most common
adverse events were gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain), asthenia, headache, dizziness,
and vaginal discharge [5] [45]. These studies did not report
any serious allergic reactions related to antibiotics.
Recurrence The data did not allow for a meta-analysis
on the occurrence of clinical recurrence [6]. In the study
comparing nitrofurantoin to placebo the clinical recurrence
rate at two weeks was between 17.6% in the placebo
group and 20% in the treatment group [5]. In the
study comparing pivmecillinam to placebo the recurrence
rate at one month was 12–13% in both group [38].
We did not find study reporting the incidence of recurrence
over longer periods.
Resistance The emergence of resistance in the randomized
studies varied from 0 to 45.5% in women taking an
antibiotic versus 0–20% of women taking a placebo, with
no significant difference [6]. In a Swedish study, antibiotic
treatment for a uUTI in primary care was associated
with a higher rate of bacterial resistance [19].
Alternative treatments Patients taking herbal medicine
did not have a different symptom course than those taking
a placebo [46, 47]. There is no evidence of cranberry
(Vaccinium macrocarpon) or hydration as an effective
treatment for uncomplicated cystitis [48], 49].
Focus groups
Participants spoke of their personal or reported experiences
with cystitis and their impact on their social and
sexual lives: “It restricts social life, because you always
have to be near a bathroom (laughter)” (P3.2), “You don’t
dare to have sex anymore” (P4.4).
This experience touched on intimacy and could be
perceived as taboo: “It’s a feeling of guilt, actually. Well,
in a way it is, because we feel that our intimacy as
women is being attacked” (P3.4).
They feared that cystitis could be complicated by
renal, gynaecological, or fertility problems: “If there’s
blood in my urine it means that the kidneys must be affected”
(P3.2), “It’s going to make an infection maybe a
bit generalized in that area, maybe causing problems to
have children...” (P1.2).
Their knowledge about the risk factors and treatment
of cystitis was part of a lay knowledge shared amongst
women: “I told my mother about it and she said: don’t
worry, drink lots of water, it will pass, this antibiotic
works well; because she often had it” (P2.2).
Some participants described a feeling of infantilization
and guilt during the consultation with the physician:
“The doctor or the ones I saw, made me feel like it was
my fault because I didn’t wash (myself) well. Afterwards,
we are told once we hold it back! We don’t have to be
told every time” (P3.2).
They wanted a personalized exchange, where they
could express their experiences: “What is important with
cystitis, I learned from the doctor who took the time to
explain it to me. [...] We are not in a normal state when
we are sick. So he really needs to listen to us” (P2.5).
The participants wished to clearly define cystitis and
its risk factors, with a vocabulary accessible to all, without
medical jargon: “And in rather simple terms, so that
everyone can understand it... Not in doctor’s language”
(P1.3). They suggested a pictorial presentation: “The
more graphic, the more people are affected” (P1.3), accompanied
by the doctor: “The diagram is nice, but if
the doctor doesn’t explain it to you, [...] she won’t understand
anything” (P3.3).
Their expectations of treatment could be the rapid relief
of symptoms, or the prevention of recurrence in the
longer term: “Isn’t there something more effective and
long-lasting, [...] rather than just immediately stopping
the pain?” (P1.2).
Some patients have expressed an interest in being involved
in the decision related to the antibiotic: “Do you
have something to offer me that is not antibiotics? I have
time now, I can stay at home, if it’s really not going well
we’ll switch to antibiotics, but why don’t we test something
else? Maybe there should be a second option”
(P4.4).
The action of the antibiotic was seen as magical, but
could lead to side effects and resistance: “This antibiotic
was really a miracle” (P6.1), “Every antibiotic [...] that
we swallow, we know that there are side-effects” (P1.1).
The participants considered alternative treatments, described
as natural, such as cranberry or hydration: “Having
the choice between a chemical molecule and
something a bit more natural, something less harsh, I’ll
take what is less harsh” (P2.3).
Draft version of the prototype
The draft version of the prototype (Fig. 2) included the
following elements.
The title explicitly described the decision of whether
to take an antibiotic or not. The elements of the PtDA
were then arranged according to these two choices.
The common symptoms and etiology of uUTI were
briefly described and illustrated with a diagram of the
bladder.
The treatment options that were presented included
antibiotic treatment, hydration, and cranberry. The practical
modality of a single-dose antibiotic therapy was
specified.
The average duration of symptoms, the risks of recurrence,
resistance and complications were detailed according
to whether the antibiotic was taken or not.
Coloured pictograms numerically represented the evolution
of symptoms after three days according to the
choice of treatment and the incidence of adverse effects.
The patient values to report were physical discomfort,
the impact on their daily life (professional, social, sexual),
their general opinion on antibiotics and their adverse
effects. A free space allowed for the collection of
additional value.
Deliberation was facilitated by sliders polarized according
to the two options, for each expressed value. A
final slider helped in the decision-making process.
The chosen format of the PtDA was a double-sided
A4 sheet of paper. It was intended to be used during a
discussion with the physician during the consultation
and not by the patient alone.
Alpha-testing and final version of prototype
The results of the alpha-testing phase and the second
meeting of the steering group are presented in Table 1,
according to the main points of the SUNDAE checklist
[32]. The final prototype of the PtDA is shown in Fig. 3.
Discussion
The literature review showed a need to increase patient’s
involvement in the decision-making process for uUTI
treatment. Patient’s feedbacks during focus groups confirmed
this need [8] [7]. The literature review could not
reveal which decision was intrinsically better than the
other and confirmed the relevance of the equipoise. In
2009, a study including 1900 French general
practitioners, concluded that there was a need for tools
to reduce the gaps between guidelines and patient preferences
[50]. Our goal is to meet this demand by providing
a validated PtDA.
Hence, we developed a prototype of PtDA to help physicians
and patients to make a shared decision regarding
antibiotic treatment for uUTI. This prototype aims to provide
support during consultations, in addition to the information
delivered orally by the physician (diagnosis, risk
factors, monitoring, advice for further consultation, etc.).
Of note, we recruited more patients face-to-face during
medical consultations than through patient support
and community groups. The ease of face-to-face recruitment
was previously described in the literature [51]
Moreover, in 2016 and 2017, a law led to the creation of
a new national-scale patient support and community
group: France Assos Santé. This major change in the
community groups field led to the need for their
reorganization. This may have hindered their participation
despite a strong willingness to be involved in the
project.
The medium-sized focus groups in our study allowed
rich and varied exchanges, including those involving intimate
topics, as already described in the literature,
where a focus group of four to six participants has previously
been documented to facilitates communication
[51]. The age and socio-professional category criteria
and place of residence varied, which contributed to the
expression of diverse points of view.
Some elements collected from the focus groups corresponded
with the existing literature, such as representations
of uUTI and its risk factors [8], representations
and opinions on antibiotics [8] [7], and the impact on
social or professional life [3]. Patients mentioned numerous
representations relating to the gynaecological
sphere, intimacy, sexuality, and fertility. Such representations
are rarely found in articles regarding uUTI. Their
evocation was facilitated during focus groups composed
solely of women, including the observer and the investigator.
The importance of representations around femininity
was integrated into the PtDA using a pink/purple
colour. Some members of the focus group expressed the
desire to have a more gender-neutral representation.
The pink colour was widely validated by the patients
during the alpha-testing phase and was consequently
retained.
Some of these representations correspond to known
risk factors (i.e. sexual intercourse), however, the steering
group decided not to mention risk factors because
they were not directly involved in the decision-making
process. Other representations were beliefs (risk of infertility)
that were absent in the literature. Some patients
wanted to be able to discuss them. This information
could be added in a leaflet handed over to the patient.
Most of the patients’ values expressed in the focus
groups could be integrated into the PtDA, particularly in
the slider. An empty slider allows the patient to express
additional values, like her expectations regarding treatment
(reduction of recurrence, rapid symptom relief,
etc.).
One concern expressed among the interviewed patients
and doctors was the risk of pyelonephritis. There
is little data on the natural course of uUTI without antibiotics,
and the meta-analysis comparing antibiotics to
placebo did not show a significant increase in the risk of
pyelonephritis between the two [6]. However, patients
treated with an anti-inflammatory drug had a higher risk
of pyelonephritis compared to those treated with an
antibiotic [9] [10] [40]. This increased risk could be explained
by the harmful role that anti-inflammatory drugs
can play in infectious diseases [40].
Some of the interviewed physicians were concerned
that the use of the PtDA would lengthen the consultation.
There is little evidence on the impact of shareddecision
making on the length of consultations [52], but
a study comparing a standard approach to the use of
PtDAs in the management of depression in primary care
did not show a significant difference in the length of the
visit [53].
A noticeable limitation of this PtDA is the lack of
medical perspectives exterior to the study. The number
of interviews with physicians during the alpha-testing
phase was low. As already reported in a Cochrane review,
during PtDAs development, patients’ views were
more often collected than those of physicians [24].
The steering group chose to present the probability of
symptoms after three days. This time frame made possible
to present data in the PtDAs regarding the firstline
antibiotic in France (fosfomycin) and placebo. This
short delay is in line with the French guidelines which
recommend another consultation after three days in case
of treatment failure, but also with the British guidelines
proposing a 48-h delay for the delayed prescription of
antibiotics. Indeed, delayed prescribing could reduce
antibiotic use [54]. This option is close to immediate
non-prescription and re-evaluation in case of persistent
symptoms. Delaying the prescription can therefore fit in
the use of the PtDA, which is not currently recommended
in France [13], contrary to the United Kingdom
and the Netherlands [20] [21]. Hence, our PtDA proposes
not to prescribe antibiotics immediately. PtDAs
have a better clinical impact when they are developed
simultaneously to national guidelines [25], as NICE has
been able to do [27]. Our PtDA is similar to NICE’s
PtDA with regards to the information on the options,
their benefits, risks, and consequences, and is based on
the same literature references. On the other hand,
NICE’s PtDA does not include a diagram to facilitate an
appropriate understanding of numerical probabilities;
besides, it does not allow patients to clarify their values
nor foster deliberation, as recommended by the IPDAS
[22].
Our PtDA was created in line with international standards
and will soon be beta-tested in a larger study [28].
Helped by users’ feedbacks, the beta-test phase will allow
to improve our tool and the global acceptance of the
concept from both patient and physician perspectives.
The possibility to implement this approach in France
will also be studied during the beta-test. Indeed, there
may be some difficulties to implement the PtDA in clinical
practice. The PtDA leads to a discussion with the
patient about the choice of using antiobiotic or not,
whereas actual French guidelines advise a systematic
antibiotic prescription. Furthermore, systematic antibiotic
prescription requires less investment from the
practitioner. Nevertheless, practitioner investment can
lead to better outcomes: if the practitioner is optimistic
about diagnosis and prognosis, symptoms could resolve
faster [43]. Thus, if our PtDA shows good implementation
during the beta-test, it would lead to a large-scale
study with a validated PtDA to evaluate its impact on
antibiotic prescription and patients’ satisfaction. This
could influence new national guidelines on cystitis for
general practitioners and then facilitate the PtDAs
implementation.
Conclusion
uUTI is no longer considered as a pathology for which
the symptomatology is experienced similarly for all patients
and for which a single treatment should be offered.
The literature review suggests that uUTI is an
equipoise situation, hence, shared-decision making
seems to be the best way to broach this subject. Developing
a tool to help for shared-decision making in primary
care consultation is necessary to move forward and
to assess its efficiency compared to a systematic antibiotic
treatment approach. To do so, we developed one
of the first PtDA for uUTI treatment in primary care, in
line with international standards.
The impact of our PtDA on patients’ satisfaction and
antibiotic prescription remains to be evaluated, but its
conception has already brought a lot of information on
patients’ and practitioners’ perceptions of uUTI.