Background
Prostate cancer is the second most frequent cancer and
the fifth leading cause of cancer death in men worldwide
[1, 2]. This estimated that there would be about 1.3 million
new prostate cancer cases and 359,000 related
deaths worldwide in 2018 [1, 2]. However, although the
incidence of prostate cancer rose rapidly in most countries
due to an increase in screening for prostate cancer
by prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing in the 1990s, it
has been decreasing in the Netherlands over recent years
[3–5]. In contrast, the country-specific standardized PCa
mortality showed a steady decrease from 35.1 per 100,
000 in 1995 to 22.2 per 100,000 in 2016 [4].
Prostate cancer screening based on PSA testing has
been a matter of debate for many years, mainly because
large clinical trials examining its effects on mortality
have shown inconsistent results [6–13]. Indeed, a recent
systematic review concluded that, at best, prostate cancer
screening leads to a small reduction in diseasespecific
mortality over 10 years, but that it has no effect
on overall mortality [14]. This is compounded by the
reality that PSA screening is not without adverse consequences,
such as overdiagnosis and overtreatment, with
the potential for avoidable physical harm, anxiety, and
costs [14–17]. Therefore, the net benefit of prostate cancer
screening remains unclear, resulting in ambiguity
that is reflected by different PSA testing recommendations
for physicians [18–20]. Coupled with the absence
of a formal screening program, this leads to uncertainty
about testing for men who may otherwise be eligible for
screening. Men considering screening may then receive
inconsistent advice from their physicians.
In health systems predicated on evidence-based care,
the attitudes and daily practice of physicians are expected
to follow clinical guidelines based on the most
relevant clinical trial results. Physicians should then
individualize decisions according to these, also considering
patient values, settings, comorbidities, general health,
and other relevant characteristics. In terms of PSA testing,
it has been shown that the personal beliefs and the
specialization of the physician may also be relevant to
the usage of PSA testing [21–23]. Variability in practice
for PSA testing is not unusual among general practitioners
(GPs), including those in the Netherlands. This
is despite the fact that the Dutch College of General
Practitioners (Nederlands Huisartsen Genootschap
[NHG]) produced a practice guideline for Lower Urinary
Tract Symptoms in Men in 2013 (henceforth, the NHG
guideline) that includes a PCa screening approach due
to the fact that patients frequently (wrongly) connect
these two [20]. In 2014, the PSA threshold in this guideline
was lowered from 4 ng/mL to 3 ng/mL to be consistent
with the national guideline on prostate cancer
issued by the Dutch Urological Association (Nederlandse
Vereniging voor Urologie) [19, 24]. The guideline recommends
against active offering of PSA testing to men
without clinical symptoms of PCa and is actually (in
2020) under revision. Apart from being free available on
the internet, the guideline is, among others, published in
a Dutch scientific journal for GPs, and is part of trainings
and education for GPs.
In the present study, we aimed to survey GPs in the
Netherlands to assess their approaches, attitudes, and
knowledge regarding the use of PSA screening for early
prostate cancer detection, focusing on the prostate cancer
recommendations set out in the NHG guideline.
Methods
Study design, setting, and participants
This cross-sectional pilot survey was performed in April
and May 2016 by asking GPs in the north-east of the
Netherlands to complete paper-based questionnaire. We
used conventional mail to contact all GPs affiliated to
the University Medical Center Groningen. In addition,
the questionnaire was distributed at a training day that
took place at the University Medical Center Groningen
during the study period and was attended by 23 GP
trainers (educational supervisors of GPs in training).
Questionnaire development and data collection
As the questionnaire in this project was conducted in
the context of a binational project, a German version of
the questionnaire was translated into Dutch. Formal
back and forwards translations were performed by native
speakers of both German and Dutch [22]. After translation,
the questionnaire was adapted to the Dutch prostate
cancer guidelines and the Dutch health care system.
Adaptations included for example the inclusion of digital
rectal examination (DRE) results in case scenarios and
questions on usage of DRE. We used the NHG guideline
for reference because we expected that most GPs in the
Netherlands would report using this guideline. Additional
File 1 shows the Dutch questionnaire, Additional
File 2 the English translation of this
questionnaire.
The final iteration comprised 31 questions in five sections,
addressing issues such as how and when to initiate
PSA screening, the implications of results, awareness of
the recommendations from national guidelines, and
awareness of the results of relevant studies concerning
PSA screening. Variations in daily practice of PSA testing
were explored by presenting standardized case scenarios
(unrelated to those listed in Section 2.3). In
addition, some demographic and organizational data
were collected about the participants and their practices.
Questions requiring graded responses were mostly answered
on five-point Likert scales. To test the questionnaire
on acceptance, comprehensibility, ease of use,
feasibility and validity, pretests were conducted among
urologists and GPs for both versions of the questionnaire.
The Dutch version was regarded by a three Dutch
GPs and a Dutch urologist. Based on this, the questionnaire
was revised, according to the comments of the
physicians. Questionnaires were completed once.
The NHG guideline
The 2013 NHG guideline on Lower Urinary Tract
Symptoms in Men provides strategies for early prostate
cancer detection without advocating general PSA screening
for prostate cancer [20]. Instead, guidance for PSA
testing is given in two scenarios, and even then, depends
on clinical assessments: [1] when an asymptomatic patient
makes a request; and [2] when there is clinical
suspicion.
Patient request (scenario 1): an asymptomatic patient
requests testing
When faced with a patient request, GPs are advised to
provide balanced and detailed information on the risks
and benefits of screening to help the patient make an informed
decision. Physicians are required to provide the
following details related to prostate cancer: the risk in
older men (incidence), the rarity of symptoms, and the
risk of death. If the patient decides to undergo early detection,
a DRE should be performed first, and a suspicious
outcome should trigger direct referral to a
urologist. In this scenario, a PSA test should only be ordered
if the DRE is normal.
Suspected prostate cancer (scenario 2): the presence of
suggestive symptoms or signs
When cancer is suspected based on an abnormal DRE
and when patients have a life expectancy of more than
10 years they should be referred directly to a urologist
without performing a PSA test. However, for those with
a life expectancy of less than 10 years, the policy varies
based on the suspicion of metastases. For example, a
DRE should be performed when metastases are suspected,
with a suspicious result triggering referral to a
urologist and a normal result triggering PSA testing.
The PSA test results then dictate the direction of any
subsequent referral: a patient is referred to a urologist if
the PSA level is ≥4 ng/mL and is referred to an oncologist
if the PSA is < 4 ng/mL.
Statistical analysis
Response proportions were calculated separately for the
GPs and the GP trainers. Participant characteristics and
survey responses were analyzed descriptively by absolute
and relative frequencies for categorical variables. Because
of the exploratory nature of the survey and the low
numbers of participants within subgroups, formal
statistical tests were not applied. Data analysis was done
using IBM SPSS Version 25 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY,
USA).
Ethics and data security
The German part of the study was approved by the
Medical Ethics Committee of the Carl von Ossietzky
University Oldenburg (No. 041/2016), which was in line
with local law. For the Dutch part, no ethical approval
was required, as participants were healthy volunteers
and no patients, it was a one-time questionnaire, and the
questions were not intrusive. Before answering the questionnaire,
the participants were informed that their privacy
would be respected. Data were anonymized before
data handling.
Results
Response proportion and responder characteristics
Of the 179 postal questionnaires 65 (36%) were completed
and returned. By contrast, all 23 GPs at the training
day completed the questionnaires (100%).
Additional File 3 shows the participation flowchart.
The characteristics of the participants and their practices
are shown in Table 1. The median age of all GPs
was 54 years, 25 (29%) were female, 77 (89%) had more
than 10 years’ experience as a GP, and 16 (18%) worked
in a practice on their own. Although almost a third
(32%; n = 28) reported having had at least some work
experience in urology during or after medical school,
this was less than 1 month for most (82%; n = 23). More
than half of the GPs (59%; n = 51) had attended a postgraduate
training course on the usage of PSA testing.
Familiarity with the NHG recommendations on prostate
cancer in the LUTS guideline
Apart from 1 GP (1%), all 86 GPs had at least heard of
the NHG guideline [20]. Only 3 GPs (4%) had never read
or used the guideline, and of the remaining 82 (95%),
half had read it and could recall the content (50%, n =
43). Those who reported having read the NHG guideline
stated that they sought to use the recommendations in
daily practice.
Approaches and attitudes of GPs to PSA screening
GPs reported that they usually addressed the impact of
PSA screening (testing in asymptomatic men) by looking
at the disease-specific mortality when discussing PSA
screening (Table 2). It was reported that adverse effects,
such as overdiagnosis or the potential for false-positive
results, were also discussed often, but that the chance of
detecting prostate cancer before metastasis was rarely
mentioned.
In general, the surveyed GPs were critical of PSA
screening (Table 3). Almost none would recommend
testing to relatives and most of the male GPs (71%; n =
44) had not undergone PSA testing themselves and did
not plan to do so in the future. More than 40% of the
GPs (43%; n = 37) were not worried about missing a
diagnosis of prostate cancer in patients, and in most
cases, considered screening for other cancers to be more
important.
Approaches of GPs in specific case scenarios
Table 4 shows the results of the approaches of GPs
when presented with different scenarios. For
symptomatic patients, GPs tended to order PSA tests
rarely for lower urinary tract symptoms compared with
sometimes for other unclear discomfort. Over threequarters
of the GPs (76%; n = 67) always or often perform
a DRE before requesting a PSA test. The most
common indication for PSA testing was a DRE suggestive
of prostate cancer (67%; n = 59).
Almost all GPs (94%; n = 80) reported that there were
circumstances in which they would not refer a patient
with an increased PSA level to a urologist. Examples included
advanced age, short life expectancy, or a plausible
diagnosis of prostatitis. Some GPs used specific PSA
thresholds to determine whether to refer asymptomatic
patients, citing levels of 4, 5, 7, and 10 ng/mL. In patients
with a normal PSA level, most GPs preferred not
to retest (80%; n = 67).
In asymptomatic patients actively requesting PSA testing,
39 GPs (46%) said that they would agree to the request
within the same session after providing
information on the benefits and risks of the test. Less
commonly, GPs reported they would first discuss the
test but would require a separate appointment before
deciding whether to perform the test (35%; n = 30).
Discussion
We have presented the results of a survey conducted in
the north-east of the Netherlands to assess the approaches,
attitudes, and knowledge of GPs concerning
the application of PSA screening for the early detection
of prostate cancer. Most GPs stated that they used the
NHG recommendations in daily practice when applying
PSA testing in primary care: Before performing a PSA
test, most stated that they discussed relevant topics with
their patients, covering the many advantages and
disadvantages.
Other studies on approaches to PSA testing have
shown varying results. Research in the Netherlands
concerning the PSA testing policy among GPs and nonurological
medical specialists has revealed comparable
approaches to those in the present study when faced
with a patient requesting a PSA test [25]. However, before
ordering a PSA test, GPs in that study performed
DRE less frequently than in ours, which is consistent
with the results of a survey among 303 physicians in
South Africa [26]. GPs in Northern Ireland have also
been shown to have similar DRE practices to those
found in our study, but GPs in that study were less reserved
about PSA testing (e.g., in patients with urinary
tract symptoms) [27]. This finding was notable because
most GPs in our survey were male, and research has indicated
that male GPs are more likely to order a PSA
test than female GPs [28, 29].
Another study identified considerable differences in
the approaches to PSA testing between GPs in Australia
and the United Kingdom (UK). Decisions about screening
and PSA testing made by GPs in Australia were
mostly at the discretion of individual clinicians, resulting
in significant variations in practice. However, the replies
of GPs in the UK reflected a clear, consistent,
organizationally embedded approach based on evidenced
recommendations to discourage screening [30]. The approaches
reported by GPs in our survey were comparable
to those reported by GPs in the UK. We agree that
this suggests that health care systems, organizational
structures, and guidelines collectively affect how physician’s
view and handle PSA testing for early cancer detection,
which is also supported by others [30].
Differences between these factors can also play a role
when comparing PSA and DRE practices between countries
and must therefore also be considered.
Concerning guideline adherence, a study among 55
physicians in Switzerland found that physicians generally
had favorable attitudes toward clinical guidelines, but
that only one-third used them very often or often [31].
Although most GPs in our study reported using the
NHG guideline in daily practice, only a few followed the
advice to refer a patient to a urologist without performing
a PSA test if the DRE raised suspicion. After the
main outcomes of the European Randomized Study of
Screening for Prostate Cancer were published, the level
of follow-up testing among Dutch GPs decreased after
an increased PSA result [32]. The reason for this remains
unclear, as do the reports by some of our respondents
that they adopt their own (unsuitable) criteria and
PSA cut-off values for when not to refer a patient to a
urologist. In Lower Saxony, Germany, evidence has also
been published showing that GPs and urologists did not
treat patients in accordance with established guidelines
on prostate cancer [22]. A systematic review looking at
the state of PSA testing policies worldwide revealed significant
variation in follow-up policies after a normal or
raised PSA level, and that this is often discordant with
the available practice guidelines [33]. The conflicting advice
in current guidelines on prostate cancer could lead
to the variations seen in daily practice [34].
There are several limitations to our survey, primarily
related to the small sample and the restricted catchment
area of a single university hospital, which may not have
been representative of the national population. This was
aggravated by the low response proportion in general
and the difference in response among GPs contacted by
mail compared with those surveyed at the training day.
Although other postal surveys among GPs show comparable
or even lower response proportions, this could
be improved by relying on on-site surveys [35, 36]. The
pooling of the data for the two groups is an important
limitation because the conditions among those groups
were different; however, we considered that the number
of GPs was too small to stratify the results further. That
said, we acknowledge that being a GP trainer is likely to
influence opinions and knowledge on PSA testing, and
that 60% of the surveyed GPs had participated in a postgraduate
course on PSA testing, skewing the results to
overestimate the levels of guideline adherence and
knowledge. Of course, this assumes that the surveyed
GP trainers involved in education and/or research are
more compliant and knowledgeable than nonresponders.
Another factor possibly leading to an overestimation
of the results may be that all answers are selfreported.
However, in the Netherlands most GPs are
aware of the existence and content of the Dutch GP
guidelines [37]. Finally, the questionnaire was developed
in German and translated to Dutch. Although we took
care to ensure comparability between the two versions,
we cannot exclude the possibility that the questionnaire
lacks validity and reliability in the Dutch health system.
Conclusion
Routine clinical practice regarding PSA testing in primary
care seems generally to be consistent with the
NHG guideline that is restrictive to PSA testing. We
propose that future research should further evaluate the
effects of the several PSA testing strategies.