In recent decades, there has been a particular emphasis
on the ways to increase patient involvement in treatment
decisions. Placing patients at the center of care and enhancing
patient autonomy have become essential milestones
in the new approach to the improvement of the
quality of medical care [1]. By definition, shared decision
making (SDM) is a process where both the patient and
health professional jointly make a decision based on the
most comprehensive evidence about available treatment
options and the patient’s values and preferences [2]. According
to available evidence, apart from being an ethical
principle (i.e., respecting patient’s autonomy and
decision capacity), the SDM process increases participants’
knowledge, reduces decisional conflict, increases
accuracy of risk perceptions [3], and promotes patients’
satisfaction with care [4]. Effective SDM has been shown
to improve patients’ compliance and lead to better health
results [5]. Furthermore, the results of several systematic
reviews have confirmed that most patients prefer sharing
decisions with physicians [6] and that physicians positively
evaluate using SDM in their clinical practice [7].
However, upon an evaluation of clinicians’ communication
ability to share information with patients and to
promote patients’ involvement in decision making, there
is a need to evaluate the degree of implementation of
SMD in health care. In this respect, Observing Patient
Involvement in Decision Making (OPTION), a frequently
applied decision-making assessment scale during
medical encounters [8], is an effective tool to objectively
evaluate the interaction between clinicians and patients
from the perspective of observers. The OPTION scale
consists of 12 items (OPTION12) to be rated on a 5-
point Likert scale (‘behavior not observed=0’; ‘behavior
exhibited to a very high standard=4’) and evaluates the
extent to which clinicians involve patients in medical decisions
[9]. Using the data collected by using the OPTION
scale, researchers can evaluate clinicians and
patients’ decision-making process by directly observing
their on-the-spot dialogues, or via analyzing relevant
audio or video recordings [10]. To date, the OPTION12
scale has been translated into many languages including
Chinese [11]. In 2013, Elywn et al. simplified OPTION12
into the OPTION5 scale where the items not belonging
to the core components of SDM were deleted, so that
only 5 items focused on the guidance and integration of
patients’ preferences and assessing the extent of providers
promoting patients’ involvement in decision
making were retained [12]. The results of a comparative
analysis of OPTION5 and OPTION12 demonstrated
a good inter-rater agreement and significant
positive correlation between the two versions of the
scale [13]. The English version of OPTION5 (Additional
file 1) showed a valid and reliable SDM
estimate, as well as inter-rater reliability and intrarater
reliability on the item level [13].
At present, OPTION5 has been translated into several
languages, including, among others, German and Dutch.
For the German version of OPTION5, inter- and intrarater
reliability were both excellent on the total score
level, which demonstrated a moderate concurrent validity
using OPTON12 [14]. In the Dutch version, upon
appropriate adjustments of the OPTION manuals, the
inter-rater agreement of OPTION12 and OPTION5
ranged from good to excellent. There was also a high
correlation between the total scores. Furthermore, OPTION5
with a wider score range systematically scored
higher than OPTION12 [15].
As for the extent of SDM observed by OPTION scale,
a systematic review assessed studies that used the OPTION12
scale to observe the extent to which health-care
providers involve patients in decision making, and found
that few providers consistently attempt to promote patient
involvement, and even fewer adjust care to patient
preferences [16]. In the English OPTION5, item scores
in the PDA group were higher than in the usual care
arm, which means observed a higher level of SDM in the
PDA group than the usual care arm [13]. In the Dutch
validation, OPTION5 seems to differentiate better between
various levels of patient involvement [15].
With regard to China, while the assessment of SDM is
made mostly from patients and clinicians’ points of view,
the rating evaluated by observers is still in the initial
stage. Huang verified the effect of the English OPTION12
in promoting SDM process between Chinese
clinicians and patients with coronary heart disease [17].
However, other researches that would apply the Chinese
version of OPTION12 have not been undertaken yet. In
this context, following Prof. Elwyn’s consent, the present
study aimed to establish a simplified Chinese version of
Observer OPTION5 scale and to test its reliability and
validity.
Methods
Translation process
The process of translating the Observer OPTION5 scale
from English to Chinese was performed to reach crosscultural
equivalence [18]. The translation process consisted
of the following nine steps: (1) Preparation (upon
authorization and consent from the main developer of
the OPTION5 scale); the plan of the translation process
was established and sent to Prof. Elwyn for review; (2)
Forward translation; two medical professionals, who
were Chinese native speakers and were proficient in
English, independently translated the English OPTION5
scale; (3) Reconciliation; upon an in-depth discussion,
the team members including the two aforementioned
translators compared the translated versions and merged
them into one; (4) Back translation; two college English
teachers familiar with medical research translated the
Chinese version produced in Step (3) back into English;
(5) Back translation review; the team members compared
the back-translated versions with the original and
highlighted discrepancies between them. The original,
the Chinese reconciled translation, and two backtranslated
versions were sent to Prof. Elwyn for consultation
and revision; (6) Harmonization; which was
achieved after the team discussion based on Prof.
Elwyn’s feedback; (7) Rater training; after the OPTION5
user manual was translated, evaluated, and revised into a
final simplified Chinese version through team discussion,
two raters were trained according to the translated OPTION5
user manual; (8) Cognitive debriefing; two raters
independently rated consultation recordings from 5 patients
in order to check understandability, interpretation,
and cultural relevance of the translation; (9) Proofreading;
the simplified Chinese OPTION5 scale was finally
reviewed and calibrated through team discussion.
The final simplified Chinese OPTION5 scale and user
manual are available from the corresponding author
upon request. Table 1 shows the basic information about
the key actors of the translation process.
Setting and design
One rater (BX), who did not involve in the activities, observed
with audio-recordings the consultations between
GPs and chronically ill patients from May to June 2019
in a Beijing community health service center (CHSC).
Meanwhile, demographic data of the patients and GPs
were collected by the rater via information forms.
Inclusion criteria for the patients were as follows: (1) a
chronic disease (mainly hypertension or other chronic
diseases); (2) age above 18 years old; (3) Chinesespeaking;
(4) facing a specific treatment decision; (5)
willing to participate in the study; and (6) oral consent
to be recorded. Patients with cognitive impairment or
visiting their GP only for a medicine prescription
were excluded. Inclusion criteria for GPs were as
follows: (1) working at CHSC for over a year; (2)
signing informed consent (including consent and
audio-recording); (3) willing to participate in the
study. A total of 10 GPs and 209 patients who met
inclusion criteria were included in the final sample. A
total of 209 audio-recordings were rated with the
simplified Chinese version of OPTION5 scale.
Sample size
With an estimated dropout of 20% consultations, an
enough sample size was aimed to detect correlations
above 0.5 with a power of 80% for the planned analyses.
A sample size of N = 100 was finally determined.
In the present study, each rater had to achieve the target
of observing no fewer than 10 consultations between
each GP and patients with hypertension. A total of 10
GPs and 209 patients with chronic diseases (including
hypertension, type-2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and other
common chronic diseases) who met inclusion criteria
were included.
Rating process
A total of 209 audio-recordings were separately evaluated
by both raters (ZY and BX) in order to assess interrater
reliability of the simplified Chinese version of
Observer OPTION5 from July to September 2019. One
of the raters (BX) rated them a second time within one
month from the first rating to assess intra-rater
reliability.
Data analysis
The data were analyzed using SPSS Statistics 22 (SPSS
Inc., Chicago, IL). General demographic data of the
patients and GPs were analyzed by descriptive statistics.
All item scores and total scores of OPTION5 were statistically
described. In general, intra-class correlation coefficient
(ICC) can be used for quantitative or classified
data, while the kappa coefficient method is suitable for
classified data [19]. In the present study, inter- and
intra-rater reliabilities were calculated using weighted
Cohen’s kappa value on single item testing, and using
ICC on the total score testing. Cronbach’s α was applied
to evaluate the internal consistency of the scale. Strength
of agreement of weighted Cohen’s Kappa statistics
between 0.81–1.00 was classified as almost perfect,
0.61–0.80 as substantial, 0.41–0.60 as moderate, 0.21–
0.40 as fair, 0.00–0.20 as slight, and < 0.00 as poor [20].
The results of ICC between 0.75–1.0 were classified as
excellent, 0.6–0.74 as good, 0.40–0.59 as moderate, and
0–0.39 as poor [21]. Because there is a violation of normality,
criterion validity was calculated using Spearman’s
rank correlation to compare OPTION5 and OPTION12.
Results
Basic characteristics of the GPs and patients
All 10 observed GPs were female, aged 28–64 years old
(mean age = 42.40 ± 9.69), with over 10 years of work experience
(see Table 2).
A total of 1969 patients were involved during the observed
period, and 209 of the 1969 patients participated
in the decision making regarding a chronic disease treatment.
The average age of the 209 patients was in the
range of 41–87 years old (mean 64.42 ± 8.64), and the
average consultation time ranged from 1.0 to 17.8 min
(mean 5.13 ± 3.25). Of all consultations, 99 focused on
the decisions regarding hypertension, 39 concerning
Type 2 diabetes, 34 concerning hyperlipidemia, 20 concerning
another chronic disease, and 17 concerning multiple
other chronic diseases (see Table 3).
The results of rating item of simplified Chinese version of
OPTION5
The rating results from Rater 1 and Rater 2 showed that
the scores of the items were mainly concentrated on 1
and 2; the frequencies of the scores are reported in Tables
4 and 5.
Reliability of the simplified Chinese version of OPTION5
Inter-rater reliability
On the total score level, inter-rater ICC of the simplified
Chinese version of OPTION5 was 0.859; 95% confidence
interval was 0.724–0.917 (p < 0.001). Weighted Cohen’s
kappa value of OPTION5 ranged from 0.376 (item 5) to
0.649 (item 2) on the single item level (see Table 6).
Intra-rater reliability
On the total score level, the intra-rater ICC of the simplified
Chinese version of OPTION5 was 0.945; 95%
confidence interval was 0.904–0.965 (p < 0.001). The
weighted Cohen’s kappa value of OPTION5 ranged from
0.469 (item 5) to 0.883 (item1) on the single item level
(see Table 7).
Internal consistency
Cronbach’s α value of 5 items of the simplified Chinese
version of OPTION5 was 0.746, indicating that there
was a good internal consistency in these 5 items in the
scale.
The validity of the Chinese version of OPTION5
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient between OPTION5
and OPTION12 for the Chinese versions was
0.660 (p < 0.001), indicating that there was a moderate
positive correlation between the two scales (Fig. 1).
Discussion
In the present study, the original OPTION5 was
translated into Chinese and cross-culturally adapted for
further testing of its reliability and validity. Two raters
independently assessed the simplified Chinese version of
OPTION5 using the audio recording acquired from the
consultations between GPs and chronically ill patients at
CHSC.
The validation of the simplified Chinese version of
OPTION5
The results showed that the simplified Chinese version
of OPTION5 has satisfactory psychometric properties.
The scale was found to be reliable on the total score
level and to have a good internal consistency among 5
items of the Chinese version. On the single item level,
inter-rater reliability coefficient ranged from fair to substantial
(kappa = 0.376–0.649), and intra-rater reliability
coefficient ranged from medium to excellent (kappa =
0.469–0.883). Furthermore, a moderate positive
correlation between Observer OPTION5 and OPTION12
also showed a good concurrent validity of the simplified
Chinese OPTION5. These results provide convincing
evidence about the validity and reliability of the scale
and are consistent with the results of previous studies
[13, 14]. Therefore, the simplified Chinese version of
OPTION5 produced in the present study can be
effectively used to measure GPs facilitating patients’ participation
in the SDM process and to evaluate the
decision-making process in clinical practice and health
service research from an observer’s perspective.
On the single item level, item 5 was the only item that
had the lowest levels of inter-rater agreement (kappa =
0.376). This suggests a poor consistency of two raters on
item 5. Consultations of longer duration may lead to reduced
inter-rater agreement [13]. In further research,
improving item specificity, training raters extensively,
and providing more guidance may help to improve
inter-rater consistency [13].
On the total score level, compared to inter-rater reliability
in the first testing of the English version (ICC =
0.67) [13] and the psychometric testing in the DUTCH
version [15] (K = 0.68), our result on inter-rater reliability
was relatively higher (ICC = 0.859). This outcome
may be related to the single clinical decision making
involved in the consultation. In the present study, most
doctor-patient interactions focused on only one problem
in treatment. In previous studies, however, there may
have been some ambiguity during clinical consultations,
or more decisions needed to be made by clinicians and
patients. This may have led to a relatively low
consistency of studies that used the English version of
the scale. In addition, we found an excellent intra-rater
reliability on the total score level, which is consistent
with the results of testing the German version of the
scale [14].
The observed low SDM extent and its potential causes
In addition to helping objectively assess SDM
process, the OPTION5 scale also provides a general
estimate of the involvement of two parties in a consultation
[14].
From the perspective of single item, the scores of five
studied items on inter-rater and intra-rater reliabilities
were mostly concentrated on 1–2 points, which resulted
in the left deviation of the distribution of the scores, indicating
that GPs promotes and facilitates patients’ involvement
to a low extent. This outcome has verified the
conclusions in English and German studies since it is in
line with the research results [13, 14]. Several possible
reasons may explain the observed low level of SDM.
First, none of the observed GPs were involved in SDM
training. According to the systematic review of previous
studies by using OPTION12, untrained healthcare providers
also scored lower points [16]. The continuous
training and education of GPs’ positive attitudes towards
SDM, enhancement of their SDM theoretical background,
and cultivation of ability to transfer SDM knowledge
into routine clinical practice are the major
measures to facilitate SDM process in consultation. Second,
insufficient consultation time may be another
cause. As can be analyzed from our other studies, during
consultations for chronic diseases, the GPs usually spend
more time in discussing with the patients seeking for
specific treatment decision than with those merely for
medicine prescription (median time = 4.4: 2.0 min, P <
0.05) [22]. However, due to the heavy workload in
Beijing community, which hinders substantial communication
and interaction between GPs and patients, GPs’
consultation time is dramatically not enough. Training
more GPs or re-employing competent retired GPs in primary
care is a solution to alleviate workload and increase
consultation time [23]. Third, patients’ willingness
to participate in decision making also needs to be guided
and educated.
In addition, the rare observation of behavior captured
by a specific item is likely to obtain a lower kappa score
[24]. The item 2 on inter-rater and intra-rater reliabilities,
namely, “The clinician reassures the patient or reaffirms
that the clinician will support the patient to
become informed or deliberate about the options. If the
patient states that they have sought or obtained information
prior to the encounter, the clinician supports such a
deliberation process”, was the least observed in our
study. The same item has been reported as problematic
in the English OPTION5 scale [13]. The raters assessed
the interactions between GPs and patients by means of
recordings, which imply that GPs’ body languages in
supporting patients could be neither observed nor positively
scored.
Strengths and limitations
Overall, the results of the present study demonstrated
that the simplified Chinese version of OPTION5 is a
feasible, reliable, and effective observer rating scale. The
scale can be effectively used to evaluate SDM in doctorpatient
communication, clinicians’ communication skills,
as well as the level of clinicians’ promotion of patients’
involvement in decision making. To date, it is the shortest
available observer rating scale for SDM [13].
However, the present study has several limitations.
First, due to all participating GPs were female in our
study, we could not sure whether there was a gender
bias in the findings. According to available evidence,
compared to female clinicians, their male counterparts
are more likely to be doctor-centered and are less likely
to guide patients to participate in decision making about
treatment [25–27]. Therefore, in future research, it
would be advisable to include a more gender-balanced
sample of GPs.
Second, the simplified Chinese version of OPTION5
was conducted at a single medical center (CHSC), for
mostly three chronic diseases. The scope of application
of the scale was somewhat limited. Therefore, in
future studies, it would be necessary to apply the
scale in more diverse medical settings and for other
chronic diseases [28].
Third, the rating materials were audio recording, and
one of the two raters observed the nonverbal aspects of
the interaction between GPs and patients, which may
have led to discrepancies between the two raters.
Fourth, although the researcher did not participate in
the interactions when observing the consultations, it was
possible that the presence of the researcher influenced
the behaviors of GPs and patients.
Finally, while the simplified Chinese OPTION5 is generally
effective and reliable, in future research, improving
single item specificity and providing more guidance may
be needed.
Conclusions
In the present study, the simplified Chinese version of
OPTION5 was developed following stringent translation
procedures. The results of testing the simplified Chinese
OPTION5 scale showed that the scale has satisfactory
psychometric characteristics. Overall, it can be concluded
that the scale can be meaningfully used to
evaluate the decision-making process regarding the
treatment of chronic diseases in community clinical
practice. Furthermore, this scale will contribute to providing
effective information on clinical practices in
China. However, further testing of the scale is recommended,
particularly before applying it on other occasions
or other patient groups that those targeted in the
present study.