The integration of nurse practitioners (NPs) into primary
care has been viewed as a solution to shortages
of doctors [1], and a tool for improving patient access
to care and lowering costs [2]. It has also been suggested
that the integration of NPs into communitybased
care delivery is critical to accomplishing the
transformation of primary care into primary health
care (PHC) [3, 4] - a transformation that has itself
been linked to improved care, improved outcomes,
and lowered costs [5–8]. The shift to PHC is one towards
prevention, health, wellness and the successful
management of chronic disease [9–14], accomplished
through team-based care [15]. The integration of NPs
into PHC-focused teams, and their integration into
healthcare systems more broadly has been advocated
for in a range of policy environments, including both
Canada and the United States [16–19]. Despite this
alignment with transformation principles and much
policy enthusiasm, the utilization of NPs in Canadian
primary care has been inconsistent [17].
To better understand the factors behind the inconsistent
utilization of NPs, this paper presents one Canadian
province’s recent and ongoing efforts to increase the integration of NPs into its primary care system. We describe
the Nurse Practitioner Support Program (NPSP1)
in Alberta, Canada, and present qualitative data from interviews
with stakeholders. These interviews highlight
the challenges to achieving the goals outlined in the
NPSP and to NP integration in the province’s primary
care environment. The data we present here provide
broader comparative learnings for other jurisdictions
contemplating policies to support greater NP integration
into their primary care systems.
NPs in Alberta are registered nurses (RNs) that have:
worked at least 4500 RN hours; completed a recognized
NP educational program; and passed a standardized
exam specific to their practice area [20]. Drawing on
competencies acquired in their Masters-level, clinically
focused education [21] NPs enjoy a wider scope of practice
than RNs, including the ability to: conduct advanced
health assessments; order and interpret diagnostic tests;
diagnose, treat, and perform advanced interventions;
prescribe medications; monitor patient outcomes; and
refer patients to other professionals as required [22].
Currently all provinces in Canada have legislation regulating
the NP scope of practice [2, 23]. In the province
of Alberta, the Health Professions Act [24] and the
Registered Nurses Profession Regulation [25] requires
NPs be registered with the College and Association of
Registered Nurses of Alberta (CARNA). CARNA requirements
govern maintenance of an NP’s license to
practice [22]. Despite a regulatory presence in colleges
and legislation across Canada, [2] funding and
payment reform to support NP integration have
proved to be barriers to practical implementation of
the role [26].
The NPSP was not the Alberta government’s first
attempt at increasing NP participation in primary
care [27]. In 2012, the province announced an increased
role for NPs with the introduction of family
care clinics [28]. Seen as costly and opposed by some
members of the medical community [29, 30], the
family care clinic concept did not successfully navigate
a change in political leadership [31, 32]. Only 3
out of the 140 clinics envisioned were ultimately
built [31].
In April 2019, with a commitment to team-based care2
and its advantages [33] well-articulated in the provincial
primary care strategy [4], the province sought to increase
the relatively low count of NPs in primary care by
introducing the NPSP [17]. In Alberta the majority of
registered NPs – 72% in 2018 – were employed in acute
care or specialty out-patient clinics [17]. In other
Provinces the majority of NPs work in primary care and
community settings with only 24% working in hospitals
[35]. The NPSP thus aimed to increase the use of NPs in
Alberta’s primary care system, part of a broader provincial
government priority to improve access, safety,
quality, and continuity of primary care [17].
The NPSP allows the province’s Primary Care Networks
(PCNs) to apply for NP-specific funding, with the aim of
increasing NP integration into primary care. PCNs are
intermediary organizations positioned between the
government and the front lines of primary care, and as
envisioned by the NPSP, are the primary agents for
primary care NP integration in the province. Originally
created in 2003, PCNs are funded by the Government of
Alberta’s Ministry of Health and formed through a joint
venture arrangement between Alberta Health Services
(AHS; the single health authority and service provider for
the province) and primary care physicians who opt-in,
signing a contract to become members of a PCN [36].
In Alberta, individual physicians are generally independent
small-business owners, with the province functioning
almost exclusively on a Fee-For-Service (FFS) model [37–
40]. Physicians can however arrange an alternative compensation
method with the government if they choose
[41]. These compensation options are available to primary
care physicians whether they choose to join a PCN or not.
As noted above, primary care physicians can opt to join a
PCN, which generates money for their respective PCN.
This per capita funding for the PCN is in addition to the
physician’s regular compensation. For each patient on a
PCN-physician’s panel, a PCN receives $62 per year, with
this collective per capita money being used to support locally
adapted service delivery and team enhancement, as
well as pay the PCN’s administrative costs. In addition to
implementing team-based care, the PCNs are also responsible
for implementing other elements of the Patient Medical
Home (PMH) including improved access, patient
panelling, use of electronic medical records, and quality
improvement [4, 42].
The NPSP positions Alberta’s PCNs as the primary
support and implementation mechanism for achieving
NP integration into primary care, as part of a broader
western Canadian objective of delivering team-based primary
care [15]. In light of the province’s relatively low
rate of NP uptake in primary care, the NPSP aims to
incentivize PCNs to hire more NPs in Alberta and to increase
NP integration into primary care teams and
achieve primary healthcare transformation [17].
In order to place NPs within the PCN structure, the
NPSP introduced changes to the PCN funding formula
allowing NPs, and not just physicians, to create a ‘panel
of patients [43]. Where a panel refers to a set of patients
attached to a particular provider, a ‘roster’ refers to a set of
patients attached to a group of providers [43]. The funding
generated from an NP’s PCN-based panel of patients (the
same $62 per capita) would, unlike with physicians, be
earmarked to cover that NP’s salary. In other words, according
to the NPSP, if a patient is paneled to an NP, the
$62 per capita payment is routed to that NP’s salary which
offsets (and decreases) the government’s supplemental
top-up, paid to the PCN to support the NP’s annual
salary. This supplemental top up is to a maximum of
$125,000 [17]. In contrast, if a patient is paneled to a
physician, the per capita payments do not reduce the
amount the government remunerates that physician
based on FFS billings. Instead, a physician bills the
government the regular amount and the physician’s
per capita money is pooled with other PCN physician
members’ per capita panel funds and made available
to the PCN [17]. This financial arrangement, alongside
other factors discussed below, directly impacts
the viability of the NPSP policy aimed at integrating
NPs into Alberta’s primary care system.
Changes in government often introduce differing priorities
with existing publicly funded policies either changed
or abandoned. Shortly after the introduction of the
NPSP, there was a change in Alberta’s government.
However, the integration of NPs into primary care continues
to be a priority, with the new government promising
NP billing reform [44] and continued support for the
NPSP [45]. The urgency of the issue has been emphasized
as NPs and their scope of practice have once again
come to the forefront as part of the response to the
COVID-19 pandemic and the strains it introduced to
the primary care system [46].
This paper draws on qualitative interview data to
understand NP integration challenges and how a policy
like the NPSP is viewed by key stakeholders (NPs,
physicians, individuals from nursing and medical professional
associations, a patient advocacy group representative,
a patient, PCN administrators, and
government officials). In the context of the NPSP’s
introduction and ongoing interest in NP integration,
we interviewed a range of stakeholders seeking to
understand the factors that might be limiting the
NPSP’s success and ultimately NP integration into
Alberta’s primary care environment. Our guiding research
questions sought to:
 Identify policy and operational factors that are
shaping how Nurse Practitioners (NPs) integrate
into Alberta’s PCNs.
 Deepen understanding of the effects that current
funding policies and incentivization strategies are
having on NP participation in primary care.
 Understand how the policy innovations targeting the
integration of NPs into PCNs are perceived by key
stakeholders.
 Make evidence-based recommendations regarding
policy and operational factors that will help improve
NP integration into PCNs and PCN effectiveness.
Methods
Semi-structured interviews (n = 15) were conducted, recorded,
transcribed and analyzed using the interpretive
description method. Interpretive description is a qualitative,
analytical, inductive method of inquiry that focuses
on generating practically-applicable knowledge for
healthcare issues [47, 48]. We used semi-structured interviews
to collect a wide range of perspectives, reflections,
and practical knowledge related to the NPSP in
Alberta. These interviews were conducted with a range
of healthcare providers, decision makers/ influencers,
and patient advocates.
Further information is provided in Table 1 below.
Recruitment began purposively – with the express aim
of including a diversity of perspectives driving our
choices [49] – and then shifted to include snowball sampling
of individuals through participant referrals [49, 50].
We sent out a recruitment email to potential participants
and included research objectives and a template of
interview questions. The main focus of the questions involved
asking participants for their perception of NP integration
in primary care, and their views on the NPSP.
Participants are identified in the following pages with
the Roman numerals I to XV. In total, we interviewed 15
participants, with this sample composed of different professional
backgrounds to ensure potential differences in
opinion were considered (See Table 1). Over the course
of collecting data from this sample, we found that we
had achieved “a realistic range of predictable variance”
[51] in the opinions and perspectives that participants
were advancing.
The semi-structured interviews were conducted by SB
using a guide that was developed iteratively with ML.
The guide aimed to draw out rich, nuanced, selfreflective
responses from the participants. The
interviews ranged in length between 30 to 90 min and
were both recorded and transcribed. The data was then
analyzed with the assistance of NVivo 12 software using
an inductive coding approach aimed at rendering an interpretive
description of participants views on NP integration
into primary care generally, and via the PCNs
and the NPSP specifically.
Our interpretive description approach allowed us to
gain insight not just on areas of commonality, but areas
of disagreement amongst participants, and with an eye
on providing pragmatic suggestions to improve policy in
the area [51, 52]. SB and ML analysed the data
iteratively, expanding, collapsing and merging themes to
arrive at the final analysis. We carried out participant
checks on the interpretations presented.
This research obtained ethical approval from the Conjoint
Faculties Research Ethics Board at the University of
Calgary (REB18–1709). Participants provided written
consent.
Results
Participants described NPs as an underutilized resource
in Alberta’s primary care environment. The data from
15 participant interviews attributed this low level of NP
integration to a lack of independent practice opportunity
and minimal job prospects which, in turn, related to: 1)
financial viability issues that impact both NPs, physicians,
and PCNs; 2) ineffective policy, and 3) issues with
governance.
A lack of available jobs
As a policy maker participant noted, Alberta is “…
under-using [NPs] … especially in primary care” (Participant
VI). A PCN executive director described how there
had been little progress in integrating NPs into primary
care in the preceding decade:
There were very, very few positions outside of the
acute care setting. And I think, in some ways still –
like 10 years later, there hasn’t been much progress.
(Participant IX).
The lack of available positions was, in the same participant’s
mind, a disservice to both those undertaking NP
training and the taxpayers who subsidize that training:
All of those professional [programs] are generally
topped up by government funding in the education
stream... I don’t think we were doing NPs a service
when they could obtain this education, graduate,
and then not have any … positions in the primary
care environment [available]. (Participant IX).
Another participant further elaborated:
[I]t’s so sad that this cream of the crop bunch [is] being
lost [due] to lack of opportunity... what a brain
drain! And they’re leaving the province, they’re leaving
the country … they are leaving the profession.
[W] hat a waste of human resources. (Participant I).
The lack of job openings and government-funded
brain drain to other jurisdictions was viewed by participants
as a result of specific financial disincentives that
shaped the viability of becoming an NP in the province’s
primary care system. These financial viability issues
impacted all three of the key stakeholders involved in
the NPSP: NPs, physicians, and the PCNs.
Financial viability: NPs
A range of participants described how the province’s
physicians have an assortment of options to fund
their practice (FFS, blended capitations, salary). However,
the majority of family physicians in Alberta operate
as a private business and fund their practice by
billing the government FFS. In contrast, NPs – both
under the NPSP and prior to its introduction – can
only be funded as employees (Participant I, XIV, XII),
relying on physicians or PCNs having available jobs
for them. As one participant noted, independent NP
practice “isn’t supported” by current policy arrangements
(Participant III).
A policy maker with 20 years experience suggested this
was because:
[T] he compensation systems are not in place to support
independent [NP] practice right now (Participant
VI).
This lack of funding options was emphasized by another
participant – an NP – who explained how, despite
being trained and given authority under legislation to
provide certain healthcare services, NPs cannot be paid
directly:
I can’t get paid by the government to offer those
services. [T] he regulatory body and the Health
Professions Act of Alberta allows me to do it, but I
cannot get paid [to provide those services]
(Participant XI).
Unable to be reimbursed as independent practitioners,
NPs for the most part currently can either choose to bill
patients directly for services or rely on being hired by
PCNs or individual physicians as employees. For those
who choose to bill outside the publicly funded system,
participants noted that financial viability hinges on
exploiting a niche for which patients – otherwise accustomed
to ‘free’ primary care – are willing to pay out-ofpocket.
Without niche practice able to support private
billing, financial viability hinges on becoming an employee
of an individual physician or a PCN. As we will
see later, the governance and power issues inherent in
seeking employment from physicians and PCNs are seen
as both personally challenging, and detrimental to NPs
practicing at their full scope. Beyond these issues, the
rate of pay as an employee and lack of alternative options
to practice was summed up by one participant as
follows:
A lot of registered nurses (RNs) … ask me, is it worth
it? I would say, no. [T]here’s no opportunity [to get a
business loan, to bill the government, or get a job.] …
[I] f there is opportunity [to get a job], often you
make less than a senior RN. (Participant XI).
A recent report reviewing the province’s health system
agreed with this participant’s point, emphasizing
the financial disincentive RNs have to take the further
education, training, and testing involved to become
an NP [53].
If the root cause of low levels of NP integration is tied,
from the perspective of NPs, to a lack of billing options
and poor financial incentives, financial viability was also
an issue for physicians.
Financial viability: physicians
Under the province’s predominant physician’s FFS billing
arrangements, physicians are not encouraged to deploy
NP employees to deliver care for which physicians
would otherwise be able to bill the government. For a
policy-maker participant, the central problem was a
missing mechanism for physicians to recover revenue
‘lost’ when an NP provided a service:
[I]t’s really unclear to family physicians how they
would use an NP in their practice. There’s not a
mechanism for the physician [and the practice] to be
compensated for the services that that NP delivers
right now (Participant VI).
A physician participant described the disincentive of
losing revenue to an NP employee in starker terms:
[I]t’s lucrative [for physicians] to see easy patients
because [physicians] get paid fee-for-service.
I think a lot of people in primary care don’t
want NPs to do that stuff, because [physicians]
think it [is] going to impact their bottom line
(Participant II).
Beyond presenting a challenge to the low-effort,
high-reward cases at the heart of current physician
profitability, participants noted that the NPSP did not
provide ways to generate revenue to cover overhead
costs. As an NP who ultimately lost their job noted:
I was basically taking up space where if a physician
was in that space, they could bill the government
and pay overhead. And the overhead that physicians
pay is astronomical (Participant VII).
Most family physicians in Alberta operate as a private
business with revenue generated from billing the
government for services provided. NPs cannot bill the
government for services they provide and do not receive
compensation directly from government. If a
physician or a PCN hires an NP, that NP’s salary is
paid from the physician’s or PCN’s revenue. As such,
NPs do not generate revenue from government to pay
overhead. If an NP opened a clinic outside the public
system and billed patients directly, the NP would
have to pay the same amount of overhead. However,
with patients accustomed to publicly funded primary
care services, and many NPs wanting to operate
within the public system, the inability to cover overhead
costs like their physician colleagues proved
problematic for most participants.
One physician participant noted a workaround commonly
referred to as the ‘whites of the eyes’ billing. This
approach involves the physician entering a consulting
room where the NP is finishing an appointment just
long enough for cursory interaction with the patient. By
doing so, this allows the physician employer to bill for
the service delivered by the NP employee. As described
by the physician:
I have to kind of just pop my head in and say, “Hi!
Any questions? Let me know...” And that’s a bit ridiculous,
but I have to pop my head in so I can bill
for those patients (Participant XV).
This ‘whites of the eyes’ billing approach increased
revenue to cover the NP’s overhead costs and salary.
However, it appeared to be an exception to a general
rule where most physicians instead viewed NPs as a financial
burden to their business.
Financial viability: PCNs
Despite being the focal point of the NPSP, the PCNs
– as member-driven organizations composed of family
physicians – are also disincentivized by the financial
realities of integrating NPs. Where the NPSP aims to
use per capita revenue generated by the NP’s patient
panel to pay the NP salary, the PCNs’ members tend
not to see the value proposition. In an extension of
their individual concern for an employee delivering
services they would otherwise be able to bill for, PCN
members often see their organization’s per capita
funds better spent elsewhere. A former PCN administrator
noted:
[T] he prevailing belief among docs is:
‘We shouldn’t be using PCN money to fund NPs …
because we could just [put a physician in that position
and] bill FFS [to cover the physician’s salary
and overhead] and do what [the NP is] doing and
use the [PCN] money for something else like a
Beyond being unpopular amongst member-physicians,
NP employees are a challenge for the PCNs themselves
given that they come out of the intermediary organization’s
bottom line. As another participant noted, from
the PCN’s perspective:
[T] he services that an NP can offer could be offered
similarly by a physician and that physician’s compensation
would come out of, not the PCN budget, but
[the Ministry of Health’s budget] (Participant XI).
Alongside these financial viability issues for NPs, physicians,
and PCNs, participants also identified policy and
governance issues that made attractive jobs as a primary
care NP rare.
Ineffective policy
Participants took issue with specific aspects of the NPSP,
focusing on the policy’s paneling requirement and its
use of the PCNs as its only mechanism for funding and
implementation.
Requirements for paneling and full scope primary care
While some participants were pleased that the NPSP
allowed NPs to panel patients, others were less interested.
As 1 NP participant noted:
I don’t feel the need to have my own patient panel.
There are other nurse practitioners who want to
have their own patients. So that’s just a personal
preference (Participant VII).
This sense that the policy’s paneling requirement was
unnecessarily restrictive was shared by physicians (Participant
XV, Participant II). Another NP participant
illustrated what they saw as the ineffectiveness of the
paneling requirement by making a hypothetical pitch for
money to start up a community-based specialty NP
practice:
I’m a nurse practitioner. I have a sub specialization
in chronic pain management. There is a high burden
of chronic pain in Calgary and it’s under met. The
chronic pain center has a 2 year waiting list. I want
to start a clinic that deals with chronic pain patients.
I want to submit a business plan … [and], I
want to submit an expression of interest to have
funding to be able to do this. But I can’t do that. It
doesn’t exist. Even under the [NPSP] I can’t do it because
the premise is full scope, primary care.
(Participant XI).
In the hypothetical pitch, even if an NP were able to
identify a specific area that is underserved by physicians,
the NPSP’s demand for only full spectrum – which is to
say fully empanelled – care would stop the project moving
forward because there is no current funding mechanism
that would accommodate the participant’s
example. In this way, the policy’s panelling requirement
and resulting mandate that NPs integrate by providing
full scope primary care fails to allow flexibility for NP integration
based both on the needs of the community
and practitioner preferences.
Funding and implementation through the PCNs
Under the terms of the NPSP, a PCN - and only a PCN
- has the option to submit an application for this dedicated
NP funding. Some participants questioned the prerogative
this gives to PCNs over whether to consider
integrating NPs at all. As one former PCN administrator
noted:
If physicians are managing it, it’s a little bit like the
mice guarding the cheese … Would they really want
to give money to NPs and fund their competition?
(Participant XII).
This sense that PCNs should not be the only avenue
for NP funding and integration and options beyond
PCNs are necessary were widely shared by other participants
(Participants I, III, XI, XIV).
How a given PCN and its PCN physician-members
view NPs thus has an oversized effect on how the NPSP
gets implemented, as PCNs are the only avenue for NPs
to qualify for NPSP funding support. As a policy maker
noted:
[W]e’re getting some early indication that [NPs are]
also perceived as a threat, and therefore the physicians
don’t want them... (Participant VI).
Even a PCN administrator participant that was very
supportive of NP integration into PCNs emphasized that
the PCNs ought not to be the only implementation
mechanism:
I think we’re a great avenue to support [NP integration].
But I don’t necessarily think we are the only
avenue that could (Participant IX).
Using PCNs as the exclusive avenue for primary care
NP integration was considered a major limitation by
many participants. Beyond the need for options, there
were deep concerns about the governance and authority
structures that are embedded in the PCNs, and their
impact on NP integration into Alberta’s primary care
environment.
Inappropriate governance
Both NP and non-NP participants believed that
positioning the PCNs as the sole implementation
mechanism for the NPSP was highly problematic.
Their concerns centered on the fact that PCNs were
“controlled by physicians” (Participant III), “physiciancentric”
(Participant I) (Participant IX), “led by family
physicians” (Participant XIV), and “physician-led”
(Participant VI).
As 1 NP described it, choosing the PCNs to
advance NP integration was one in which the government
was essentially “asking another profession –
which is physicians - to develop the role of NPs.” This was
not only seen as “inappropriate”, but meant the NPSP was
“flawed by design” because it, “leaves the decision to physicians
to integrate [NPs]; how to integrate them; where to
integrate them” (Participant XI).
Further elaborating, the NP emphasized the power imbalance
that comes with being an employee rather than
a member of a PCN:
[NPs] can only be an employee of the PCN [not a
full member like physicians] … so you’re missing
the nursing voice at the table … How you’re
deployed, where are you deployed, how
you’re utilized. I don’t have any control
(Participant XI).
This loss of input and control was felt keenly by most
NP participants. For them, the NPSP supports an inappropriate
form of governance and dysfunctional form
of team-based care. For one participant, there was a key
difference between a team that was working together
collegially, and a team that was built around doing work
for physicians. This participant described the difference
as being one between:
People who are willing to work actually in a team –
[and people who] want a team to work for them.
Completely different (Participant I).
When team was defined collegially, and so governance
hierarchies were flattened, not just NP integration,
but reported job and patient satisfaction
improved. Under these conditions the employee-NP
model was viable from a governance standpoint as
much as it still suffered from financial challenges. Illustrating
this, an NP participant described a period
of collegial physician-NP teamwork at a PCN where
they worked:
[W] e called it the Dream Team … the patients
were really happy … It [was] the best job of my
whole life … And we co-referred, we shared, we
had hallway consults – it was incredibly dynamic.
The patients got what they want [ed] … our job
satisfaction was like a hundred percent … And
then, the medical director [of the PCN] came
back, and insisted on a hierarchy. And we all got
sort of dispersed, and we weren’t allowed to eat
lunch together … And almost everybody either
quit or was let go (Participant I).
Where anxieties about overlapping scopes of practice
and expertise, as well as financial viability, had
briefly been set aside, they returned with the medical
director who had the authority to re-impose old
hierarchies. With these hierarchies came a revised
definition of team. As a concept it shifted away from
a collegial levelling and towards treating employee
NPs as tools for greater physician productivity. As the
social distinctions between the professions were reasserted,
and the governance of NPs by physicians became
the reality, the two groups no longer ate lunch
in the same physical spaces and morale suffered.
Under what this NP saw as an inappropriate governance
regime within their PCN, NPs became mere
“helpers to physicians” expected to “fill in where doctors
have left holes in care,” (Participant I).
Another NP described how their role as a PCN employee
had been to fill in for physicians when physicians
were unavailable or during times when the
physicians preferred not to work. They described
how:
Physicians [in the PCN where I worked] would
not let me practice. [They] refused to allow me to
practice … I didn’t get it. But then, something
[would need] to be assessed right away and [they
would say], “Oh, you could go do that!” After
hours, Friday nights and weekends. [Then it was]
no problem, but during the week I could not have
clinic space (Participant XIV).
From the perspective of a participant working for both
a PCN and the provincial medical association, this
employer-employee relationship along with its governance
implications, was appropriate.
[I] f we don’t have doctors that will work until
8:00 PM and NPs are willing to fill in to meet
those primary care needs … [That is] TOTALLY
[acceptable]. Absolutely use [the NPs] in that
capacity. But for the day to day, like the eight-tofive
work of the physician when we have so many
physicians, it wouldn’t make sense to me that you
use the NP in the same way (Participant XIII).
A PCN administrator participant noted how deploying
NPs after hours and to fill in when and where
doctors were unavailable or uninterested in working
was ultimately at odds with the NPSPs goal for comprehensive
primary care:
[If an NP is] just providing access in terms of evenings
and weekends, you can’t necessarily be there to
provide that comprehensive care (Participant IX).
In this way the hierarchical rather than collegial governance
enabled by the NPSP’s choice of the PCNs was
seen, by some participants, as working against the policy’s
central goals.
Discussion
Alberta’s NPSP faces a number of critical challenges that
impede its ability to achieve its stated objective of integrating
NPs into the province’s primary care system.
These challenges include governance issues that distribute
authority and funding options unequally; financial
disincentives for NPs, physicians, and PCNs; and a small
number of highly delimited job opportunities. Each of
these represents an opportunity to adjust the policy to
be better calibrated to accomplish its main goal of NP
primary care integration.
From the majority of participants’ perspectives, perhaps
the most problematic aspect of the NPSP’s use of
the PCNs as mechanisms of integration was that this
gave physicians the final say on job availability, remuneration,
and termination, as well as how key ideas like ‘care
team’ are operationalized. In this sense, our interviews
highlighted governance impediments to NP integration
similar to those identified elsewhere [54], with other policy
and legislative arrangements described as major barriers
to effective integration [55]. Whether NPs are to be
employees or independent providers, for primary care
integration to succeed, governance arrangements that
see them collaborating with - rather than subordinate to
physicians - are likely a pre-requisite. Here we are drawing
on the observations of others who have noted the
ways in which funding and care delivery models that
support medical dominance tend to impede collaboration
[56]. Our data confirm that NPs are not encouraged
to integrate when physicians are granted the
authority to resolve territorial conflicts over scope of
practice in their own favour, or to define whether a team
will be collegial or hierarchical. As D’Amour et al. [57]
have noted, successful collaboration in healthcare teams
is the result of careful work at interpersonal, system, and
governance levels, not imbalanced relationships. In this
sense, the NPSP in its present form, embedded as it is in
the billing and governance structures of the province, is
not able to reach its full potential as a means to increase
access to quality primary care through NP participation.
Beyond governance as an issue of professional autonomy,
the NPSP fails to address longstanding financial
disincentives that affect NPs themselves, physicians, and
the PCNs. It is imperative to consider physician compensation
structures in place where NPs are attempting
to integrate. Family physicians in Alberta are able to directly
access public funding by billing the government
FFS [58], or if they choose through an annualized, sessional
or blended capitation agreements with the government
[41]. In contrast, the NPSP affords none of
these options to NPs and instead requires them to be
employees of “physician-controlled” PCNs. As such, NPs
find themselves both unable to open practices of their
own and find it challenging to generate enough revenue
to cover the overhead they incur as employees. For
their part, physicians operating on a FFS basis –
which is to say the majority of primary care practices
in the province – find that NPs, along with other
members of the care team working alongside them,
are unable to bill for services that physicians would
normally provide. The inability to bill the government
for services rendered by non-physician care team
members has been consistently identified as an impediment
to integrating non-physicians into FFS practices
[26, 59]. Indeed, it has been identified as
restricting NP integration specifically [54, 56, 60–63].
If these are the disincentives for individual NPs and
physicians, at the PCN level the NPSP proposes that
PCNs use the per capita revenue generated by the patients
on an NP’s panel to cover, or partially cover, that
NP’s salary. The challenge here is that this per capita
funding is at the center of the PCNs’ financial model.
Redirecting per capita payments – the PCNs’ only
source of revenue – towards NP salaries is a redirection
away from other care initiatives and practice support
work at the heart of these organizations’ mandate. In
this sense, deploying a physician who can bill the government
FFS, and not an NP who draws down the local
budget, is a more sensible option as a physician frees up
more PCN money. The NPSP does not adequately address
the fact PCNs are financially incentivized to utilize
physicians over NPs – a critical point since the decision
to utilize NPs, as the policy is presently written, remains
a choice for the PCN to make. If the goal is for longterm
NP utilization, rather than a “fill in” for the shortterm,
these financial disincentives need to be addressed.
The sense among participants was that options beyond
PCNs, and options beyond panel driven general practice
were central to achieving greater NP integration in the
province’s primary care system.
of the NPSP was in its failure to conceptualize the operational
and practical role of NPs as they integrated into
primary care. The Program does not provide clarity regarding
the roles and positioning of NPs in the primary
care system: is the objective to add NP jobs, where the
NP acts as a supplement to physicians in certain geographical
areas, with certain patient population, or after
hours? Or is the role of the NP to partner with a physician
and together manage patients? Perhaps the goal
was to enable NPs to operate as independent practitioners.
These goals do not have to be mutually exclusive,
but each require different operational and funding
barriers to be addressed for the stated goal to be met.
Any policy that impacts the role of NPs should offer
clear definitions of goals and roles of the program, particularly
from the perspective of the finer operational details.
In addition, the concerns of existing stakeholders
need to be anticipated and addressed in a comprehensive
manner – meaning they must be developed with broad
clinician and stakeholder consultation. In other words,
NPs should, as one participant put it, “have a seat at the
table” in providing input to how their role is utilized.
Conclusion
Three major factors are impeding Alberta’s NPSP from
realizing its own objective of increasing NP integration
into primary care: 1) financial viability issues in which
NPs, physicians, and PCNs are all adversely affected; 2)
policy issues in which PCNs with competing priorities
act as NP employers, and NPs are expected to panel patients
in competition with PCN physicians; and 3) governance
issues in which NPs are not afforded sufficient
authority over their role or how the key concept of ‘care
team’ is defined and operationalized. In its current iteration,
the NPSP does not appear to be a long-term solution
for increasing NP integration into the province’s
primary care environment. Increased NP integration in
primary care likely requires increased funding flexibility
that will allow NPs to access funding directly from the
government, outside PCNs, with funding options to fit
their individual practice setting. In addition, future NP
policy development should: 1) ensure a clear goal for the
NP role is established through clinician and stakeholder
consultation including NPs themselves; and 2) ensure
funding, policy, and governance structures are aligned
with this envisioned goal for successful NP integration
into various primary care practice settings.