Background
Incisional hernias are one of the most common problems
seen in general surgery practice. While expectant management
is appropriate for some patients, many patients
with an incisional hernia will require surgery [1]. Unfortunately,
recurrence after repair is common with some
studies reporting rates of more than 50% among patients
who have been followed for at least 10 years after surgery
[2]. To some extent, this likely reflects the fact that there
is very little high-quality evidence to guide management
and it is often unclear which approaches, if any, are associated
with the best outcomes. In contrast to other surgical
problems, there are many different techniques and
materials that can be used to repair an incisional hernia.
Surgeon decision-making is further complicated by the
frequent introduction of new materials and novel procedures
for managing these patients. This is illustrated by
the fact that in just 2 years (2013–2015) 77 new hernia
meshes were approved for clinical use by the Food and
Drug Administration in the United States [3]. Given the
variety of mesh products currently available and different
surgical approaches described in the literature, the
potential for variation in clinical practice and confusion
among surgeons is likely as high as it has ever been. However,
very little is known about the current management
of incisional hernias among practicing surgeons or how
much variation may exist. Therefore, the purpose of this
research was to describe the self-reported practice patterns
of Canadian general surgeons for the elective management
of incisional hernias.
Methods
A mail survey was sent to all general surgeons in Canada
between. Mailing addresses were obtained from the
Canadian Medical Directory. A cover letter explaining
the purpose of the study was included along with the
survey. Each respondent was provided with a stamped,
addressed envelope to return the questionnaire. The
survey was translated into French, and both French and
English versions were sent to surgeons in Quebec to
complete in the language of their choice. Only one survey
was sent to each surgeon and there were no reminders or
follow-up surveys.
The survey was designed in conjunction with experts
in ventral hernia repair from our institution (Additional
file 1: Appendix A). It was then reviewed by academic
and community general surgeons for content and clarity
and changes were made based on the feedback. The
survey collected data regarding years in practice, practice
setting, surgical training, frequency of hernia repair, and
whether or not surgeons considered themselves hernia
repair “experts”. Surgeons were asked to describe their
usual surgical technique for a patient with a midline
incisional hernia following a right hemicolectomy with a
10 × 6 cm fascial defect. This included surgical approach,
use of mesh, type of mesh, mesh placement, mesh fixation
technique, fascial closure and use of component
separation. The following definitions were used for mesh
placement; onlay: above the fascia, inlay: retrorectus,
preperitoneal (within the abdominal wall) and sublay;
intraperitoneal.
Descriptive statistics were calculated using Microsoft
Excel. Categorical variables were described using proportions
and frequencies and chi square analysis was used
for comparison between groups. Responses were compared
between self-reported experts and non-experts.
No information was available for the non-responders.
Approval for this study was obtained from the Nova
Scotia Health Authority research ethics board. All methods
were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines
and regulations. By filling out and returning the
survey the participants provided informed consent for
involvement with the study.
Results
Of the 1837 surveys mailed out to general surgeons
across Canada 555 (30.0%) were returned. Twenty-seven
respondents indicated that were no longer in practice
and 45 reported that they did not perform incisional hernia
repairs. The remaining 483 respondents comprised
the study cohort (Table 1). Among these respondents,
76% regularly perform incisional hernia repairs, and 37%
of those considered themselves experts. In contrast only
1.5% and 0.2% of surgeons who repair incisional hernias
infrequently or only when on call consider themselves
experts, respectively.
Given the clinical scenario of a patient with an incisional
hernia following a right hemicolectomy with a
10 × 6 cm midline fascial defect, the majority of surgeons
indicated that they would perform an open repair
(74%), followed by laparoscopic (18.4%) and hybrid
(7.6%) approaches. Almost all surgeons reported that
they would use a permanent mesh to repair the hernia
(Table 2) and 93% would place anchoring sutures.
Seventy-three percent of surgeons reported that they
would perform a primary fascial closure and just under
half would perform a component separation (Table 3).
Surgeons performing open procedures were more likely
to use primary fascial closure compared to those who
would perform laparoscopic operations (83% versus 23%,
p < 0.05). Of those who perform a component separation
57% indicated that they would perform a posterior component
separation. The self-reported experts were more
likely to report using primary fascial closure (83% versus
67%, p < 0.05) and component separation (58% versus
39%, p < 0.05) compared to the non-experts.
The most common “overall surgical approach” was an
open repair with mesh and primary fascial closure aided
by a component separation. This was described by 37%
of all respondents and 40% of the self-reported experts
(Table 4). When only considering mesh location, primary
fascial closure and component separation twelve different
operations were described to repair the hernia in the
clinical scenario (Table 5). The most common operation
was an open repair, with an intraperitoneal mesh, with
primary fascial closure and a component separation.
Discussion
Previously, very little has been known about the management
of incisional hernias in Canada. In this study
of self-reported practice patterns almost all surgeons
reported that they would use permanent mesh. This is
supported by the literature and is in keeping with current
guidelines [1]. It was the most consistent practice among
respondents. The use of laparoscopic surgery reported by
surgeons in this study was considerably lower than that
reported in previous clinical studies [4, 5]. This likely
reflects the size of the defect described in our clinical
scenario and the technical challenges associated with
closing the fascia laparoscopically [6]. There was considerable
variation among Canadian Surgeons regarding
mesh type, mesh location, component separation techniques
and the overall surgical approach they would use
to repair an incisional hernia.
The variation in surgical practice observed in this study
and in previous retrospective studies from Europe and
the United States [4, 5, 7, 8] is likely due, in part, to a lack
of high-quality evidence to guide care. Despite the fact
that incisional hernia repair is a common procedure and
is associated with high recurrence rates, very few randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) have been performed to
evaluate surgical techniques [9]. Most of the literature
consists of observational studies and case series. Studies
frequently combine heterogeneous patient populations
with incisional, primary ventral and umbilical hernias [7].
Within studies focused exclusively on incisional hernias,
there is often substantial variation regarding hernia size,
hernia location and co-morbidities among patients [10,
11]. A recent systematic review of study quality among
RCTs for incisional hernia repair highlighted several limitations.
This included inconsistent techniques to determine
hernia recurrence among studies (clinical exam
and/or imaging) and variability in length of follow-up
after surgery ranging from 1 to 64 months [9].
Another important limitation associated with the hernia
literature is the lack of standardized definitions. This
is of particular concern for the anatomic planes use for
placement of mesh. The terms “onlay”, “overlay”, “inlay”,
“underlay” and “sublay” have been used interchangeably
to describe various repairs [12]. This has made hernia
research, evaluation of outcomes and comparison of
studies difficult. To address this issue Parker et al. have
proposed a standardized classification of abdominal wall
planes developed by a consensus panel of abdominal wall
reconstruction experts [13]. They defined eleven potential
locations for mesh placement, some of which have
not commonly been described. Our survey was developed
and sent out prior to this publication. The number
of anatomic planes and definitions we used differed from
those proposed by Parker et al. but were in keeping with
what has been described in the literature. Given that the
new standardized classification system was just published
in 2020 it is too soon for it to have influenced the hernia
repair literature. Whether or not it will gain widespread
acceptance and how long this may take is unknown.
In addition to mesh placement, there are many other
variables involved in repair of an incisional hernia including
operative approach (open vs laparoscopic), type of
mesh (permanent vs absorbable), fixation methods,
mesh material, mesh weight, primary fascial closure and
component separation. When considering all these possible
factors, there are a remarkable number of different
ways that an incisional hernia can be repaired. Ideally the
choice of hernia repair technique should be tailored for
each patient based on patient- and hernia-specific features.
In the current study, Canadian surgeons reported
12 different ways they would repair the same hernia
based on only three factors: mesh location, fascial closure
and component separation. It is highly unlikely that each
of these repairs will lead to the same outcomes, and differences
in these techniques, and others, likely explain
the variation in hernia recurrence rates among surgeons
[7].
Previous studies have reported that patients treated
by surgeons who have specialized training and clinical
practice focused on abdominal wall reconstruction [14],
or those who perform high volumes of incisional hernia
surgery [15], have better outcomes compared to other
patients. These improved results may be due to more
appropriate choice of procedures and/or mesh materials,
better surgical technique or a combination of both. In the
present study, surgeons who considered themselves hernia
repair experts were more likely to perform primary
fascial closure in keeping with guidelines. However, there
was still considerable variation in surgical procedures
among the “experts”. While criteria to define expertise
were not included in our study, such criteria have been
described [16, 17]. Given the increasing complexity of
incisional hernia surgery it has been suggested that there
is a need for both specialized hernia centers and surgeons
[16, 17]. Given the vast geography and population distribution
of a country like Canada, centralization of hernia
surgery in high volume tertiary-care centers is not realistic.
However, limiting the number of surgeons in community
and regional hospitals who perform incisional
hernia surgery, and ensuring that they have appropriate
training is potentially feasible. Given the variation in care
reported in this study and ongoing evolution of incisional
hernia repair techniques, continuing professional
development events are needed now and in the future.
This should include both hands-on courses and didactic
teaching opportunities. Both have been shown to be
important for improving the delivery of other surgical
procedures in Canada [18].
Regardless of where incisional hernia surgery is performed
or who performs it, a systematic approach
to assessing new materials and surgical techniques is
needed. The availability of numerous different types of
hernia mesh, and the introduction of new materials, is
facilitated by a system that does not require clinical trials
to prove safety or effectiveness prior to use in clinical
practice [3, 19]. All that is required is proof of “substantial
equivalence” to materials and devices that have been previously
approved. There is even less oversight regarding
the introduction and adoption of new surgical techniques
into clinical care. The use of component separation for
incisional hernia repair is good example of this. Anterior
component separation was first described 30 years ago
while posterior component separation (TAR) was introduced
in 2012 [20, 21]. A 2018 meta-analysis compared
the impact of these two approaches on outcomes for
patients with incisional hernias. The literature consisted
of retrospective studies and case series that included a
total of only 566 cases [22]. No RCTs or controlled prospective
trials were identified. While short-term morbidity
appears to be acceptable with these procedures [23],
there are no data regarding the impact of anterior or posterior
component separation on long-term respiratory
function, pelvic stability, back pain, abdominal wall function
or long-term hernia recurrence [1]. Despite this, the
use of component separation appears to be increasing.
It was used for 9% of open ventral hernia repairs from
2005 to 2013 in the United States [24], but in the present
study 47% of survey respondents indicated that they
would perform a component separation. Whether or not
a component separation is appropriate for a patient with
a 10 × 6 cm fascial defect is unclear. Given the lack of evidence
to guide care surgeons may be unsure of when this
procedure is clinically indicated. There may be other factors
such a financial remuneration that influence the utilization
of this procedure. We did not provide a definition
of component separation with our survey. It is possible
that surgeons who reported doing this procedure are in
fact doing something other than what we had intended
to capture.
There are several limitations associated with this
research that should be considered. The response rate
was 30%. It is possible that the non-responders were
different from those who completed the survey leading
to response bias. There are no data available for the
non-responders. Despite the response rate, practice patterns
for almost 500 surgeons from across the country
were collected. Surgeons may have provided answers to
the survey questions based on perceived best practices
as opposed to what they would actually do in their own
practice. However, there is evidence suggesting that selfreported
physician practice patterns measured using
a clinical vignette are similar to actual clinical practice
[25]. This study was not linked to actual clinical care and
it is unclear how the reported variation in hernia management
impacts patient outcomes. The survey did not
ask about the use of robotic repair as robotic surgery is
not widely available in Canada. Finally, given the lack of
standardized terms and definitions for certain elements
of incisional hernia repair, some of the survey questions
may have been unclear or confusing and the responses
may not have been accurate.
Conclusions
This study highlights that there is substantial variation
in surgical techniques used to repair incisional hernias
among Canadian General Surgeons. Although most surgeons
reported that they would use permanent mesh
with a primary fascial closure, more than 20% would perform
a bridging repair and there was considerable variation
among most other aspects of the procedure. There
is a clear need for high quality research to help surgeons
make rational decisions that optimize patient outcomes
and use resources appropriately. Mesh location and the
use of component separation techniques are important
issues that should be considered in future clinical trials.
The adoption of standardized nomenclature for abdominal
wall planes will be critical to this. New materials and
techniques for incisional hernia repair should not be
introduced into clinical practice without mechanisms to
evaluate their safety and effectiveness. Finally, there is a
clear need to provide surgeons with continuing professional
development opportunities now, given the current
variation in care, and in the future as the evidence
evolves for the management of incisional hernias.