Since the first documented case of COVID-19 in the
United States (US) on January 21, 2020, many hospitals
have had to enact strict measures to prevent further
spread of the virus among the population. The pandemic
has led to widespread disruptions in the performance of
elective and outpatient procedures. Endoscopic procedures
were especially affected by these disruptions due to
high rates of aerosolization of the virus by upper endoscopy,
viral shedding in the stool, and potential contamination
of endoscopy suite surfaces with viable virus up to
72 h after initial contact [1]. As endoscopic procedures
also carry a high risk of viral spread to healthcare providers,
it became necessary for hospitals to set up an organized
model for re-opening endoscopy suites to elective procedures through a combination of testing, triage, and
provision of appropriate personal protective equipment
to patients and staff. Little is currently known regarding
the efficacy of these measures in preventing transmission
of the novel virus to staff and patients in this context.
Since patient perception of procedure associated infection
has been identified as a significant concern when
restarting outpatient elective procedures, it is crucial to
assess the safety of our procedures to ensure ongoing
appropriate utilization of outpatient endoscopy [2].
As of the date of this manuscript, there have been over
33 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the United
States out of 173 million cases worldwide with over 3.5
million COVID-19 related deaths worldwide [3]. The
infectious transmission of the virus is thought to be via
respiratory droplets with potential for airborne spread
during aerosol-producing procedures, such as endoscopy
[4]. The insidious nature of the epidemic stems from
its high rate of asymptomatic spread, with 80% of cases
being mild or asymptomatic [4]. Considering this, the
US Surgeon General recommended the cancellation of
all elective procedures on March 14, 2020 [5]. Soon after
on March 17, 2020, the American College of Surgeons,
American Gastroenterological Association (AGA), and
the other national gastroenterology societies recommended
rescheduling elective procedures to focus only
urgent and emergent endoscopic procedures [6–8].
The first inpatient case of COVID-19 at our institution
was confirmed on March 3, 2020. As the number of
inpatient cases increased, the capacity to safely perform
invasive procedures decreased with limited guidance
regarding appropriate re-opening strategies and stratification
of endoscopic cases from the joint GI societies [9,
10]. As the prevalence of disease became more clearly
established by widespread testing within our institution
and community, the Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology developed a tiered strategy in an effort to
resume timely scheduling of patients awaiting diagnostic
procedures. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), in concordance with multi-society guidelines,
helped provide a framework for gradual reopening
of outpatient clinical procedures. Here we describe the
process and outcomes of a tier-based system for scheduling
outpatient endoscopy, in the context of an ongoing,
and evolving pandemic, to provide diagnostic and screening
endoscopy services within a reasonable period applying
appropriate risk mitigation precautions for patients
and staff members. In addition, within the context of
those needing urgent procedures we identified barriers to
proceeding with endoscopy. Despite the absence of procedural
COVID-19 transmission at our institution, concerns
voiced by patients provided important insight into
challenges the gastroenterology community will have to
address in the immediate future and beyond.
Methods
Using the EPIC electronic medical record (EMR),
patients with cancelled procedures due to the COVID-19
pandemic from 3/16/2020 to 4/20/2020 were identified
from two separate practice locations within our medical
system, the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB)
endoscopy unit in Galveston and the UTMB League City
campus endoscopy unit. Patients were stratified into
tier groups (1–4) by gastroenterology faculty in order of
urgency (Table 1). During phase 1 of Texas’s reopening,
tier 1 (urgent/emergent) and tier 2 (semi-urgent) cases
were identified and reviewed by the newly formed Endoscopy
Committee and, if approved, were contacted by the
nursing staff and scheduled within 1 week and 4 weeks
respectively. During phase 2, tier 3 and 4 cases were to be
rescheduled within 3 months. After the initial scheduling,
the barriers to successful rescheduling were assessed
and organized by the nursing staff (Table 2). Within a
short period after the initiation of the tier system, once
the urgent and semi-urgent cases were scheduled, due to
increase surge capacity all tiers were eventually accommodated
at the patient’s earliest convenience.
Our hospital risk mitigation strategies included a strict
no visitor policy, temperature and symptom screening
of all hospital employees at the entrance to the hospital,
mandating the use of masks in all patient care areas
of the hospital, maintaining 6 feet of social distancing,
and mandatory testing of all inpatients for COVID-19
as well as COVID-19 testing for all health care providers
involved in endoscopy patient care. In the endoscopy
unit, comprehensive personal protective equipment
(PPE) protocols were developed based on national and
international guidance and experience including: head
coverings, gowning, N95 masks for all staff during endoscopy
(with mandate for prior fit testing performed) in
addition to an overlying surgical mask, eye protection,
and double gloving. Specific doffing and donning techniques
with hand hygiene were implemented and quality
checks by staff were enforced [11, 12]. Enhanced cleaning
techniques were implemented for each active endoscopy
suite between cases, with increased time between scheduled
cases to account for these measures. All patients
underwent pre-procedure COVID-19 testing within
72 h of their scheduled procedure with polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) test, or rapid testing on day of procedure,
if unable to be screened prior. Both were administered
and processed at our institution. In addition, all patients
were screened for COVID-19 symptoms on the day of
procedure at admission with a plan to reschedule anyone
with a positive COVID-19 test or suggestive symptoms.
Patients who had completed their respective endoscopic
procedures were contacted by telephone to inquire
if they underwent COVID-19 testing within 14 days postprocedure
(Table 3). The symptoms experienced at the
time, reason for testing, and results of the testing were
assessed to evaluate the efficacy of peri-procedural transmission
prevention measures.
Results
Of the 540 patients awaiting delayed endoscopic procedures
between 3/16/2020 to 4/20/2020 due to the pandemic,
227 patients across all tiers were rescheduled. Of
these, only 57.14% of tier 1 and 48.97% of tier 2 could be
scheduled at their originally intended procedure interval,
respectively. Even with the capability to accommodate for
all tier 1 and tier 2 patients, the average delay of endoscopy
from the initial scheduled procedure date to index
endoscopy was 32 days, with the longest delay being
86 days. Despite counseling on extensive safety measures
instituted as well as the indication for the procedure, the
most identified barrier for patients to return to undergo
urgent or semi-urgent endoscopy was COVID-19 related
concerns in 40% of tier 1 and tier 2 patients. 7.2% of
patients in the same cohort identified new financial limitations
as reasons for not scheduling. Patient refusals
while scheduling Tiers 1 & 2 allowed prompt scheduling
of majority of the other tiers early. Our pre-procedure
COVID-19 testing of the patients willing to return
for their procedures revealed a seroprevalence of 1.3%,
which is lower than the test positivity of 4.4% in the general
population of Galveston county at the same time and
continued to rise even after the conclusion of our study.
Of the 281 patients who underwent their re-scheduled
endoscopic procedures (Table 3), 94.7% of
patients received the rapid molecular diagnostic test
(Rapid ID Now) and 5.3% of patients received the PCR
test. The average number of days patients were tested
prior to their procedures was 2 days. 24% of patients
who underwent upper endoscopies and 3.7% of those
who underwent lower endoscopies were tested again
during post-procedure follow up either due to newonset
symptoms suspicious for COVID-19 infection,
or requiring hospitalization for unrelated reasons,
or needing medical clearance prior to follow-up
procedure. Of the patients who were symptomatic,
fever, cough and gastrointestinal symptoms were the
most reported. None of the patients who underwent
post-procedure testing were positive for COVID-19.
Of the 4 patients that reported fever after endoscopy,
3 of the patients tested negative for COVID-19 by
rapid assay. One patient declined testing because fever
resolved within 24 h. During the study period, no cases
of endoscopy unit transmission to staff were identified.
Of the patients in tier 1 and tier 2 who successfully
underwent rescheduled endoscopy, 4 patients
were diagnosed with a gastrointestinal malignancy or
inflammatory bowel disease. These cases consisted of
gastric adenocarcinoma, esophageal adenocarcinoma,
ulcerative colitis, and Crohn’s disease. The average
delay of endoscopy in these 4 patients was 34 days
from the initial scheduled procedure date to the index
endoscopy. The patient with gastric adenocarcinoma
passed away within 1 month of diagnosis. The
patient with Crohn’s disease was listed as deceased
within 3 months of diagnosis for unclear reasons and
occurred outside the confines of our electronic medical
record. No significant interim upper or lower gastrointestinal
bleeds were identified.
Discussion
In an attempt to preserve hospital beds, resources, PPE
and to protect staff and patients during the COVID-19
pandemic, non-emergent endoscopies were delayed or
canceled leading to a substantial reduction in procedures
performed in endoscopy suites. Use of our model for reopening
endoscopy suites by a tier-based system allowed
recognition of barriers for scheduling and facilitated
appropriate utilization of the excess capacity to accommodate
most patients across all tiers within 4 weeks.
Thus, minimizing delays in patient care.
By practicing our strict risk mitigation strategies, which
were in line with experiences and practice in Italy implicating
low risk of transmission during endoscopy if the
proper precautions are taken, we were able to limit the
peri-procedure transmission to nil as shown by the data
from our post-procedure surveys (Table 3) [13, 14].
Despite these successes, the barriers to restarting endoscopy
in our study remain the public perception of safety
in addition to the financial cost and loss of insurance coverage
during the pandemic. This narrowed the utility of
our tier system, as our highest priority patients identified
COVID-19 related unemployment and financial limitations
besides peri-procedure infection concerns as reasons
for postponing their procedures. While COVID-19
related concerns accounted for the largest proportion
of patients in all groups, a financial disparity was noted
in comparison to our Tier 4 patients (most often average
risk colon cancer screening colonoscopies), none of
whom reported insurance or cost concerns for reasons
for postponement. Interestingly, our reported rates of
COVID-19 concern related postponement in procedures
are much higher than the rates reported by Rex
et al., where only 4.3% were unwilling to undergo elective
endoscopy in May 2020 versus 16.3% across all tiers
in our cohort [2]. Partly this difference is likely related to
relative lower socioeconomic status of our main hospital’s
catchment area, Galveston County, including a 12.9%
poverty rate prior to the pandemic. Individuals with
lower incomes and education perceive higher personal
health and financial threats from COVID-19 compared
to other groups [15]. This may explain this disparity, particularly
at the beginning of the pandemic when infection
burden in our area was relatively low compared to
other parts of the country. Relatively slower peaking of
the infection rates in the region led to a situation where
public perception and fear played a role in some delay
in resuming the procedural services. Implementation of
safety measures with a robust testing capacity and easy
access for patients and endoscopy staff as well as appropriate
planning for adequate supplies of PPE from the
onset and throughout allowed relatively high overall
number of patients to eventually undergoing endoscopic
procedures during this period. While the tiered approach
for rescheduling and higher patient response rate for survey
after the procedures are the strengths of the study,
the limitations include relatively lower number of Tier 1
and Tier 4 patients who could be rescheduled. After initial
testing, lack of serial formal COVID-19 testing for
endoscopy staff during the study period is another potential
limitation to detect asymptomatic transmission.
Suspending non-urgent endoscopic procedures has
serious clinical and financial implications. Approximately
18 million endoscopic procedures are performed
annually in the US with an estimated annual healthcare
cost of $32.4 billion [16, 17]. The consequences of suspending
elective endoscopy for even 6 months has grim
medical implications including the impediment of surveilling
nearly 1,500 fatal but preventable variceal bleeds
in cirrhotic patients [18–20]. Additionally, there could
be a delay in the diagnosis of nearly 22,000 high grade
adenomatous polyps with malignant potential and 3000
colorectal cancers, resulting in a 6.5% increase in the
6-month mortality rate for patients who would eventually
be diagnosed with colorectal cancer [17, 21, 22]. Our
study identified delays in the diagnosis of 2 gastrointestinal
malignancies and 2 cases of inflammatory bowel disease
in patients with the highest priority in endoscopy. A
recent study estimated a 58% decrease in weekly cancer
detections and up to a 95% decrease in endoscopic activity
during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic when
compared to pre-COVID-19 activity [23]. It is therefore
important to methodically recommence non-emergent
endoscopy to minimize the economic and health impacts
of its suspension.
With the progression of the COVID-19 pandemic,
multiple best practice guidelines have emerged regarding
pre-procedure, peri-procedure, and post-procedure
risk mitigation strategies. One particular study analyzed
the consensus of effectiveness of these strategies among
multi-national large endoscopy departments using a
modified Delphi method [24]. Many of the high consensus
recommendations were in-line with the mitigation
strategies performed at our institution. Other recent
studies have detailed the most cost-effective strategies
of pre-procedure testing and risk stratification including
similar use of telephone screening methods as in our
study [24, 25].
To conclude, our tiered approach for rescheduling
while following strict risk mitigation strategies allowed
for successfully resuming outpatient endoscopic procedures
keeping patients as well as endoscopy staff safe and
protected from COVID-19 transmission. Patients who
opted to proceed with their procedures were successfully
accommodated with 15 min additional time allotted
to room cleaning and turnover per case. Additionally,
our mitigation measures resulted in no transmission
of COVID-19 cases that could be traced back to exposure
during endoscopy. Future studies regarding procedural
transmission of COVID-19 in the asymptomatic
population may further allay patient fears. However, the
financial impact of this pandemic will continue to be a
stubborn remnant from this novel virus, delaying patient
care and impacting utilization of endoscopy in the future.
Conclusion
By implementing a tiered approach to reschedule patients
undergoing elective endoscopy during the height of the
COVID-19 pandemic with strict risk mitigation strategies,
our institution was able to safely restart outpatient
endoscopy to minimize delays in endoscopic diagnosis
and patient care. All patients deemed higher risk that
were willing to undergo endoscopy were accommodated
for. The main barrier to rescheduling was public perception
of safety. The risk mitigation measures taken allowed
for zero transmission of COVID-19 among patients and
staff members.