Background
The prevalence of ulcerative colitis (UC) is on the rise,
and it is widespread in different regions around the world
[1, 2]. UC is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
characterized by a disease course involving relapses and
remissions [3]. Although a significant short-term benefit
was observed after infliximab treatment, the colectomy
rate remained stable in patients with UC. Despite many
efforts, the surgical management of UC remains a significant
challenge [4]. Mucosal healing (MH) is the key factor
in quality of life, long-term remission, hospitalization,
colorectal cancer, and surgery [5–8]. The therapeutic goal
of UC is thus not only to relieve clinical remission, but
also to achieve MH.
The association between eating habits and gastrointestinal
diseases has been reported. The dinner-to-bedtime
interval was inversely associated with gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD) [9–13]. Eating quickly, eating until
full, and skipping breakfast was positively associated with
GERD [14]. Another study showed the positive relationship
between skipping breakfast and severity of GERD
[15]. Eating quickly and having irregular meal patterns
were positively associated with functional dyspepsia
(FD) [16–18] and constipation [19], respectively. Given
the association between eating habits and gastrointestinal
disease, we sought to examine if eating habits affect
disease activity in patients with UC. To date, there have
been no reports on the association between eating habits
and UC. Thus, we aimed to evaluate the association
between eating habits and clinical outcome in Japanese
patients with UC.
Material and methods
Study population
Study subjects consisted of patients with UC who
attended the Department of Gastroenterology and
Metabology at the Ehime University Graduate School
of Medicine or several affiliated hospitals in Ehime Prefecture
(the Ehime Clinical Network for Alimentary
Diseases study group). All patients were diagnosed with
UC based on endoscopic, histological, radiological, and
clinical criteria. All patients who were able to consent
to this study and respond to the self-administered questionnaire
were considered candidates for this study. This
study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki. The institutional review board of the Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine approved the
study protocol (#1505011). Trained staff obtained written
informed consent from all enrolled patient. The study
was registered at each hospital between 2015 and 2019.
Measurements
Information on endoscopic findings, extent of UC, medication,
and C-reactive protein (CRP) was collected from
medical records. Each participant completed a selfreported
questionnaire that collected data on eating habits.
Current smoking was defined as positive if a subject
reported smoking at least one cigarette per day. Current
drinking was defined as positive if a subject reported any
drinking, regardless of frequency or amount. Blood samples
were taken in the morning after overnight fasting.
Each patient’s BMI was calculated as their weight (kg)
divided by the square of their height (
m2). Blood examination
was performed when a colonoscopy was booked
or when the colonoscopy examination was performed,
and there was up to two months between the two.
Definition of eating habits
Eating rate, eating until full, and skipping breakfast data
were determined from a self-administered questionnaire.
Quick eating and slow eating were based, respectively, on
whether a respondent answered “fast” or “very fast” and
“slow” or “very slow” to the question, “How fast do you
eat your meals?” (the 5 response options were very slow,
slow, medium, fast, and very fast). Self-reported eating
speed showed a high level of agreement with eating speed
reported by a friend; the percentages of exact and adjunct
categories of answers (e.g., very fast and fast were regarded
as agreeing) were 46% and 47%, respectively [20]. Eating
until full was defined on the basis of whether or not the
respondent answered “Yes” to the question, “Do you tend
to eat too much?” Skipping breakfast was defined as missing
breakfast at least three times per week: “How often do
you eat breakfast?” (the 6 response options were less than
once a month, 1–3 times per month, 1–2 times per week,
3–4 times per week, 5–6 times per week, and every day).
Definition of mucosal healing
The Mayo endoscopic subscore (MES) contains four categories
[21]. Partial MH and MH were defined as category
0 and 0–1 in this study, respectively. A single endoscopic
specialist was responsible for evaluating MES and MH, and
was blinded to eating habits, CRP, and clinical remission.
Statistical analysis
(1) Eating rate was divided into three categories: slow
(reference), moderate and quick. (2) Eating until full was
divided into two categories: no (reference) and yes. (3)
Skipping breakfast was divided into two categories: no (reference)
and yes. Estimations of crude odds ratios (ORs)
and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for clinical remission,
partial MH, and MH in relation to eating habits were
performed using logistic regression analysis. Multiple
logistic regression analyses were used to adjust for potential
confounding factors. Age, sex, BMI, current smoking,
current drinking, prednisolone use, and anti-TNFα monoclonal
antibody use were selected a priori as potential
confounding factors. Statistical analyses were performed
using SAS software package version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC, USA). All probability values for statistical tests
were two-tailed, and p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
Results
Table 1 shows the clinical characteristics of study participants.
A total of 294 Japanese patients with UC were
included in this study. The percentages of men, current
smoking, and current drinking were 59.2%, 7.5%,
and 40.8%, respectively. Mean age, BMI, clinical remission,
partial MH, MH, quick eating, eating until full,
and skipping breakfast were 51.1 years, 22.75, 58.8%,
63.2%, 26.1%, 53.1%, 62.2%, and 13.6%, respectively. Most
patients in the present study used 5-aminosalicylates.
Table 2 shows the crude and adjusted ORs and 95% CIs
for clinical outcome in relation to eating rate. In the crude
analysis, eating rate was not associated with clinical remission
or partial MH. After adjustment for sex, age, BMI,
current smoking, current drinking, and prednisolone and
TNF-α monoclonal antibody use, eating moderately and
eating quickly were independently inversely associated with
MH; the adjusted ORs were 0.38 (95% CI 0.16–0.85) and
0.38 (95% CI 0.17–0.81), respectively (p for trend = 0.033).
Table 3 shows the association between eating until full
and clinical outcome. Eating until full was independently
inversely associated with only MH after adjustment for
confounding factors: the adjusted OR was 0.38 (95% CI
0.27–0.86).
The association between skipping breakfast and clinical
remission is shown in Table 4. The percentage of MH
in patients who skip breakfast was marginally lower than
in those who did not skip breakfast (p = 0.06). Skipping
breakfast was not, however, associated with all clinical
outcomes after adjustment for confounding factors.
Discussion
In the present study, eating rate and eating until full but not
skipping breakfast were independently inversely associated
with MH among 294 Japanese patients with UC. Eating
habits were not associated with clinical remission or partial
MH. This is the first study to report the association between
eating habits and clinical outcome in patients with UC.
The association between eating habits and the onset of
lifestyle-related diseases has previously been examined.
Eating quickly was associated with obesity [22–25] and
blood pressure [22–24]. Eating until full was associated
with obesity and central obesity [26, 27]. Skipping breakfast
was positively associated with obesity [28], low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol [29], and onset of diabetes [30].
The association between eating habits and digestive diseases
has also been reported. Eating dinner late was associated
with GERD. In a case–control study of Japanese
patients, the dinner-to-bedtime interval was independently
inversely associated with GERD [9]. Similar results
were reported in Iranian [10], Albanian [11], Korean [12],
and a Japanese study [13]. Eating quickly is associated
with GERD and FD. Eating quickly was positively associated
with GERD in a case–control study of 1518 Chinese 
subjects [14]. In a cross-sectional Iranian study of 4763
subjects, eating quickly was associated with FD [16]. In
a Serbian study, the statistical tendency to eat quickly
among patients with FD was high [17]. In a Korean study
of 87 patients, the frequency of eating meals within
13 min among patients with FD was higher than that
among patients with GERD and the control group [18].
Eating until full and skipping breakfast were positively
associated with GERD in the above-mentioned Chinese
study [14]. In a cross-sectional Japanese study in which
19,864 subjects underwent medical checkups, skipping
breakfast had a positive relationship with GERD severity
based on a frequency scale for symptoms of GERD [15].
Skipping meals, including skipping breakfast, was positively
associated with FD [16, 17, 31]. Skipping breakfast
was positively associated with constipation in Japanese university
students [19]. In contrast, no association between
skipping breakfast and GERD was found in a Turkish study
[32] and another Japanese study [33]. Several studies found
a positive association between unhealthy eating behaviors
and digestive diseases. The association between eating
behavior and digestive diseases remains inconsistent, however.
The inconsistency might be explained at least in part
by sample size, age, BMI, eating behavior definitions, and
questionnaire differences. To the best of our knowledge,
no studies have investigated the association between eating
habits and IBD, including Crohn’s disease. The underlying
mechanism linking eating habits and MH among patients
with UC remains unclear. Eating rate is inversely associated
with numbers of chewing. Chewing was associated
with mucosal blood flow via nitric oxide [34]. Eating until
full might affect the ghrelin and leptin levels. In IBD model
mice, both ghrelin and leptin were associated with intestinal
motility and inflammation [35, 36]. Higher ghrelin and
lower leptin in patients with UC had been observed compared
to healthy controls [37]. Thus, eating quickly might
induce mucosal ischemia via low nitric oxide, and eating
until full might activate intestinal motility and inflammation
via gastrointestinal hormones.
Our study has a few limitations. First, this was a crosssectional
study. Eating habits can, however, undergo
intervention. Further research is needed to confirm the
association between eating habits and MH in the future.
Second, most of the patients were receiving treatment. The
long duration of such treatment might have affected eating
habits and clinical outcomes. Third, potential confounding
factors, such as dietary patterns, nutritional information
for the specific foods consumed, and other health-related
behaviors, might be missing. Fourth, although self-reported
eating rate was validated in a previous study [18, 20],
information on eating habits was based on a self-reported
questionnaire. Data on frequency of skipping breakfast
and eating until full were also based on the responses to
a self-reported questionnaire. Fifth, this cohort consisted
only of Japanese patients with UC. As dietary patterns vary
among cultures, further research is needed to confirm the
association between eating habits and MH in UC patients
from other parts of the world. Finally, the patients of the
present study were not likely representative of patients with
UC in Japan. Nevertheless, the men: women ratio, median
age, and use of biologics, prednisolone, 5-aminosalicylates,
and thiopurines were similar between the present study
(59.2%, 48.0 years, 6.1%, 20.8%, 91.5%, and 16.0%, and,
respectively) and a Japanese national study based on UC
claims data in 2016 (63.9%, 44.0 years, 9.0%, 15.5%, 96.2%,
and 13.8%, respectively) [38].
Conclusions
Eating rate and eating until full but not skipping breakfast
may be independently inversely associated with MH
among Japanese patients with UC.