Background
Nutritional support for critically ill is now recognized
as an integral part of patient care [1, 2]. Enteral nutrition
(EN) has been the preferred means of nutritional
support for feeding critically ill patients because of its
favorable morbidity effects, lower cost, enhancement of
gut immune function and its association with less septic
complications compared to parenteral nutrition [3, 4].
However, delivery of adequate EN might be prohibited
by critical illness induced gastrointestinal (GI) dysmotility
resulting in elevated gastric residual volumes (GRVs).
Many of the conditions associated with admission to the
intensive care unit (ICU) cause delayed gastric emptying
and result in GI dysfunction such as multi trauma, hyperglycemia,
burns, mechanical ventilation, cardiac surgery,
renal dysfunction, respiratory failure, medications, or the
disease process itself. In critically ill patients, when gastric
emptying was assessed, almost half of them showed
delay in gastric emptying consistent with enteral feeding
intolerance (EFI) [5].
EFI, defined as the failure to provide sufficient EN to
critically ill patients due to delay of gastric emptying with
the absence of mechanical blocking, is a common problem
in critically ill patients with a stated prevalence of
30–46% and is accompanied by cumulative energy deficit,
prolonged ICU stays, decreased ventilator-free days, and
increased mortality [5, 6].
Accordingly, there is significant interest in therapies
that enhance gastric motility and can alleviate feeding
intolerance. Recent guidelines for the assessment and
provision of nutritional support therapy in the adult
critically ill patients have proven the significance of using
prokinetic drugs to enhance gastric feeding tolerance and
consequently improve clinical outcomes [3, 7].
Prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide, erythromycin,
cisapride, and domeperidone have been used to
enhance gastric emptying and are commonly used in the
ICUs [8]. The safety profile of available prokinetic agents
is a major concern when selecting therapies for EFI treatment.
Cisapride is associated with QT interval prolongation
in the electrocardiogram (ECG), and infrequent but
serious cardiac arrythmias [9], while domeperidone has
been described to cause gynecomastia and galactorrhea
[10]. Erythromycin was associated with QT prolongation,
multidrug resistant organisms’ super-infection and drugdrug
interactions [11].
Metoclopramide is the most commonly used prokinetic
drug to overcome delayed gastric emptying, However,
it is correlated with central nervous system (CNS)
adverse drug effects (ADEs) and QT prolongation [12].
Moreover, the effects of the drug decrease rapidly with
time where after a few days of treatment with metoclopramide,
tachyphylaxis occurs such that success of feeding
is less than 20% by day 3 of therapy in patients with
high GRVs [13].
Thus, in view of these safety concerns with the currently
available prokinetic agents, this has led to the
search for another prokinetic agent with equivalent or
better effectiveness, favorable tolerability profile and
lower side effect potential.
Itopride hydrochloride, a prokinetic drug that has been
reported to enhance GI motility through a dual mode of
action; by preventing the effect of dopamine on the D2
receptors of the cholinergic nerves in the post-synaptic
region. It also prevents the hydrolysis of the acetylcholine
by the enzyme acetyl cholinesterase and thereby
promotes GI motility [14, 15]. Since itopride does not
cross the blood brain barrier thus does not exhibit ADEs
related to CNS, it also hardly increases prolactin levels
and does not prolong the QT interval [16].
Although GRV measurement provide a useful clinical
endpoint in prokinetic drug studies, however, the current
diagnostic tools for evaluating gastric emptying (GE)
which include: scintigraphy, which is considered the “gold
standard” for GE evaluation, the wireless motility capsule
test, GE breath test, magnetic resonance imaging, fluoroscopy,
and paracetamol or synthetic glucose absorption,
all these methods have technical limitations, are expensive,
complex, or not readily available in the ICU setting
making the evaluation of GE a challenging task in clinical
practice [17].
Ultrasonography (USG) is a non-invasive, inexpensive
diagnostic test with a good inter-observer agreement
compared to scintigraphy, and which provides real-time
structural and functional information regarding most
parameters of gastric motility. It doesn’t require radiation
and can be carried out at the bed side [18, 19].
In view of the aforementioned trends and knowing that
to date, minimal data are available to support the clinical
efficacy of Itopride in critically ill patients. Therefore,
we conducted a clinical study to determine the efficacy
and safety of Itopride in critically ill patients with EFI in
comparison with metoclopramide. In addition, it tested
the utility and applicability of USG to measure GRV in
this population.
Methods
Study design and setting
This was a prospective randomized, double blind, comparator-
controlled, study conducted between October
2018 and December 2019 at the ICU of Alkasr Al -Aini
hospital, Cairo, Egypt.
Ethical considerations
The ethical approval for both the scientific and the ethical
aspects to conduct the study was obtained before initiation
of the study from the committee of Ethics of Faculty
of Pharmacy, Ain Shams University, and the research
ethics committee for experimental and clinical studies at
faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Pharmaceutical
Industries, Future University, Cairo, Egypt.
Patients or their legal guardians signed informed consent
for inclusion in this study. All study procedures followed
the Helsinki Declaration for protecting human
subjects and compiled with Good Clinical Practice
Guidelines. The trial was registered in ClinicalTrials.gov
(NCT03698292).
Without prejudice, a patient can withdraw from the
study at any time. For whatever reason, the physician
could discontinue the participation of any patient, including
inability to comply with the protocol. If a patient
withdrew from the study or was withdrawn from it, this
was noted on the case report form along with the reason
for withdrawal.
Methodology
Study population
Patients were eligible to participate in the study, if they
were admitted to the ICU and were expected to stay in
it for at least one week and fulfilled the inclusion criteria
which was: Age between 18 and 60 years of both genders
who were prescribed enteral feeding and diagnosed with
EFI which was determined by the following criteria: a 4-h
GRV measurement by USG; and a GRV of ≥ 250 ml on
one or more of the measurements or the development of
vomiting, regurgitation, abdominal pain, or abdominal
distention during enteral feeding.
The study excluded the following patients: A. Use of any
prokinetic within 48 h before participating in the study. B.
Known hypersensitivity to itopride or metoclopramide.
C. Hemodynamic instability or occurrence of cardiac
arrhythmia or prolonged QT interval of > 480 ms on a
12-lead ECG. D. Acute CNS infection diagnosis or severe
brain injury. E. GI surgery ≤ 6 weeks before enrollment in
the study, suspicious GI obstruction, hemorrhage, perforation,
or history of GI disease, history of total/partial
gastrectomy or esophagectomy, F. Extubation is expected
within 48 h. G. weight > 150 kg, pregnancy or clinically
significant renal or hepatic dysfunction.
Study intervention
Eligible patients fulfilling the inclusion criteria were
randomly assigned, using a computer random number
generator program (Stattrek.com/statistics/randomnumber-
generator), where a random list of numbers for
patient allocation was produced and participant randomization
assignment remained concealed in sealed
envelopes. The study was double blinded; patients, clinicians,
radiologist, and unit staff responsible for assessments
remained blind from randomization. Study
medications were prepared by an unblinded pharmacist
to ensure correct treatment assignment however, this
pharmacist was not aware of the study objectives nor
involved in outcome assessment or other care. Standard
operating procedures assured that all other operational
personnel remained blinded to treatment assignment.
Patients were assigned to one of the two groups as
follows:
1 Itopride group These patients received 50 mg Itopride
(Ganaton ® Kahira Pharmaceuticals Co., Cairo Egypt
Under license from Abbott Laboratories) enterally
t.i.d.
2 Metoclopramide group These patients received 10 mg
metoclopramide (Primperan ® Sanofi Aventis) intravenously
every 6–8 h. The treatment duration was
7 days for both groups.
Enteral Feeding protocol: Continuous feeding with
1.5 kcal/mL Fresubin® (Fresenius Kabi, Egypt) in the
form of 18 gm carbohydrates, 5.8 gm fat, and 5.6 gm protein
per 100 mL, was administered through nasogastric
tube, starting with a rate of 20 mL/h, the feeding rate was
increased gradually till the target energy requirement was
reached. According to the 2016 ASPEN/SCCM guidelines
[3], for all patients, based on actual body weight, the
target energy requirement was calculated as 25 kcal/kg/d
and the protein requirement was 1.4 g/kg/day. The head
of the bed was elevated to 35° to reduce aspiration risk,
and GRV was checked every 4–6 h by USG.
Treatment was stopped if failure of feeding occurs.
Therapy failure was defined as patients with two or more
high GRVs (i.e., ≥ 250 ml) or who developed feeding
intolerance symptoms, including vomiting, abdominal
pain, regurgitation or abdominal distension, for 2 successive
episodes even with a feeding rate ≤ 40 mL/h, or at
the lowest rate. In these patients, enteral feeding was discontinued
temporarily, and the study drug was stopped.
Additionally, the study drug was discontinued by patients
in case of being transferred from ICU, stopped tube feedings,
or had a severe adverse reaction that was correlated
to the study drug.
Study procedures
All patients were subjected to the following:
Patient data collection
– Baseline characteristics: Demographic data of the
participants; Age, gender, height, weight, Body mass
index (BMI), Organ Function as assessed by the
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA), Severity
of illness as assessed by the Acute Physiology and
Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II).—ICU
admission date and diagnosis.
– Complete medication history, medical history as well
as nutrition data were recorded for each patient.
Clinical assessment
– Physical Examination: Measurement of blood pressure,
heart rate, temperature. Complete examination
including cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurological
examination. Abdominal examination was done
focusing on signs of feeding intolerance including
passage of stool, abdominal distension and rigidity,
intestinal sounds, vomiting or gastroesophageal
reflux.
– Nutritional Risk Assessment: Modified nutrition risk
in critically ill (mNUTRIC) score was measured for
each patient at baseline and at the end of the study.
– Cardiovascular Assessment: A 12-Lead ECG was
done on each patient at the screening visit to exclude
QT prolongation, and at the end of the study to
detect any effect of Itopride or metoclopramide on
the QT interval.
– Biochemical Investigations: Routine lab investigations
for ICU: Complete blood count, liver function
test, electrolytes, kidney function test, lipid profile
and blood glucose were done at baseline of the study
and at the end of therapy.
Measurable outcomes
Primary outcome
Radiological Assessment of Gastric Emptying: Measurement
of GRV in enterally fed critically ill patients is
a convenient clinical tool that is widely used as a surrogate
indication of gastric emptying, success of feeding,
and possibly the risk of aspiration [20]. Gastric emptying
was measured using 2-dimensional ultrasound, where it
is usually characterized by measurement of changes in
antral cross-sectional area (CSA) [21]. Residual gastric
volume assessment was performed using a "GE LOGIQ
E9" ultrasound device; all exams were done by the same
physician who was a professional of the department of
radiology. After 30 to 45 min from ingestion of the feed,
participants were positioned in the right lateral decubitus
position for 5 min, and then an echographic ultrasound
examination was done to measure the CSA of the gastric
antrum. The antral residues gastric volume was then
calculated using a mathematical formula that was previously
tested and validated (GRV (ml) = 27 + 14.6 × rightlat
CSA-1.28 × age)). [22] This formula is accurate with a
margin of error in measurements of only ± 6 ml between
the predicted and measured volumes. [23] The time
to perform the entire measurements did not exceed
5–10 min in any individual. GRV data were collected at
three-time points; day 1, day 4 and day 7.
Secondary outcomes
1. Determining the adequacy of enteral nutrition &
compliance with enteral nutrition orders was registered
daily; EN volume ratio (VR) % considered as an
index of efficacy of nutrient delivery, was calculated
as follows:
EN VR (%) = (administered volume of EN/ prescribed
volume) × 100.
2. Adequacy of calories and protein (the total amount
of energy or protein received from EN is divided by
the amount prescribed and expressed as %) over the
7 days of therapy.
3. ICU Length of stay (LOS).
4. Occurrence of ADEs: If adverse events occurred,
the time of onset, duration, severity, relationship to
itopride or metoclopramide and the requirement of
treatment were evaluated.
5. Incidence of infectious complications; Patients were
assessed for pulmonary infection up to 3 days following
the end of treatment in both groups.
6. Occurrence of vomiting and/or requirement of postpyloric
feeding tube insertion due to feed intolerance
Data management and analysis
The data collected have been revised, coded, tabulated,
and introduced to a PC using Statistical package for
Social Science ((IBM Corp. Released 2011. IBM SPSS
Statistics for Windows, Version 20.0. Armonk, NY: IBM
Corp).
For Descriptive statistics: Data were checked for normality
with shapiro wilk test and expressed as mean
(standard deviation) for parametric numerical data or
median (interquartile range) for non-parametric numerical
data. For Non-numerical data, frequency and percentage
were used. For Analytical statistics, the following
tests were used, Student T Test, Mann Whitney Test,
Chi-Square test and Paired t test. P < 0.05 was considered
to be statistically significant.
Sample size was calculated using STATA program, setting
the type-1 error (α) at 0.05 and lower at 80%. Result
from previous study showed that the treatment with a
prokinetic (erythromycin) produced a greater reduction
in the GRV than another prokinetic (metoclopramide)
(59 ± 4% versus 35 ± 6%, respectively) with 24% mean
difference between the 2 medications [24]. Assuming a
lower difference (5%) between Itopride and metoclopramide
in GRV reduction, produced a sample size of 38
cases per group taking in account 25% drop rate.
Results
Between October 2018 and November 2019, a total of
eighty-four patients were screened, and finally 76 patients
were randomly assigned to one of the 2 groups. The most
frequent reason for exclusion prior to randomization
were ICU discharge for surgical procedures. Thirty- eight
patients were assigned Itopride and 38 received metoclopramide
and due to dropouts, 35 patients of each group
were finally analyzed (Fig. 1)
Baseline characteristics
Table 1 shows that there were no statistically significant
differences between the 2 groups in demographics, ICU
admission diagnosis or risk scores (APACHE II, SOFA,
mNUTRIC) at day 1 of the study.
Additionally, at day 7 of the study, there were no
differences between the Itopride and metoclopramide
groups regarding APACHE II (p = 0.44), SOFA
(p = 0.65) or mNUTRIC (p = 0.06).
There were no significant differences in the volume
of feed, total energy or protein prescribed to
patients between Itopride and metoclopramide groups
(Table 1). Mean prescribed feed volume was 1310.66 ml
(± 67.089) in Itopride group, and 1333.03 ml (± 63.461)
in the metoclopramide group, (p = 0.156). Patients
in the Itopride group were prescribed a mean of
1757.14 kcal/d (± 185.561) and the metoclopramide
group 1754.29 kcal/d (± 137.932), (p = 0.942).
Mean protein requirement in the Itopride group was
90.14 g/d (± 8.357) and 93 g/d (± 6.207) in the metoclopramide
group, p = 0.109.
Primary outcome
The primary outcome was the radiological assessment
of gastric emptying by measurement of GRV as shown
in Fig. 2. In Table 2, at day 1, there was no statistically
significant difference between the 2 groups regarding
GRV with mean GRV of 359.5 (± 82.6) for the Itopride
group and 344 (± 99.3) for the metoclopramide group,
(p = 0.47). Similarly, at day 4, there were no differences
between the mean GRV of Itopride 251.9 (± 77.6) and
metoclopramide 265.9 (± 89), (p = 0.48). While, at day
7, GRV significantly decreased in the itopride group 89.6
(± 70.5) compared to metoclopramide group 145.8126
(± 66.7), (p = 0.001). Moreover, there was a statistically
significant difference between the 2 groups regarding the
GRV percentage of change between day 1 and day 7 with
more decrease in GRV in the Itopride group 75.7 (± 18.8)
than the metoclopramide group 57.3 (± 18.9) (p = 0.001)
as shown in Fig. 3.
Secondary outcomes
Difference in feed volume, energy and protein delivered
between Itopride and metoclopramide groups.
After the one-week therapy, mean prescribed feed
volume delivered increased significantly in the Itopride
group 1180.63 (± 63.42) than the metoclopramide
group 1001.43 (± 70.955), p = 0.001. At day 1 of
the study, there was no significant difference between
the EN VR of Itopride 64.34 (± 14.20) and metoclopramide
61.2 (± 15.52), p = 0.364. Moreover, Fig. 4 shows
that after the one-week therapy, the mean percentage
of EN VR % was significantly higher in the Itopride
88.03 (± 9.32) than the metoclopramide group 74.17
(± 13.67), p = 0.001. And the percentage of change of
EN VR between day 1 and day 7 was 42.32 (± 29.6) for
the Itopride and 26.76 (± 36.51) for the metoclopramide,
p = 0.003. Regarding the mean prescribed energy
delivered, for the itopride group 1551.43 (± 216.417),
it was significantly higher than the metoclopramide
group 1390.14 (± 126.098), p = 0.001 and similarly,
the percentage of energy ratio was higher in the Itopride
group 89.158 (± 14.63) than the metoclopramide
group 79.7 (± 9.397), p = 0.002. For the mean grams
of protein reaching the patients of Itopride group
85 (± 8.135), it was significantly higher than the
metoclopramide group 78 (± 8.419), p = 0.001. The
ratio of protein administered was 94.83 (± 10.1) for
the patients of Itopride group compared with 84.2
(± 10.26) for the metoclopramide group, p = 0.01.
ICU LOS
No statistically significant difference was found
between both study groups concerning the ICU LOS
(p = 0.71) as shown in Table 3.
Adverse events were summarized in Fig. 5. Itopride was
well tolerated and only minimal adverse events were
documented; one patient suffered from diarrhea and one
patient complained of abdominal pain. For the metoclopramide
group, 1 patient suffered from headache and
1 patient suffered from drowsiness. All the reported
adverse events from both groups were mild and subsided
without interfering with continuation of treatment. At
day 1, none of the patients of the 2 groups showed any
prolongation of the QT interval. Therapy with Itopride
was well tolerated and none of the patients showed
any prolongation of QT interval on day 7 ECG. On the
other hand, two patients of the metoclopramide group
recorded QT interval prolongation.
Therapy with both drugs did not produce any abnormalities
in serum biochemistry profile, where there were
no significant differences between the 2 groups regarding
all biochemical analyses at both day 1 and day 7.
Also, in patients of both groups, prolactin level was
not increased and no adverse events like lacteal secretion
occurred in both groups.
Neither vomiting nor requirement of post-pyloric feeding
tube insertion due to feed intolerance or infectious
complications were reported.
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, the current study is the first
prospective, randomized, double-blind study to compare
the effectiveness as well as the safety of Itopride against
metoclopramide for EFI in critically ill patients.
Delayed GE causes major unwarranted clinical outcomes
in critically ill patients with EFI and its rate is
possibly underestimated as there are no clinically applicable
GRV measurement techniques for these patients.
Therefore, GRV monitoring is an essential component
of EN patient care and aids in preventing complications
due to EN. High GRV is a reliable surrogate marker of
delayed gastric emptying, and GRV can still be useful for
the early detection of delayed gastric emptying and the
commencement of pharmacological treatment. Although
GRV > 500 mL is identified as the threshold for the determination
of large GRVs and according to the recent
American recommendations, requires withholding of
enteral feeding. [3] however, a GRV of 250 mL is defined
as the threshold for the early detection of feeding intolerance
and prompt initiation of therapy. Similarly, to our
study, several other studies used ≥ 250 mL as an indication
of high GRV [6, 24–26].
Primary outcome
Regarding the primary efficacy outcome, the results of
the present work demonstrate that Itopride has a significant
effect in reducing the GRV after the one-week therapy
duration while metoclopramide has a lesser effect,
and this was also supported by the significant difference
between the two groups in the percentage of change
of GRV between day 1 and day 7. This finding may be
explained that although the mechanism of action of itopride
on GE is not clear so far, but the dual mechanism
of itopride seems to make this drug efficacious in promoting
the GI movement, where its mechanism of action
is completely different from the existing prokinetics; it
works both by inhibiting the activity of acetylcholinesterase
and antagonizing the dopamine receptors, leading
to enhancement of the cholinergic activity in the GI tract,
which may in turn improve GI motility [14, 15].
Similarly, several studies have proven its efficacy causing
symptomatic relief with minimal side effects compared
to other prokinetic agents like demeperidone,
cisapride and mosapride in other gastrointestinal disorders
as functional dyspepsia and gastroesophageal
reflux disease, where a meta-analysis studying nine well
designed randomized placebo-controlled trials involving
a total of 2,620 individuals of which 1,372 were treated
with itopride at the dose of 50 mg t.i.d. each and 1,248
constituted the control group, who were treated with
drugs such as domperidone, mosapride, or placebo. The
effect of therapy in the group treated with itopride was
significantly higher when compared with the control
group, where individuals in the itopride group reported
statistically significant improvement in GI dysmotility
symptoms as post-prandial fullness, early satiation and
global patient assessment scores compared to control
group [27].
Moreover, two randomized controlled trials have
reported that Itopride has been observed to have a positive
effect on GE and gastroduodenal motility [15, 28].
Additionally, to support our results, a retrograde study
in chronic gastritis Japanese patients where 50 mg itopride
or placebo were administered reported that itopride
accelerated GE [29]. In the same concern, another
randomized, comparative study reported moderate to
complete relief of gastrointestinal symptoms in 100%
of non-ulcer dyspepsia patients treated with itopride as
compared to 53% patients treated with metoclopramide
[30]. Also, results from studies conducted among Indian
patient population reported itopride as an efficacious
drug in the management of GI dysmotility disorders [31,
32]. Likewise, a post marketing surveillance study carried
out among 573 delayed GE patients reported global efficacy
of itopride as excellent (44.5%), good (40.14%), fair
(13.61%) and poor (1.75%) [33].
Furthermore, in experimental animal studies, itopride
increased motility in the stomach, duodenum, and the
proximal and distal colon [14, 34]. In addition, another
study was carried out comparing the efficacy of Itopride
and metoclopramide on rat’s gastric motility and has
shown the superiority of Itopride to metoclopramide in
accelerating both upper and lower GI motility [35].
On the other hand, the decreased efficacy of metoclopramide
at the end of the therapy may be explained that
sometimes, tachyphylaxis related to the use of metoclopramide
happens after a few days of therapy. Similarly,
tachyphylaxis has been attributed to the use of metoclopramide
as reported by other studies [13, 36]. Desensitization,
downregulation and endocytosis of neurohumoral
receptors have been proposed as mechanisms underlying
the occurrence of tachyphylaxis [24].
Likewise, to the results of our study, a recent RCT
reported that intravenous metoclopramide caused significantly
higher accumulative GRV than another prokinetic
(erythromycin estolate) combined with metoclopramide
when used for EFI in critically ill patients [25].
Secondary outcomes
Regarding the secondary outcomes, EN VR %, energy
ratio%, and protein ratio % which indicate the adequacy
of EN & compliance with EN orders.
It was observed that at day 7, the percentage EN VR,
energy ratio and protein ratios were significantly higher
in the itopride group than the metoclopramide group
decreased GRV (i.e., enhanced feed tolerance) in the
itopride group with increased enteral feed intake. In
the same concern, Mentec et al. reported that increased
GRVs in their patients were correlated with reduced
mean caloric intake [5]. This increase in the volume,
calories and protein reaching patients of Itopride group
compared to metoclopramide group can be explained by
the positive effect of Itopride on EFI and thus improving
feeding tolerance and achieving increase in the administered
EN as compared to the prescribed EN.
Also, the results of our study demonstrated that energy
target achieved was more than 80% for the Itopride group
(89%) which is considered as successful feeding specifically
in high nutrition risk critically ill patients and this
was reported to improve clinical outcomes. This came in
accordance with the results of another study that defined
successful feeding for achieving ≥ 80% of energy target,
[24]and this was different from other studies [6, 37]. In
the same concern, the current trial showed high feeding
success rates that came in accordance with the results of
the PROMOTE trial [38], and compared with other ICU
studies, the rates of aspiration, vomiting or regurgitation,
and pulmonary infection were low [39, 40].
In our study, nutrition risk and illness severity were
high similar to results of a recent randomized controlled
trial [25] while they were evidently higher than those in
previous study [41].
Safety
The safety profiles of Itopride and metoclopramide were
assessed where this study showed that itopride was well
tolerated by most of the patients and likewise this was
proved by several studies that showed good tolerability
and minimal adverse events occurring in patients who
received Itopride [27, 42].
In the current study, in Itopride group, only two
patients suffered from mild symptoms of diarrhea and
abdominal pain that resolved spontaneously without
interference. Likewise, another post marketing surveillance
study reported that the most reported ADEs were
diarrhea, headache, giddiness, constipation, and itching/
rash and most of them were mild and not related to itopride
therapy [33]. While a relatively frequent problem
in patients receiving EN and prokinetic agents is watery
diarrhea, it is important to note that in the current study
none of the diarrhea was correlated to infection, where
microbiological testing of stool was negative for C. difficile
toxin, inflammatory cells and bacterial infection in all
patients.
Additionally, there were no reported CNS adverse
events in the itopride group of the current study
as Itopride is strongly polar, and thus, unlike other
gastroprokinetic agents, hardly penetrates the brain and
CNS. Therefore, CNS adverse effects and rises in serum
levels of prolactin induced by itopride’s antidopaminergic
activity are less frequent and less severe than those associated
with other dopamine receptor antagonists.
While, in the metoclopramide group, this study shows
that two patients had adverse events of drowsiness and
headache which may be attributed to the CNS ADEs
caused by the drug. Likewise, previous study has reported
CNS adverse events attributed to the use of metoclopramide
[43].
In the present study also, we did not encounter any cardiac
side effects with itopride. As Itopride does not cause
prolongation of the QT interval, and, thus, unlike other
prokinetics as metoclopramide and cisapride, does not
likely cause arrhythmias.
However, since we have not included any patient with
QT abnormality and with concomitant drug ingestion,
further studies with itopride in high-risk groups would
be needed.
On the other hand, after the one-week therapy, there
were clinically related changes in the ECG of two patients
of the metoclopramide group, particularly prolongation
of QT intervals. In similarity to the findings of the current
study, other studies and case reports have reported
cardiotoxic effects caused by metoclopramide especially
with higher doses and with long-term use [44, 45].
GRV measurement by USG
Existing clinically applicable measurement options for
GE include imprecise manual evaluation of GRV, the
paracetamol absorption test limited by the availability
of central laboratory and impaired by liver and renal
dysfunction; or breath testing which has been limited by
the need for cumbersome active and regular attachment/
detachment of the test tube to the patient. the wireless
motility capsule test, GE breath test, magnetic resonance
imaging, fluoroscopy, and paracetamol or synthetic glucose
absorption. However, all these tests have technical
limitations, are expensive, complex, have disadvantages
such as long procedure time, invasiveness and radiation
or not readily available in the ICU setting making the
evaluation of GE a challenging task in clinical practice
[17, 46, 47].
The current study showed that USG, which is a simple,
non-invasive, widely available, inexpensive valid diagnostic
test with a good inter-observer agreement, and which
provides real-time structural and functional information
regarding most parameters of gastric motility, can
be easily used to measure GRV, potentially leading to
improvement of patient management. It involves no radiation
and can be performed at the bed side and the test
does not involve radiation exposure and allows repeated
measurements when the effects of drugs or therapeutic
procedures are to be evaluated. Similarly, previous studies
have reported the usefulness of two-dimensional US
in assessing GRV and suggest that ultrasound accurately
determines GRV [21, 48, 49].
Additionally, it was demonstrated to be comparable in
sensitivity to scintigraphy which is considered the “gold
standard” in evaluating GE [50].
This study has several strengths. First, the treatments
were blinded and randomized. Second, this was the first
study that demonstrated Itopride’s superior efficacy to
metoclopramide in reducing GRV and improved meeting
of nutritional targets. Second, this study also demonstrated
that measurements of GE can be performed by
using a basic bed-side device which is USG that is readily
available in any ICU and also in use in many medical
applications and is validated for measuring GRV which
gives credibility to the results obtained.
However, this study also has some limitations. First, the
study was comparator, not placebo, controlled, it was also
conducted at a single ICU; therefore, the generalizability
of the results may be challenged, the study focused on a
single center with its own feeding protocol; so, the findings
of the study may not apply to other centers with different
feeding protocols. In addition, the short duration
of treatment and follow-up period to observe possible
drug-related complications; thus, the frequency of complications
may have been underestimated. Third, patients
in this study were critically ill due to specific medical
conditions; thus, the study findings may not be relevant
to patients with critical illness caused by postoperative
conditions or surgery. And although measuring GRV by
USG was recommended by our study but it has some
disadvantages which include the following: (1) the technique
is dependent on the and needs expertise; (2) Bowel
gas and/or obesity can restrict ultrasonic imaging; (3)
geometric assumptions are needed for the shape of the
stomach; (4) It is difficult to measure GE of solid meals
using ultrasound [51, 52]. In addition, our study had high
severity index and nutrition risk; so, the impact of therapy
in patients with lower disease severity and nutrition
risk could not be determined. Also, future studies using
higher GRV thresholds are warranted.
Therefore, in order to optimize interpretation and generalizability,
large, multicenter randomized controlled
trials must be designed to further validate the safety and
efficacy of Itopride in clinical settings and to confirm
our results as Itopride is a promising prokinetic with
high potency and safety compared to other prokinetics
particularly metoclopramide. Our experience with USG
suggests that further studies combining clinical assessment
of EFI with GRV measurements may establish USG
as a simple objective tool to guide individual prokinetic
therapy.
Conclusion
In summary, the findings of this study revealed that in
the treatment of EFI, itopride, a dopamine D2 antagonist
with anti-acetylcholinesterase effects, is superior
to metoclopramide. The precise mechanisms by which
itopride improves symptoms have yet to be determined,
and more clinical studies are required to determine the
effectiveness and optimal length of treatment in different
populations.
Moreover, our study demonstrated that USG is a
simple, non-invasive, inexpensive, and undemanding
method for GRV measurements and can offer reliable
assessments in the GE modality, where it can be used in
other ICU settings rather than the other available methods
with technical problems.