Background
Peptic ulcer disease is mainly associated with Helicobacter
pylori (H. pylori) infection [1–4], and the use of gastrotoxic
drugs such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) [5]. However, in the last decade, the
main etiology of peptic ulcer disease has changed significantly
in both children and adults from both eastern and
western countries [6–8]. The prevalence of both H. pylori
ulcer and gastrotoxic drug peptic ulcer has declined
due to improved eradication therapy for H. pylori infection
and reduced use of NSAIDs, respectively [9–11],
while there have been several reports on the recurrence
of peptic ulcers after the eradication of H. pylori in nonusers
of NSAIDs [6, 12, 13]. Thus, H. pylori-negative
and/or gastrotoxic drug-negative peptic ulcer (HNGNPU)
has emerged as a “new” disease entity [14, 15].
Most cases of H. pylori-negative peptic ulcers are
caused by NSAIDs in adults [5], but not in children. Although
the prevalence of HNGN-PU is reported to be
higher in children than in adults [6, 16], the exact etiology
of HNGN-PU in children is unclear and has not
been investigated yet.
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EoGE) is an inflammatory
disorder characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the
stomach and/or duodenum. In some cases, inflammation
of the esophagus, distal intestine, and colon may also be
present. EoGE occurs without any other known cause of
tissue eosinophilia. Vomiting, abdominal pain, and
growth retardation are the most common symptoms
[17], and approximately 40% of patients with EoGE have
a history of allergic disease including asthma, eczema, or
rhinitis [17–19]. Previous studies in adult patients have
reported EoGE to be a cause of intractable peptic ulcers
in some patients. However, there have been no studies
investigating EoGE as the etiology of peptic ulcers in
children yet, even though EoGE can be a potential etiology
of HNGN-PU in children.
The present study was aimed at analyzing the etiology
of HNGN-PU in children and investigating the differences
in clinical, laboratory, endoscopic, and histopathologic
findings of peptic ulcers according to etiology
including H. pylori infection, gastrotoxic drugs, systemic
diseases, eosinophilic gastroenteritis (EoGE), and idiopathic
peptic ulcers.
Methods
Study population and data collection
Of 1694 children and adolescents aged 18 or less who
visited the Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology in
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital with upper
gastrointestinal symptoms and underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy
with biopsy between July 2003 and
April 2017, 255 children diagnosed with peptic ulcers on
endoscopy were recruited. The study subjects were
categorized into 5 groups according to the etiology of
the ulcer: 1) H. pylori infection (n = 51); 2) gastrotoxic
drugs (n = 18); 3) idiopathic peptic ulcers (n = 144); 4)
systemic diseases such as Henoch-Schönlein purpura
(HSP) and Crohn’s disease (n = 23); and 5) EoGE (n =
19). Anastomosis site ulcer after gastrojejunostomy was
excluded from the study. Patients referred from other
hospitals after upper endoscopy and those transferred
after ulcer treatment were also excluded.
Medical records of participants including demographic
data, clinical features, allergy history, drug history, endoscopic
findings, histopathologic findings, and laboratory
tests were reviewed and analyzed retrospectively. Medication
history was defined as drug intake during the 4-
week period before diagnosis. Gastrotoxic drugs included
NSAIDs or steroid usages, alkali ingestion, and
disc battery ingestion.
This retrospective study was approved by the Institutional
Review Board (IRB) of Seoul National University
Bundang Hospital (IRB No. B-1707/409–105).
Laboratory tests and radiologic investigations
All participants underwent laboratory tests including
complete blood cell counts such as white blood cell
count (WBC), absolute neutrophil count (ANC), eosinophil
count, hemoglobin, hematocrit, platelet count,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), highly sensitive Creactive
protein (hsCRP), protein, albumin, liver function
tests, serum amylase, lipase, iron panel, ferritin, urinalysis
and urine cultures, stool examination for parasite,
fecal occult blood, and fecal calprotectin levels, as well
as abdominal X-ray and abdominal ultrasonography.
Endoscopic evaluation
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with mucosal biopsies was
performed in all 255 study participants using a GIFXP260
or GIF-Q260 scope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Diagnosis of peptic ulcers was made based on endoscopic
findings, which included the location, size, and
number of ulcers and ulcer recurrence.
Colonoscopy with mucosal biopsies was performed
additionally in 23 patients, to rule out gastric or duodenal
ulcers due to systemic diseases.
Histopathologic evaluation
Endoscopic mucosal biopsies were obtained from the
esophagus, gastric antrum and body, and duodenum,
during the upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, in all participants.
Biopsy tissues were immediately fixed in
formalin-filled bottle and processed to paraffin wax. Sections
were cut at 3 μm and stained with hematoxylineosin
and Wright-Giemsa stain for H pylori.
Modified Sydney classification was used to test for H
pylori colonization, polymorphonuclear neutrophil
activity, mononuclear cell infiltration, glandular atrophy,
and intestinal metaplasia of the gastric tissue from the
antrum and body. For the histopathologic diagnosis of H
pylori infection, the specimens were subjected to rapid
urease test in addition to histopathologic examination. H
pylori infection was diagnosed if two endoscopic tests
were positive for H pylori. For the rapid urease test kit
(CLOtest, Ballard Inc., Draper, UT), the inoculated specimen
was interpreted as positive if its color changed
from yellow to pink within 24 h.
For the diagnosis of EoGE, tissue eosinophils were
counted in 5 randomly selected high-power fields. Quantification
of eosinophils was performed using an Axioskop40
microscope (Mirax-Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen,
Germany) at 400x magnification. Histopathologic diagnosis
of EoGE was made when the total number of infiltrating
eosinophils per high power field was more than
15 in the esophagus and more than 20 in the stomach
and duodenum without any other organic causes of tissue
eosinophilia.
Statistical analysis
Data for continuous parametric variables are presented as
mean and standard deviations and that for categorical variables
are presented as a percentage of the total number.
All statistical analyses were performed using PASW
Statistics (SPSS version 22.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL,
USA). Continuous data were analyzed using the Mann-
Whitney U test of two independent samples to compare
two quantitative nonparametric variables and the
Kruskal-Wallis test of independent samples to compare
three or more quantitative nonparametric variables. Chisquare
tests were used to compare categorical variables.
For statistical analysis of the differences in nonparametric
continuous variables between the two groups, the
Mann-Whitney test was additionally applied. The Bonferroni
correction method was used to test and verity
the variables marked as having differences. The significance
level was divided by the number of comparison
[α = 0.005 (0.05/10)] and then the Mann-Whitney test
was performed.
For all statistical analyses, a two-sided p value < 0.05
was considered statistically significant.
Results
Patient characteristics of children with peptic ulcers
Totally 255 (15%) children out of 1694 patients who had
undergone upper endoscopy for investigation of upper
gastrointestinal symptoms, during the study period, were
identified to have gastric or duodenal ulcers, on endoscopy,
among whom one patient with anastomosis site
ulcer was excluded from the study. These 255 children
included 157 boys and 98 girls, with a mean age of
10.0 ± 5.1 years (range; 1 day ~ 18.0 years).
Of the 255 pediatric patients with peptic ulcers, 159
(62.4%) and 69 (27.1%) patients had only duodenal ulcers
and gastric ulcers, respectively. Both gastric and
duodenal ulcers were observed in 27 (10.6%) patients
and multiple ulcers were observed in 73 (28.6%) patients,
on endoscopy.
Regarding the etiology of peptic ulcers, H. pylori infection
was diagnosed in 51 (20.0%) of the 255 patients; history
of preceding gastrotoxic drugs intake in 18 (7.1%);
systemic diseases such as Crohn’s disease and HSP in 23
(9.0%); EoGE-related peptic ulcers in 19 (7.5%); and idiopathic
peptic ulcers in 144 (56.4%) patients (Table 1).
EoGE ulcers accounted for 10.2% of 186 HNGN-PU in
pediatric patients.
Changes in the diagnosis of causes of peptic ulcers in
children during the study period
Figure 1 reveals the distribution of the etiology of peptic
ulcers in children during the study period from 2003 to
2017. Since the introduction of a new protocol for histopathologic
evaluation of endoscopic biopsy to count tissue
eosinophils in all specimens in 2011, the distribution
of causes of HNGN-PU changed and EoGE newly
emerged as a cause of peptic ulcers in children (Fig. 1).
Comparison of clinical and laboratory factors among the
5 groups according to the etiology of peptic ulcers in
children
Regarding clinical factors related to peptic ulcers in children,
age at diagnosis (p < 0.001), history of atopic
dermatitis (p = 0.002), and ulcer recurrence (p = 0.016)
were significantly different among the 5 peptic ulcer
groups (Table 1). When applying the post-test analysis
between the two groups, statistically significant differences
were found between the H. pylori infection group
and the idiopathic peptic ulcer group at the significance
level of 0.005 (Supplement 1). Idiopathic peptic ulcer
group showed statistically significant differences in
atopic dermatitis history, duodenal ulcer, and peripheral
eosinophilia compared to H. pylori infection group.
Regarding laboratory factors, WBC counts (p = 0.008),
eosinophil counts in blood (p = 0.013), platelet counts
(p < 0.001), serum levels of albumin (p = 0.027), iron (p <
0.001), ESR (p < 0.001), and hsCRP (p = 0.016) differed
significantly among the 5 ulcer groups (Table 2).
Comparison of endoscopic and histopathologic findings
among the 5 groups according to the etiology of peptic
ulcers in children
Regarding endoscopic findings, gastric ulcers (p = 0.005),
duodenal ulcers (p < 0.001), multiple ulcers (p = 0.023),
and gastric mucosal nodularity (p < 0.001) differed significantly
among the 5 peptic ulcer groups (Table 1).
Gastric ulcers were most frequently observed on upper
endoscopy in the gastrotoxic drug group (61.1%),
followed by the idiopathic ulcer group (29.2%) (Table 1).
Duodenal ulcers were most frequently noted in the
EoGE group (78.9%), followed by the H. pylori group
(66.7%) and the systemic disease group (65.2%) (Table 1).
According to the results of the post-test for duodenal
ulcer, there was a statistically significant difference between
the H. pylori infection group and the idiopathic
peptic ulcer group at the significance level of 0.005
(Supplement 1). Gastric mucosa nodularity was most
frequently noted in the H. pylori group (52.9%), followed
by the EoGE group (26.3%) (Table 1).
Regarding histopathologic findings of upper gastrointestinal
tracts, tissue eosinophil counts were significantly
different in the esophagus, stomach, and
duodenum among the 5 ulcer groups (all p < 0.001)
(Table 1).
Comparison of EoGE ulcers with non-EoGE ulcers
When clinical features of EoGE ulcers were compared
with those of the other groups, the patients with EoGE
ulcers were significantly older in age (median 13.6 yrs.
vs. 10.2 years, p = 0.022) and revealed higher rates of
ulcer recurrence (21.1% in EoGE group vs. 4.7% in non-
EoGE group, p = 0.018), and atopic dermatitis history
(26.3% in EoGE group vs. 2.1% in non-EoGE group, p =
0.001) (Tables 3 and 4).
When comparing the laboratory, endoscopic, and histopathologic
findings of the EoGE group and the non-
EoGE ulcer groups, only blood eosinophil counts and
tissue eosinophil counts of the esophagus, stomach, and
duodenum were significantly higher in the EoGE group
(p = 0.001 & p < 0.001, respectively) (Supplemental
Digital Content 1 & Table 3).
Discussion
This is the first study that investigated the etiology of
peptic ulcers in pediatric patients and its change over
time, especially emphasizing on HNGN-PU as an
emerging etiology of peptic ulcers and EoGE as a significant
cause of HNGN-PU in children.
Previously, H. pylori infection and gastrotoxic drugs
were considered the main causes of peptic ulcers [1–4].
In developing countries including South Korea, the
prevalence of H. pylori infection has increased to 50% of
the general population, and in 15% of the infected
patients, H. pylori infection led to the development of
peptic ulcers. Additionally, H. pylori-negative duodenal
ulcers were reported in several studies in the early 1990s
in developed countries [12, 20, 21], accounting for 2.8–
6.0% of peptic ulcers and half of NSAID-associated ulcers
[20, 21]. Previous studies on the etiology of peptic
ulcers have reported that idiopathic duodenal ulcers not
associated with H. pylori or NSAIDs (HNGN-PU) were
rare in the past.
However, in the recent years, the proportion of
HNGN-PU among causes of peptic ulcers has been increasing
gradually, due to decrease in the prevalence of
H. pylori infection, because of effective prevention by environment
improvement and antibiotic treatments, and
increase in the proper use of NSAIDs [9–11, 22, 23]. Recent
studies have showed that the prevalence of idiopathic
peptic ulcers (e.g. HNGN-PU) was higher than
that which was reported by previous studies [6, 16].
Moreover, high prevalence of HNGN-PU in adults was
recently reported in the USA and Australia [6]. In
addition, there have been several case reports that peptic
ulcers did not improve or recurred after H. pylori eradication.
Furthermore, according to Laine et al., about
20% of duodenal ulcers recurred 6 months after successful
eradication of H. pylori, in a meta-analysis of seven
well-designed trials [13]. Charpignon et al. demonstrated
that there were significant differences in the age of onset
and the comorbidity of idiopathic peptic ulcer diseases
(e.g. HNGN-PU), compared with both H. pylori and
NSAIDs/aspirin-associated peptic ulcers [14]. However,
the prevalence and clinical features of HNGN-PU in
children has not been evaluated yet.
In the present study conducted for 14 years from July
2003 to April 2017, we recruited children with peptic ulcers
and categorized them into 5 groups to investigate
the differences in clinical features and the laboratory,
endoscopic, and histopathologic findings of peptic ulcers
in children, according to the etiology. Our study revealed
that the proportion of H. pylori infection-associated ulcers
and NSAIDs/aspirin-associated peptic ulcers were 20 and
7.1%, respectively, in pediatric patients. The prevalence of
H. pylori infection in Korean children declined to less than
10% in 2000, implying that H. pylori is no longer the main
cause of peptic ulcers. The notable point of our study results
is that the proportion of HNGN-PU including idiopathic
peptic ulcers, systemic diseases (Crohn’s disease,
HSP), and EoGE was relatively high, with 186 of 255 peptic
ulcer cases (72.9%) in children.
To date, most causes of HNGN-PU in children are unknown.
EoGE is an etiology of HNGN-PU in adult patients
and there have been studies stating that EoGE
may be a cause of refractory peptic ulcer and several
case reports of EoGE presenting with refractory peptic
ulcer or perforated duodenal ulcer in both adults and
children [24–26]. However, there were no studies on
EoGE as a possible cause of HNGN-PU in children yet.
In the present study, HNGN-PU was found to be relatively
prevalent in children with peptic ulcer throughout
the study period, and then EoGE emerged as a cause of
HNGN-PU since we introduced a new endoscopic biopsy
protocol to count tissue eosinophils in all specimens
in 2011. In our study, 19 of 255 (7.5%) patients
with peptic ulcers were recently diagnosed with EoGE
on the basis of clinical features and histopathologic
findings of significant tissue eosinophil infiltrations,
without any other organic diseases associated with
gastrointestinal eosinophilia. No cases were diagnosed as
EoGE ulcers before the year of 2011. Thus, the overall
proportion of EoGE ulcers accounted for 10.2% of 186
HNGN-PU in pediatric patients, which was 0% before
2011. All of these 19 EoGE cases were detected using
the protocol of full tissue eosinophil evaluation by pathologists,
without additional hospital costs.
In this study, increased blood eosinophil counts suggested
EoGE, as if an increase in platelet, ESR, and hsCRP
counts implied systemic diseases. This is consistent with
previous reports that 50% of patients with EoGE disease
had peripheral eosinophilia [17]; EoGE ulcer is a significant
laboratory finding that cause suspicions. And EoGE
among the 5 ulcer groups had more duodenal ulcers than
gastric ulcers in our study. In the gastrotoxic drug group,
however, multiple gastric ulcers were found to be more
common. Notably, 52.9% of H pylori infection and 26.3%
of EoGE were expressed as nodular gastritis. Therefore,
EoGE as well as H pylori infection should be included in
the differential diagnosis of nodular gastritis and duodenal
ulcers in endoscopic findings.
This study has a few limitations. In a retrospective
study, eosinophils cannot be counted through biopsy
from the beginning of the study. And since there is
no accurate drug history in some patients, it is likely
that the gastrotoxic drug group has been misclassified
as idiopathic group. In addition, the limitation of accurate
diagnosis of H. pylori infection can also be a
problematic issue that may increase the prevalence of
HNGN-PU [27]. Since the diagnostic criteria for
EoGE are still controversial, there is a possibility of
overdiagnosis. A prospective study focusing on EoGE
and consensus on diagnostic criteria is required in
the future.
Conclusions
Our study revealed that the prevalence of EoGE ulcers
in pediatric patients with HNGN-PU was 10.2%, much
higher than previously reported. In children with
HNGN-PU, ulcer recurrence, peripheral eosinophilia,
and history of atopic dermatitis might provide high
levels of clinical suspicion for EoGE, requiring thorough
histopathologic investigation of tissue eosinophils
counts, on the basis of endoscopic biopsy.