Frailty is a medical condition of increased vulnerability
and poor resolution of homeostasis after a stressor event
as a consequence of cumulative decline in many
physiological systems during a lifetime [1]. Around
40 % of the hospitalized older patients are frail which
is associated with poor health outcomes, such as functional
decline, hospital re-admission, institutionalization,
and mortality [2, 3].
Identifying (pre) frail older adults, and those at risk for
progression of frailty is important. Some older adults
may benefit from interventions targeted at prevention of
frailty progression to lower the risk of poor health outcomes
like functional decline [4, 5]. Reliable and valid
assessment of frailty and how to measure relevant
changes in frailty over time is therefore crucial.
Several frailty instruments exist for the purpose of
diagnosing, risk stratification, and evaluating frailty over
time [6]. Comprehensive geriatric assessment is currently
the gold standard for diagnosing the frailty status
in clinical practice [1], but the cumulative deficits model
or Frailty Index (FI) and the Frailty Phenotype (FP) are
the most widely used instruments used to establish
frailty status in research [7, 8]. Construct validity and
predictive validity of negative health outcomes of the FI
and FP have been extensively evaluated and are proven
to be satisfactory in both community-dwelling and
hospitalized older adults [9–11]. Reproducibility and
responsiveness of change scores of frailty instruments
are poorly studied especially after hospitalization and it
is still unclear which frailty instrument is most appropriate
for measuring change scores over time or the effectiveness
of interventions [9, 11, 12].
Therefore, the aim of this study is to determine
the reproducibility and responsiveness of the FI and
FP in acutely admitted hospitalized older medical
patients.
Methods
Study population
During this monocentric prospective cohort study, patients
aged ≥ 70 years were recruited between February
2017 and May 2018. Twelve months’ follow-up measurements
continued to the end of April 2019. During
weekdays patients admitted to surgical, cardiology, pulmonology,
medical oncology, nephrology, and general internal
medicine wards were checked for eligibility to participate.
Inclusion criteria were age ≥ 70 years and an expected
hospital stay of at least two days. Exclusion criteria were no
understanding of the Dutch language, any (temporary) cognitive
condition that influenced decision making capacity,
and no written informed consent. The Research Ethics
Committee of the University Medical Center Groningen
ruled that no formal ethics approval was required (file
number: 201,600,268). All participants provided written informed
consent before participation.
Data collection
Baseline assessment took place within four days after admission.
Telephonic assessments were performed at
three and twelve months’ post-discharge, in which baseline
questions were repeated and two anchor questions
were added [13]. Data were collected by trained research
staff.
Questionnaires
Frailty instruments
The FI score was calculated using 34 deficits associated
with health status [14]. The FP was assessed by five selfreporting
criteria including strength, walking ability,
weight loss, physical activity, and exhaustion [15, 16]. A
detailed description of the included items of the FI and
FP are presented in Additional File 1, Tables A1 and A2.
Patient-reported anchor questions
Anchor questions were used as an external criterion for
measuring responsiveness [17]. Two different anchor
questions were used: (1) ‘In general, how is your health
state now, compared to three months/twelve months
ago before hospitalization?’ (2) ‘In general how is your
daily functioning now, compared to three months/twelve
months ago before hospitalization?’ Response options
were a five point Likert scale. Patients were divided into
three categories based on the anchor questions (improved,
unchanged, and deteriorated patients). Improved
was scored if a patient answered ‘slightly better’ or
‘much better’. Unchanged was scored if the answer was
‘more or less the same’. Deteriorated was scored if a patient
answered ‘slightly worse’ or ‘much worse’.
Sociodemographic and patient characteristics
For all subjects, baseline sociodemographic characteristics
were collected including age, sex, living situation
(independent living vs. not independent living), and educational
level (≤ high school vs. > high school. After discharge,
medical charts were consulted to assess baseline
comorbidity (Charlson Comorbidity Index) [18] and
mortality during follow-up time.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics
For all baseline sociodemographic and patient characteristics,
descriptive statistics were calculated. The distribution
of the scores on frailty instruments at baseline were
inspected for possible floor and ceiling effects. Thresholds
for floor and ceiling effects were if ≥ 15 % of the
patients achieved the lowest or highest possible score,
respectively [19].
Reproducibility
Test-retest reproducibility was assessed among patients
who reported to be unchanged according to the anchor
question three months post discharge. The following
parameters were calculated:
 The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) using a
two-way mixed effects model for absolute agreement
was used for the baseline and three months followup
measurements of the FI and the FP. Cut-off
values for interpretation of the ICC including the
95 % confidence interval were < 0.5 poor, ≥ 0.5 and
< 0.75 moderate, ≥ 0.75 and < 0.9 good, ≥ 0.9
excellent reliability [20].
 Cohen’s kappa and absolute agreement were
calculated to assess the reproducibility of the FP
using the categorized outcome (robust, prefrail,
frail). Cut-off values were < 0.40 poor, ≥ 0.40 and <
0.75 fair to good, ≥ 0.75 excellent agreement [19].
 Measurement error of the FI and FP was assessed by
calculating Bland-Altman plots and the standard
error of measurement (SEM). Bland-Altman plots
were calculated by the mean change scores of baseline
and three months post discharge assessments
plotted against the difference on both scores. SEM
was calculated using the following formula: SEM =
SD(T0) x √(1-r). SD is the standard deviation of the
baseline measurement of the Frailty Index of the
unchanged group; r refers to the ICC. To interpret
the SEM, scores are converted to percentages of
the scale range. Cut-off values were: ≤5 % very
good, ≤ 10 % good, > 10 % and < 20 % doubtful, ≥
20 % poor [21].
 To be able to interpret change scores, the smallest
detectable change (SDC) was calculated for the FI
and FP using continuous scores. SDC reflects the
variance of the distribution of change scores among
stable patients. Patients who reported no change
according to the anchor question were assumed to
be stable. SDC was calculated by the following
formula: SDC = 1.96 x √2 x SEM [21]. Both the
absolute SDC value as well as the SDC as a
percentage of the scale range were calculated.
Responsiveness
Two types of responsiveness were determined over the
timeframes from pre-hospital admission to three and
twelve months’ post discharge:
1. Internal responsiveness, defined as the magnitude of
change related to the variance in change scores, was
determined by the standardized response mean
(SRM). SRM is calculated by dividing the mean
change score by the standard deviation of the mean
change score [22]. SRMs were separately calculated
for improved, unchanged, and deteriorated patients
according to the anchor question for both the FI
and FP using continuous scores. Cut-off values
were: ≤0.2 small, > 0.2 and ≤ 0.5 doubtful, > 0.5 and
≤ 0.8 good, > 0.8 very good internal responsiveness
for the improved and deteriorated patients; <0.50
good, ≥ 0.50 small for the unchanged patients [22].
2. External responsiveness, defined as the ability to
detect change over time in the construct to be
measured, was assessed by investigating the ability
of the instruments to discriminate between relevant
changes (improved and deteriorated patients) and
irrelevant changes (unchanged patients) [19]. This
is reflected by the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUC). For these analyses, the
anchor question was considered as the gold
standard for change, and the change scores on the
FI and FP using continuous scores were considered
as the ‘diagnostic test’ for measuring change. An
AUC of ≥ 0.70 was considered to be adequate. In
addition, for each instrument the optimal cut-off
point was calculated for which the sensitivity and
specificity together revealed the least error in
classifying patients as improved versus unchanged
and deteriorated versus unchanged. To carry out
these analyses, the correlation (Spearman’s rho)
between the change score on the frailty
instrument and the anchor question should be at
least 0.40 [23].
Missing data and sensitivity analysis
Patients who died during follow-up were included in the
analytic sample by imputing the highest prevalent frailty
category for each frailty instrument and the worst outcome
for the anchor questions. A complete case analysis
was included as a sensitivity analysis. For all analyses
IBM SPSS Statistics, version 23 was used.
Results
Descriptive statistics
Baseline characteristics were presented in Table 1. Of
the 243 participants with baseline assessments, 51 had
no follow-up data after three months post discharge
resulting in an analytic sample of 192 in the three
months follow-up analyses. The analytic sample of the
twelve months follow-up analyses included 187 participants.
A flowchart including a detailed description of the
reason for missing data is provided in Additional File 1,
Figure A1. In total, 39 patients (16 %) died during the
study. These patients were older and had higher frailty
and comorbidity index scores at baseline compared to
patients with complete data for all assessments (n = 118)
and patients lost to follow-up after twelve months (n = 56) (Additional File 2, Table S1). Between the latter two
groups, no differences in baseline characteristics were
found (Additional File 2, Table S1).
The FP showed a floor effect at baseline assessment,
hampering detection of improvement in 40 % of these
patients (Table 1; Additional File 1, Figure A3). Mean
scores of the frailty instruments at baseline and followup
measurements for all and within collapsed categories
as used in the analyses are presented in Table 2 and in
Additional File 1, Table A3.
Reproducibility
ICCs, SEMs, and SDCs were presented in Table 3. ICC
of the FI were 0.85 (95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.76;
0.91) and 0.84 (95% CI: 0.77; 0.90), and 0.65 (95% CI:
0.49; 0.77) and 0.77 (95% CI: 0.65; 0.84) for the FP.
Kappa statistics of the FP categories were 0.41 (absolute
agreement: 0.68) and 0.45 (absolute agreement: 0.70) indicating
fair agreement (Additional File 1, Tables A4 –
A7). SEM of the FI were good to very good (5 and 6 %)
and doubtful for the FP (11 and 13 %) (Table 3). Bland
Altman plots are presented in the Additional File 1,
Figures A4 and A5. Good agreement was observed for
the FI using the functioning anchor and for the FP using
the health and functioning anchors (p > 0.05). A systematic
mean difference was observed between baseline and
three-months follow-up tests of the FI using the health
anchor (mean difference 0.02; 95 % CI: 0.01; 0.03).
Responsiveness
All SRMs in the improved and deteriorated groups were
higher than the SRMs in the stable (unchanged) groups,
meaning that the measured change in frailty outcomes
was lower among patients in the stable groups compared
to patients in both the improved and deteriorated groups
(Table 4). Largest SRMs were found for deterioration
over twelve months (Table 4), with SRMs ranging from
0.69 to 1.00, indicating good to very good internal
responsiveness.
Only the FI showed sufficient responsiveness (> 0.70)
to detect deterioration in frailty over three months
(Fig. 1). Highest AUC of the FI was found for the health
anchor question (AUC: 0.77; 95 % CI: 0.69; 0.86, see
Fig. 1). The optimal cut-off of the change scores from
baseline to three months post discharge was 0.02 with
corresponding sensitivity and specificity of 69 and 81 %
(Additional File 1, Table A8). Over the timeframe of
twelve month, both the FI and FP were responsive for
deterioration in frailty status. Highest AUC’s were
found for the health anchor (AUC: 0.82; 95 % CI:
0.73; 0.90 and AUC: 0.78; 95 % CI: 0.69; 0.87) (Fig. 1)
with corresponding optimal change score of 0.04
(Sensitivity: 75 %; Specificity: 77 %) and 0.50 (Sensitivity:
68 %; Specificity: 84 %) for the FI and FP,
respectively (Additional File 1, Table A8). The FP
consistently performed better in detecting improvement
in frailty, yet all AUC values were below the
threshold of 0.70 (Fig. 1).
Sensitivity analyses including complete cases only
yielded essentially the same results. However, as
expected, by disregarding the frailest individuals
(Additional File 2, Table S1) and due to the smaller
sample, the AUC values regarding deterioration were
lower in this subgroup (Additional File 2, Figure S1).
Discussion
In this study on acutely hospitalized older medical patients,
we found that the FI showed good reproducibility and the
FP showed moderate reproducibility. In addition, the FI
was responsive in detecting deterioration in frailty between
pre-acute hospital admission and three and twelve months
post discharge. The FP was only responsive in detecting patients
with deteriorating frailty status between pre-hospital
admission and twelve months post-discharge.
Like cholesterol is a measurable marker for cardiovascular
disease risk and HbA1c for risk of complications of
diabetes type 2, frailty can be considered as the measurable
marker for risk of adverse outcomes. Responsive
frailty measures can therefore act as an important intermediate
outcome for the evaluation of interventions
aiming at preventing adverse health outcomes in older
patients. Despite that the FP is frequently used as an
outcome instrument to evaluate interventions, we failed
to establish satisfactory reproducibility and responsiveness
of the FP over a three months timeframe [24–26].
In addition, a floor effect of the FP was found in 40 % of
the cases. This may have led to an underestimation of
the ability to detect improvements, but it may have overestimated
the results based on the unchanged patients.
Consequently, the reproducibility outcomes may have
been even overestimated due to the floor effect of the
FP. Although, in theory, an instrument can be responsive
with a low validity or reliability, it may be undesirable to
use such an instrument to measure change over time
[27]. Consequently, despite the apparently better
outcomes of the FP compared to the FI to measure
improvements in frailty status over time, we have
substantial reservations to draw this conclusions due
to the unsatisfactory reproducibility outcomes of the
FP in the current study. In addition, the practical applicability
of the FP to measure improvement over
time is limited by the presence of a floor effect of the
FP.
In the current study, an increase of five deficits over
three months and six deficits over twelve months corresponds
with the smallest detectable change of the FI that
is meaningful to patients. The found change scores are
higher than reported in recent other studies investigating
clinically meaningful change of the FI [28, 29]. These
differences may be explained by the used anchor: in the
current study a subjective perception of change in health
and functioning according to the patient was used,
whereas the other studies used existing instruments, like
the EQ-5D and the Clinical Frailty Scale, as the external
anchor. Our participants could have been adapted to
their changed health state after hospitalization [30]
which may have resulted in a larger change score that is
regarded meaningful to patients themselves. However,
patients who perceived no change in health and functional
status after three and twelve months post discharge,
also had the smallest change scores on the frailty
instruments. Another explanation may be that the
change in frailty status according to a clinician which
was investigated by Theou and colleagues [29] is different
from the patients perception of change in frailty status
as investigated in the current study.
Strengths of this study are the use of various methods
for assessing reproducibility and responsiveness and the
large sample size. More than twice the recommended
number of patients for evaluating psychometric properties
were included [19]. There are, however, limitations.
First, instead of using a comprehensive geriatric assessment,
the gold standard for frailty status, we used two
relevant patient-based anchor questions to determine
change in frailty. By using two anchor questions referring
to change in function and health in a population
that is prone to frailty, we intended to come close to
evaluating real frailty status. The moderate positive correlations
of these anchor questions with the change
scores on the frailty instruments indicate that the chosen
anchor questions may not fully capture the whole concept
of frailty. Directly asking for change in frailty was,
however, not an option because older adults themselves
are not familiar with this concept [31]. Second, the design
for determining the reproducibility of the frailty instruments
was not ideal. On the one hand, the time
interval between the test and the retest, three months, is
a long period to assume that the patients have remained
stable. In addition, stability was based on self-reported,
thus subjective, anchor questions, which did show a
moderate correlation with the change scores on the
frailty instruments (ranging from 0.43 to 0.48). Although
mean change scores and standard deviations were smallest
in the unchanged subgroups, suggesting little variation
in frailty scores between the first and second
assessments and suggesting clinically stable patients, the
gold standard for measuring frailty was unavailable and
objective clinical stability could not be guaranteed. However,
if some unstable patients were inadvertently considered
stable in the current study, the found
reproducibility scores are expected to be an underestimation
of the “real” reliability. Third, we cannot rule out
that the results are biased by response shift, as response
shift evaluation was not incorporated in the study design
[30]. Fourth, the modified FP was used instead of the
original performance-based measures because in our
population of older medical patients, performance-based
assessment is often too challenging and would have led
to the inclusion of the fittest frail patients, resulting in
an undesirable selection bias. Fifth, due to ethical considerations,
no patients were included with cognitive impairment
due to dementia or delirium, although frailty
in these patients is often present and their frailty status
is expected to decline after hospitalization. However, the
broad inclusion criteria still resulted in the inclusion of a
representative sample of the geriatric population consisting
of a heterogeneous group of mentally competent
older medical patients.
Future research should compare the responsiveness of
existing frailty instruments and their relation to the
course of functional impairment in multiple studies and
other patient groups with a reliable gold standard for the
measurement of frailty. These studies should also incorporate
measures such as a then-test in study designs
to identify and adjust for response shift.
Conclusions
In this study, the Frailty Index showed better reproducibility
and responsiveness properties compared to the
Frailty Phenotype. Based on this single study we cannot
yet formulate concrete recommendations about the best
instrument to evaluating frailty status over time that is
meaningful to older patients.
