With the development of society and the acceleration of
industrialization, there are an increasing number of traffic
and engineering accidents, and more cases of highenergy
injuries and limb fractures [1]. Because patients
are prone to have severe wound infection, defective skin
necrosis and long-term wound healing after open fracture,
it is very easy for patients to develop infectious
bone nonunion in clinical practice, and open tibial fracture
is one of the most common cause of infectious bone
nonunion [2, 3]. There is weak tissue around the tibia,
and infection is easy to happen after fracture. Infection
after open tibial fracture is characterized by prolonged
disease course, permanent functional deficits and high
reinfection rates, which not only seriously affects life quality
of patients, but also causes heavy burden on families
and society [4]. Meanwhile, open tibial fracture is often accompanied
by delayed and poor healing, and infectious
bone nonunion is a more difficult problem in clinical
treatment [5]. Tibial infectious nonunion is usually associated
with bone deformities, bone loss, persistent infection
and adverse effects on life quality [6]. Because older patients
have low immune function and slow bone growth,
they are more likely to have infectious bone nonunion
after open tibial fracture. There were high therapeutic difficulty
and poor therapeutic effects in older patients with
infectious bone nonunion, posing a severe challenge for
orthopedic surgeons and patients [7].
Clinical doctors urgently need to find an effective
treatment with obvious efficacy in older patients with infectious
bone nonunion after open tibial fracture [8].
Operative surgery is the main clinical treatment of infectious
bone nonunion. Its principle is to promote bone
healing by clearing infective lesions and killing necrotic
tissues. However, traditional treatment is to resect injured
tissues, prevent active infection and repair bone
defect by free bone transplantation [9]. With the continuous
improvement of medical level, bone transport
technology has been applied by clinicians in the treatment
of infectious bone nonunion. Based on the
tension-stress law, bone transport technology might be
promote bone regeneration and bone healing by achieving
external fixation of infectious bone nonunion [10]. It
has the potential to become significant method for infectious
bone nonunion after open tibial fracture [11].
However, although several studies showed high successful
rates with surgical treatment of infectious bone nonunion
after open tibial fracture, the application of bone
transport technology is still in the exploratory stage in
the treatment of older patients with infectious bone nonunion
after open tibial fracture [12–14]. General speaking,
young patients are more likely to choose operative
reconstruction, while older patients are more likely to
choose operative amputation. However, amputation significantly
reduces physical and mental well-being of
older patients, and successful operative reconstruction
could be a better alternative option [7]. Clinical efficacy
of bone transport technology needs to be further studied
in older patients with infectious bone nonunion after
open tibial fracture. Therefore, the current study was designed
for the first time to analyze clinical efficacy of
bone transport technology in Chinese older patients with
infectious bone nonunion after open tibial fracture.
Methods
Study participants
The current study retrospectively analyzed 220 older patients
with infectious bone nonunion after open tibial
fracture. All patients received operative treatment in Orthopedics
Department, Harbin No. 5 Hospital, between
July 2012 and November 2019. There were 110 patients
receiving bone transport technology and allocated to
Group A, and 110 patients receiving membrane induction
technique with antibiotic bone cement and allocated
to Group B. Inclusion criteria: 1) ≥ 65 years old; 2)
open tibial fracture; 3) fracture-related infection: abscess,
draining sinus, intraoperative purulence, significant
growth of a microorganism from intraoperative tissue
specimens (at least two or more positive sterile site cultures),
and positive histopathology supportive of deep
active infection; 4) interrupted bone healing with no sign
of healing in the normal time. No bone healing after increasing
treatment time and treatment was essential to
achieve bone healing; and 5) signed informed consent,
had complete data and were followed up. Exclusion criteria:
1) histories of studied treatments; 2) intraarticular
or pathological fractures; 3) fractures with vascular compromise;
and 4) malignant tumors or other reasons making
patients not undergo operative surgery. The current
study was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
and approved by the Ethics Committee of Harbin No. 5
Hospital (EC-20190730-1243), with the signed informed
consent of all patients.
Surgical procedures
Patients avoided all surgical treatment during the acute
attack period and received surgical treatment after infection
was controlled with antibiotics. Patient was placed
in a supine position, with the affected limb raised and
infected area exposed. Epidural anesthesia, strict disinfection
and aseptic operation were conducted in surgical
treatment when patients was stable and surgery was possible.
Bone transport technology was conducted in patients
(Group A) based on the following surgical
procedures: 1) to resect infected, necrotic and scar tissues,
protect significant nervous and vascular structures,
peel off hardened and necrotic bones, and debride
wound surface and necrotic space; 2) to fix ring external
fixator in the metaphyseal of proximal and distal tibia,
parallel to the upper and lower tibia rings and across
osteotomy plane; 3) osteotomy was conducted at the
proximal tibia with its plane horizontal with tibial nodule
surface. 4) to maintain original length and force line
of affected limb, and adjust linear and positional alignment;
5) to tighten the nut after all steel needles were
fixed; 5) to suture whole wound and elevate affected
limb; 6) bone transport was started within 7 days after
the operation, and conducted by 0.25 mm/time, 4 times/
d and 1 mm/d; 7) dressing is changed once a week, and
needles are disinfected daily with alcohol; and 8) to stop
bone transport and remove external fixator when new
callus bone was solid and bone mineralization was basically
mature.
Patients (Group B) with soft tissue defect were first
treated with lesion resection, dressing change and skin
grafting. After soft tissue was adequately covered (3
months later), these patients were treated with membrane
induction technique with antibiotic bone cement.
Patients without soft tissue defect were directly treated
with membrane induction technique with antibiotic
bone cement: 1) to resect infected, necrotic, inflammatory
granulation and fibrous scar tissues, protect significant
nervous and vascular structures, peel off hardened
and necrotic bones, and debride wound surface and necrotic
space; 2) to fill necrotic space using antibiotic bone
cement with appropriate size and additional vancomycin;
3) to fix external fixator and make fracture stable; 4)
bone cement was removed and bone graft was implanted
after membrane induction was formed (6 to 8 weeks
later); and 5) external fixator was removed after bone
healing. For two groups, antimicrobial treatment was adjusted
based on the susceptibility of pathogens and continued
for at least 6 weeks after operation.
Postoperative follow-up
There were standardized recording of demographic data
and procedure details collected by a multidisciplinary expert
team. These experts were from Orthopedics Department,
Anesthesiology Department, Geriatric
Department, Endocrinology department and Cardiology
Department. They were not masked to surgical procedures.
Patients were followed up for 2 years after surgical
operation. Linear and positional alignment was checked
in two groups, and bone healing index was compared
between two groups. Bone healing index was the time
required for each 1 cm extension. Knee function was
evaluated using the American Knee Society (AKS) knee
function score (200 points), including Knee score and
Knee function score, each with 100 points [15]. Knee
score included pain, motion and stability. Knee function
score included the abilities to walk and climb stairs. AKS
knee function score could fully evaluate knee anatomical
and functional status, and the higher the score, the better
the recovery of knee function. Ankle function was
evaluated using the Baird-Jackson ankle function score
(100 points) similar to AKS knee function score, and the
higher the score, the better the recovery of ankle function
[16]. Clinical efficacy was evaluated with the following
criteria generally applied in clinical work: 1)
complete recovery: complete healed limb, complete recovered
function, movement without obstacle, complete
physical self-maintenance and complete physical activity;
2) good recovery: good healing limb, good functional recovery,
movement without obstacle, good physical selfmaintenance
and general physical activity; 3) moderate
recovery: moderate healing limb, moderate functional recovery,
movement with slight obstacle, moderate physical
self-maintenance and losing physical activity; 4)
poor recovery: poor healing limb, poor functional recovery,
movement with obstacle, losing physical selfmaintenance
and losing physical activity.
Statistical analyses
Continuous data with normal distribution were
expressed as mean ± standard deviation, and Student’s ttest
was used for comparison between groups. Continuous
data with skewed distribution were expressed as medians
(interquartile ranges), and Mann-Whitney U test
was used for comparison between groups. Categorical
data were expressed as numbers and percentages, and χ2
tests were used for comparison between groups. Statistic
Package for Social Science 20.0 software package (SPSS
Inc., Chicago, IL) was used for statistical analyses, with
two-tailed P < 0.05 considered statistically significant in
all tests.
Results
There were 164 male patients and 56 female patients,
with an age range of 65 to 71 years and an average age
of 67 ± 1.3 years. Traffic accident, high-fall injury and
crush injury account for 45.5, 27.7 and 26.8%, respectively.
As shown in Table 1, age, gender, histories, causes
and fracture location had no significant difference between
the two groups (P > 0.05 for all). Operation time
in the Group A was significantly shorter than that in the
Group B (P < 0.05).
During a follow-up of 2 years, all patients had a
follow-up rate of 100%. As shown in Table 2, linear and
positional alignment (70.9 vs. 57.3), American Knee
Society knee function score (167.7 ± 14.9 vs. 123.8 ±
15.7), Baird-Jackson ankle function score (89.9 ± 3.5 vs.
78.4 ± 4.9), bone healing index (43.0 ± 2.0 vs. 44.3 ± 3.0)
and clinical recovery (8.2 vs. 4.5) of patients in the
Group A were significantly better than those in the
Group B (P < 0.05 for all). Wound infection in the
Group A (7.3%) was significantly less than that in the
Group B (16.4%; P < 0.05). There were neither a neurovascular
complication nor a recurrence of infection in
the two groups.
Discussion
Infectious bone nonunion is difficult to treat and easy to
recur in clinical practice. It is often caused by trauma
and mostly occurs in the tibia [5]. Infectious bone nonunion
caused by open tibial fracture has significantly affected
physical and psychological health of patients, and
obviously increased the burden of family and society
[17]. Although there has been an improvement in the
treatment of open tibial fractures since the advanced implantation
and less traumatic surgical techniques, the infection
rate is still high, ranging from 9 to 18% of
patients, and its recurrence rate is very common, affecting
10 to 20% of patients [5]. The treatment of infectious
bone nonunion is especially challenging in older patients
with open tibial fracture. As the best treatment option of
infectious bone nonunion after open tibial fracture, surgical
operations include the following methods: 1) lesion
removal, space filling, internal fixation and bone grafting;
2) membrane induction technique with antibiotic bone
cement; and 3) bone transport technology. Lesion removal,
space filling, internal fixation and bone grafting
are traditionally and widely used operative methods for
infectious bone nonunion after open tibial fracture. It
improves patient’s condition through the thorough removal
of inactivated bone and related soft tissue. However,
it generally has high preoperative requirement for
soft tissue and easily result in postoperative infection
and bone nonunion. In the early stage after surgical operation,
the affected limb can not bear certain weight,
thus aggravating its osteoporosis in older patients.
Membrane induction technique with antibiotic bone
cement has been proposed as a new strategy for the
treatment of infectious bone nonunion after open tibial
fracture [18]. It provides key physical and biological effects
through inducing membrane formation. This membrane
has similar structure and content of growth factor
with autologous periosteum. With a thickness of 0.5-2
mm, it can secrete a variety of osteogenic precursor
cells, osteogenic growth factors and vascular growth factors.
Cortical bone defects were repaired by inducing
rapid osteogenesis and cortical shaping of intramembranous
cancellous bone. Meanwhile, implanted autologous
cancellous bone itself has good osteoinductive and
osteogenic properties. However, in addition to relatively
long treatment time, membrane induction technique
with antibiotic bone cement has high preoperative requirement
for soft tissue, and causes certain trauma
through extracting autologous ilium [5]. Although autologous
bone is the most ideal source of implanted
bone, lacking autologous bone limits the application of
membrane induction technique.
Bone transport technique is a new technique to
achieve bone and soft tissue repair through increasing
fixation strength with stable three-dimensional fixation.
Its basic principle is the tension-stress law of tensile tissue
regeneration, that is, when biological tissues are
slowly pulled to generate excellent axial stress stimulation,
activate cell proliferation and vessel formation, and
promote bone formation and healing [19, 20]. Bone
transport technique firstly makes an appropriate osteotomy
of bone stump, then uses an appropriate external
fixator, and choose the appropriate time and speed to
pull bone and soft tissues. Bone transport has the following
advantages: 1) it has simple procedures, reliable clinical
efficacy and shortened operative time; 2) it is a
minimally invasive surgical technique that can correct
deformities and shortening at the same process; 3) it
simultaneously controls the infection and repair the defection
of bone and soft tissues, especially applicable
with poor soft tissue coverage; 4) there is no strict restriction
on the length of defective bone, and it is needed
to retain only one end of tibial metaphysis; 5) in the
early stage after surgical operation, weight bearing on
the affected limb reduces time in the bed, avoid continuous
muscle wasting and avoid different perioperative
complications.
Several published papers has discussed bone transport
technique in treating infectious bone nonunion after
open tibial fracture [12–14]. These studies have shown
that bone transport technology could resect diseased
and necrotic bone and pull bone and soft tissues to promote
bone formation, correct the deformity and achieve
functional recovery without bone grafting, However, the
application of bone transport technology is still in the
exploratory stage in the treatment of older patients with
infectious bone nonunion after open tibial fracture. General
speaking, young patients are more likely to choose
operative reconstruction, while older patients are more
likely to choose operative amputation. However, amputation
significantly reduces physical and psychological
well-being of older patients, and successful operative reconstruction
could be a better alternative option [7].
Clinical efficacy of bone transport technology needs to
be further studied in older patients with infectious bone
nonunion after open tibial fracture. The current study
demonstrated that bone transport technique not only
takes less time, but also promote patients’ recovery than
membrane induction technique with antibiotic bone cement.
Linear and positional alignment, functional scores,
bone healing and clinical efficacy of patients achieved by
bone transport technique were significantly better than
membrane induction technique with antibiotic bone cement,
suggesting that bone transport technique is suitable
for Chinese older patients with infectious bone
nonunion after open tibial fracture.
Complete resection and debridement of necrotic tissue,
long course of antimicrobial and supportive therapy
and adequate reconstruction of bone and soft tissues,
are of immense significance to effective achievement of
bone transport technique in treating infectious bone
nonunion after open tibial fracture [21, 22]. Due to rich
blood supply, large bone surface and highly prevalent
osteogenesis, tibial metaphysis is generally chosen as the
osteotomy site to achieve rapid bone healing and good
clinical efficacy [21]. Debriding wound and anti-infection
treatment are essential to avoid new bone infection and
infectious bone nonunion after open tibial fracture. The
osteotomy site should meet the requirements of bone
length, blood supply and periosteum completeness. Time
and speed of bone transport are also significant to its
clinical efficacy and can be determined based on soft tissue.
Due to poor soft tissue coverage, bone transport
might affect bone healing. If there is good soft tissue
coverage, bone transport can be performed about 7 days
after osteotomy and at the speed of 1 mm/d. Bone transport
speed is mainly determined on clinical efficacy and
can be slowed down in older patients. Bone transport
direction can be appropriately adjusted based on bone
healing, and older patients should be encouraged to bear
proper weight after operation.
The current study had one limitation. The current
study was a retrospective study, and further prospective
study is essential to confirm our results. All researchers
in the current study were not masked to surgical procedures,
and randomized controlled trial with blind
method should be performed to avoid the limitation.
Conclusion
The current study demonstrated that bone transport
technology achieved better knee and ankle joint function
recovery and superior bone healing and clinical efficacy
than membrane induction technique with antibiotic
bone cement, suggesting that bone transport technique
is worthy of extensive promotion to improve clinical
condition of older patients with infectious bone nonunion
after open tibial fracture.