Background
Due to Germany’s aging population, the role of informal
caregivers is becoming increasingly important in providing
necessary support for older patients. Of the more
than 4.25 million care recipients in Germany who were
legally dependent on long-term care, 79% were living at
home in 2019. More than 90% of this population received
help and care from informal caregivers, in most
cases a family member [1]. Family carers are the main
source of support for older patients living at home, making
them Germany’s largest “nursing service” [2]. Most
of those providing care for an older person are spouses/
partners (48%) with an average age of 75.8 years [3]. The
term spouse in this paper thus encompasses husbands
and wives as well as unmarried partners living together
in a long-term partnership.
Caregivers have been described as “hidden patients”
[4]. Compared to non-caregivers, the caregiver burden
has not only been associated with worse health outcomes
(e.g. depression, anxiety, stress, physical health),
but has also been associated with decreased feelings of
self-efficacy and poorer general subjective well-being [5–
7]. Zarit et al. defined the caregiver burden “as the extent
to which caregivers perceived their emotional or
physical health, social life, and financial status as suffering
as a result of caring for their relative” [8]. Various
studies have examined the burden of caregivers in terms
of disease, age, gender, relationship, housing, work, social
support and re-hospitalization [5, 7, 9–11]. Thus,
caregiver burden can be seen as a multidimensional construct
ranging from objective burdens and self-reported
stress burdens to relationship burdens [12].
Despite these negative findings, caregivers also reported
positive aspects to caregiving [13], so-called uplifts
[14]. Reported benefits of caregiving have further
included feeling needed; acquiring new skills; a perceived increase
in personal importance; being able to take responsibility;
and the joy of spending time with the feeling to be
needed [15]. This suggests that the care of a relative must
not automatically be considered a negative experience.
Studies examined the difference between caregiving
spouses and caregiving children. They reported that
spouses seem to generally provide more care but use less
professional support, perceive their physical health to be
worse, experience more burden and depression, and have
a lower sense of wellbeing and self-efficacy [5, 7, 16].
Regarding the group of caregiving spouses with positive
caregiving experiences, caregiving was described as a
responsibility and a source of personal growth, a gift of
fulfilling commitment to one another [17]. Those with
negative experiences reported a perceived lack of choice
in the matter of caregiving [18]. Perceived caregiver burden
thus depends, at least partially, on the coping strategies
of the individual caregiver.
The transactional theory of stress and coping by Lazarus
and Folkmann [19] has often been used as a theoretical
framework for understanding caregiver distress. The
authors defined coping as “constantly changing cognitive
and behavioural efforts to manage specific external and/
or internal demands that are appraised as taxing or exceeding
the resources of the person” [19]. This process
includes various different coping strategies. Heim et al.
developed the Bernese Coping Modes (BEFO), a measurement
instrument based on the transactional theory of
stress and coping, as well as clinical observations [20,
21]. The BEFO divides disease-oriented coping into
three general dimensions: cognitive, emotional, and behavioural
strategies. This instrument has proved to be
applicable across a wide range of diagnostic areas or
contexts [20], including the context of family caregiving
[22]. A factor analysis of the BEFO identified three coping
dimensions: ‘diverting’, ‘negative emotional’ and
‘seeking attention and care’ [23]. According to Gunzelmann
et al., who investigated coping dimensions in the
context disease of older persons, good subjective health
and emotional support are associated with ‘diverting’; a
high level of social burden and practical social support
are associated with ‘seeking attention and care’; and
‘negative emotional’ coping can be accordingly found
with high social burden and poor subjective health [24].
To date, these coping dimensions by Hessel et al. [23]
have not been applied to the context of family caregivers,
specifically spouses.
Many studies on the coping strategies of caregiving
relatives have not considered the heterogeneity of this
group. Caregivers are confronted with individual situational
demands and use different available coping strategies.
Therefore, caregivers should be considered as an
aggregation of several different subtypes of caregivers that
differ in the coping strategies they choose [25]. Even less
is known about the relationship between burden and coping
by spousal caregivers [17], especially for those of geriatric
patients without dementia. Previous typological
studies with caring spouses described the experiences
across different groups of neurodegenerative diseases, particularly
dementia and Parkinson disease [26–29].
To our knowledge, no typology exists for caregiving
spouses of geriatric patients without dementia. A typology
for this special group could support health care
professionals in better understanding individual needs
and providing more targeted advice.
Aim
The aim of this study was to explore the burden and
coping strategies of caregiving spouses of geriatric patients
without dementia and a hospitalization within the
last year. To help explore this population, a typology is
presented that has been based on reported perceptions
of home care burden and individual coping strategies.
Furthermore, a case study is presented for each type of
spousal caregiver.
Methods
Design
A concurrent mixed method design, involving two identical
samples for both quantitative and qualitative components
of the investigation, was used. The single-case
data were subsequently aggregated to search for patterns
that extended beyond a single case and to derive more
general findings. To reduce the heterogeneity and
generalize the empirical data for individual cases, results
were clustered using the empirically-grounded construction
of types and typologies [30, 31]. The combination of
quantitative instruments for measuring psychosocial factors
and qualitative interviews in this study allowed
more in-depth exploration of how spousal caregivers
cope with the everyday life care of their partner.
Sample
Caregiving relatives were recruited from selected participants
in the Transsectoral Intervention Program for
Improvement of Geriatric Care in Regensburg Study
(TIGER) (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT03513159). The
study protocol was approved by the ethic committee
of the Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-
Nürnberg, Germany. The aim of the TIGER Study
was to reduce hospital readmission rate among geriatric
patients. Participants were thereby individually
supported by specialized geriatric nurses for up to 1
year following hospitalization. Patient inclusion criteria
were a minimum age of 75 years, a Mini Mental
State Score of more than 22. Exclusion criteria were a
palliative status, and a planned hospital readmission
within the next 4 weeks [32].
Relatives of the TIGER participants were approached
in the hospital or within a few days after to obtain written
informed consent to participate as primary caregivers.
A total of 59 relatives participated in the TIGER
Study. For the present study, we selected those who met
the following inclusion criteria: (a) being a spouse or
partner in a long-term relationship and sharing a common
household (b) being the main caregiver and (c) the
care recipients had been classified as a minimum degree
two regarding long-term care need (‘Pflegegrad’). The
degree of long-term care need (‘Pflegegrad’) in Germany
is set according to criteria listed in the German Social
Code XI [33], with the individual degree appraised by
the health insurance medical service (MDK). There are
five degrees, with higher degrees indicating a higher care
dependency. Degree two signifies a significant impairment
to independent living.
For the current study, nine spousal caregivers were recruited
(see Fig. 1).
Data collection and data analysis
Figure 2 illustrates the evaluation process from the collection
of quantitative and qualitative data, to single case
analysis, and finally the creation of a caregiver typology.
Quantitative data
Caregiver data were collected using demographic information
and a validated self-questionnaire from the
TIGER Study. The current analysis focused on the following
data:
 Demographics: Age, sex, education level, social
situation, degree of dependency on long-term care
(‘Pflegegrad’).
 Caregiver burden: Caregiver burden was measured
using the Zarit Burden Interview (ZBI), which
consists of 22 self-report items. Total scores range
from 0 to 88, with higher scores indicating a higher
perceived burden [8]. A score of 0–20 can be categorized
as little or no burden, 21–40 as mild to
moderate burden, 41–60 as moderate to severe burden,
and 61–88 as severe burden.
 Experienced stress: The German Version of the
Perceived Stress Questionnaire (PSQ) is a validated
instrument with 20 items used to assess subjectively
experienced stress [34]. The resulting score can
range from 0, the lowest level of perceived stress, to
the highest level of perceived stress: 1.
 Expressed emotions (EE): The Family
Questionnaire (FQ) assessed two scores: criticism
(CC) and emotional over-involvement (EOI). The
caregiver attitude towards his or her partner can be
rated as very critical or emotionally over-involved if
the sum score of the scale exceeds the given cut-off
points [35].
 Health-related quality of life: The 12-Item Short
Form Health Survey (SF-12), with a mental (MCS)
and physical component summary (PCS) score, was
used to evaluate health-related quality of life. Scores
and can range from 0 to 100. Higher scores indicate
better health status [36].
Descriptive statistics regarding quantitative data were
obtained using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences
(IBM SPSS V26).
Qualitative data
From October 2019 to February 2020, the first author
conducted nine problem-centred interviews [37] with
spousal caregivers. Interviews took place apart from the
patient and in the home of the spousal caregiver
between one and ten months following hospital discharge.
The developed semi-structured interview guide
(Additional file 1) covered the demands of care, caregiver
motivation, the perceived burden and uplifts of
caregiving, and the personal coping style of the caregiving
spouse. Additional prompts were used when appropriate
to elicit more information about each topic. The
interview guide was not rigidly adhered to, leaving room
for an open and reflective dialogue. The interviews lasted
42–112 min, were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim
and pseudonymized [38]. The transcripts were transferred
to the qualitative data analysis software
MAXQDA (VERBI Software, Berlin, Germany). Each
transcript was read soon after the interview to gain a
sense for the whole. The interviews were analysed following
the structured content analysis method by Mayring
[39]. A deductive-inductive approach was used to
discover the main response categories listed above. The
coping style was further analysed on the basis of BEFO
and broken down into 28 subcategories of copingmodes,
which could be classified under the dimensions
‘diverting’, ‘negative emotional’ and ‘seeking attention
and care’ [23].
Both quantitative and qualitative data were summarized
in a matrix to obtain an overview of the nine
individual cases. This served as the basis for the next
step of analysis: the constructing a typology.
Construction of a typology
A typology is defined as “the result of a grouping
process: An object field is divided in some groups or
types with the help of one or more attributes” [31]. Kelle
and Kluge have described four analytical stages to the
construction of a typology (Fig. 2) [30]. Based on the
theoretical background and collected data, this current
study thus chose the ‘subjective caregiver burden’ and
reported ‘caregiver coping behaviour’ as relevant attributes
in identifying similarities and differences between
the nine single cases (Stage 1). The nine individual cases
were then clustered into groups according to the predefined
attributes of the ZBI and the dimensions of the
BEFO. For this reason, the three dimensions according
to Hessel et al. [23] were ranked according to the predominant
form for each case.
Using an Excel database, individual caregiver burdens,
coping styles, and further attributes were crossreferenced
to facilitate within-case and between-case
analyses (Stage 2). To obtain a deeper understanding of
the social aspect, the relationships between the selected
attributes and the constructed types were then explored
(Stage 3). ‘Caregiver motivation’ and ‘expressed emotions’
were further included to augment understanding
of differences between the groups and find similarities
within the groups. As illustrated in Fig. 2, these three
stages occurred in a constant feedback loop. As a last
step, three cases, best exemplifying the selected attributes
of burden and coping style, were selected to illustrate
the three constructed types presented in this paper
(Stage 4). Ongoing discussion with experts of alternative
ways of interpretation throughout the research process
was used to increase the validity of the findings.
Results
Description of the sample
The final sample (Table 1) consisted of nine spousal
caregivers, four women and five men, with a mean age
of 78.9 years. All couples lived in an apartment or house
without any other supporting family members in the
close vicinity. The care recipients had a degree of care
dependency (‘Pflegegrad’) between 2 and 5 and a MMST
between 25 and 30 (Mean MMST: 27.7). In the interviews,
the spouses reported at least two hospital stays of
their partner during the last year. Four couples received
regular care support through an outpatient care service,
three received support through relatives, and two received
support from both relatives and an outpatient
care service.
Five spouses described affection as their motivation for
taking over care, and four spouses reported obligation as
their motivation. Following the ZBI classifications, one
participant ranked the care burden as no or little burden,
and four participants each ranked the care burden
as either mild to moderate or moderate to severe. Twothirds
of the FQ respondents had a high emotional over-involvement (EOI); two participants additionally had a
high criticism (CC) towards her partner. The coping
strategies for most of the spouses could be attributed to
all three dimensions of the BEFO, one participant from
each of one or two dimensions. The subjectively experienced
stress measured by the PSQ showed a broad range
(Score = .12–.92; Mean = .53). The self-reported healthrelated
quality of life measured by the SF-12 was 42
(range: 29–55) for the physical dimension and 40 (range:
19–60) for the mental dimension.
Typology of caregiving spouses
By defining three types of spousal caregiver, an association
between the caregiver burden and the applied coping
strategies could be identified. Correlating attributes
to contrast the types were the ‘motivation to care’ and
the ‘expressed emotions’. Other checked attributes such
as ‘gender’, ‘duration of care’, ‘degree of care’ or ‘type of
support’ were checked had no influence on the development
of the typology. Furthermore, two participants receiving
high CC and high EOI scores had expressed the
suspicion that their spouses had dementia. The PSQ
supported our presented typology by increasing stress
levels from Type A to Type C.
Type A demonstrated little to moderate burden, the
lowest stress level of the three types and low expressed
emotions. The predominant coping dimension was ‘diverting’.
Type A can be characterized by the motivation
to care due to feelings of affection. Mr. A, Mr. B and
Mrs. C were assigned to this type.
Type B demonstrated mild to severe burden, a higher
stress level than Type A and emotional overinvolvement.
The predominant coping dimension was
‘seeking attention and care’. The motivation to care for
this Type differs. Mrs. D, Mrs. E and Mr. F were
assigned to this type.
Type C demonstrated moderate to severe burden, the
highest stress level and high emotional overinvolvement.
The predominant coping dimension was
‘negative emotional’. Type C can be characterized by the
motivation to care due to feelings of obligation. Mr. G,
Mr. H and Mrs. J were assigned to this type.
Burdened caring partners additionally tended to report
more health impairments and showed a lower healthrelated
quality of life.
Figure 3 illustrates the correlation between perceived
burden and stress and the three dimensions of coping.
For the following description, we selected one prototypical
representative per each spousal caregiver type
[30] to illustrate our findings.
Type A: “The Caring Partner”
Mr. A cares for his wife. They had been married for
about 60 years and were self-employed together. They
had little contact with their relatives. The couple lived in
a barrier-free rented flat. For the last 2 years, Mrs. A has
been dependent on increased support and care, with the last hospital stay 9 months ago due to chronic lung disease.
When his wife “was not there, it was gloomy. Then
I look where she always sits or lies, […], she is not here”
(Mr. A, para. 84). She used a wheeled walker because of
a gait and balance disorder. She was also urinary incontinence
and impaired vision and hearing. In the morning,
she was cared for by an ambulant nursing service.
Her husband provides the following: Assistance walking,
going to the toilet, dressing, household, accompaniment
to the doctor, preparation of medication, and insulin
application.
The war and the post-war years were formative for
Mr. A: “It’s from all the experiences of the war, when
your father was at war and your mother was alone at
home, and when you somehow notice something like that,
you think in a different way and then you see that everything
turned out well. Then you say, do not give up courage,
not hope” (Mr. A, para. 94). Mr. A relativized his
own situation by comparing it with the past. His father
had also cared his wife: “But he never complained. He
never complained. How many more years did he care for
her? 5-6 years at least. Yes, yes. Mother needed a lot of
care” (Mr. A, para. 98). Mr. A considered supporting his
wife “a matter of course and we have said yes, in good
times and bad times” (Mr. A, para. 38). Moreover, his
wife supported him by giving him instructions for
household activities: “Everything works out quite well.
We are already a well-coordinated team” (Mr. A, para.
19).
During the interview, Mr. A repeatedly emphasised
how important being together is to him. Humour was
important for living together: “We laugh a lot” (Mr. A,
para. 140). He was also pleased with the respect and appreciation
he receives from his wife: “And she is really
happy that she has me. And I am glad that I have her.
She then says: You did a good job or it’s good that I have
you and all that” (Mr. A, para. 74). Mr. A tried to suppress
thoughts about the future and death with positive
thoughts: “You should rather have beautiful thoughts. I
prefer to be optimistic. That makes you not want to look
so far ahead. That comes by itself” (Mr. A, para. 46).
In Mr. A’s view, partnership and cohesion were of central
importance. This had been a feature of his life since
childhood. He saw caring for his wife not as a burden
but as a matter of course. He could not describe any
stressful situations in everyday life. The times when he
was separated from his wife were most likely to be burdensome
for him. He tried to avoid these situations by
taking care of his wife and he tried to suppress thoughts
of death. He wished “that things stay the way they are
and that we both stick together” (Mr. A, para. 162). The
expressed coping styles ‘acceptance’, ‘preserving composure’,
‘relativizing’, ‘self-validation’, ‘humour’, ‘optimism’
and ‘suppression’ by Mr. A were related primarily to the
‘diverting’ coping dimension.
Type B: “The Worried Manager”
Couple E had already been married for about 50 years
and had little contact with their only child. They lived in
a rented, non-barrier-free apartment. Mr. E had been
hospitalized twice in the last year for falls, in which he
suffered painful injuries. He also suffered from severe
itching, gait disorder and incontinence, as well as impaired
vision and hearing. Mrs. E supported her husband
with personal hygiene, dressing, walking with the
wheeled walker and medication. She had also taken over
all organizational tasks and the household. The extent of
the support was also dependent on Mr. E’s daily form.
Once a week, Mrs. E received support from a housekeeping
as well as an outpatient nursing service to help
her husband shower.
The organization and bureaucracy of the healthcare
situation was particularly stressful for Mrs. E. This is
also due to the fact that without a car, trips to public
agencies or doctors were a great challenge for the
couple: “Visits to doctors cost, you could say, half a day.
Because after that he is done. And me too sometimes”
(Mrs. E, para. 29). Recently she purchased a medical
alert system: “I always have my cell phone with me, but when I know he has the medical alert button I just feel
safer” (Mrs. E, para. 25). She mentioned that it was not
easy for her to ask others for support: “But I don’t like to
make myself so dependent. Which is perhaps to my own
detriment, I honestly admit” (Mrs. E, para. 17).
The housekeeping service was rather a stress factor for
her: “I’ve always been glad when that’s over on Monday”
(Mrs. E, para. 53). There were also situations where she
avoided being active. Regarding her husband’s increasing
visual impairment she said: “It is not that I am not dealing
with the situation, […], I don’t know how to explain
it” (Mrs. E, para. 95).
A lack of understanding for Mrs. E’s situation involved
“frustration. Stress. Stress” (Mrs. E, para. 37). “Today it is
so and tomorrow it can be […]. And do you know what
the worst thing is? Nobody believes you that the differences
are so great” (Mrs. E, para. 33). Mrs. E had reduced
social contacts to those that were positive for her: “And
just gossiping over the garden fence and maligning people
is a waste of my time” (Mrs. E, para. 45).
She often felt very sorry for herself, especially because
of the limited free time due to reduced mobility. This
caused “that I get an outburst of rage. That I am currently
beginning to scold. Well, that can happen to me,
I’m quite honest” (Mrs. E, para. 59). “Such a situation
comes and then it is over again” (Mrs. E, para. 63). In
addition, she also tried to accept her situation by relativizing:
“And there are certainly those who are worse off, I
am quite sure of it” (Mrs. E, para. 95). Another active
way of dealing with stress was “chasing the problems
away by walking. You then see things a little differently”
(Mrs. E, para. 71). She was able to divert and relax by
“beautiful music, nice things on TV. And often also a little
walk. Maybe inconspicuous for everyone else, but for
us it is something” (Mrs. E, para. 67).
She described the relationship with her husband as a
source of strength and purpose: “And because we are
there for each other. It has been like that, recently, when
I was not feeling very well and my husband was there, he
supported me. If we have luck, how to say, if God wills,
we will have a golden wedding next year. […] and that
we are there for each other. That’s why we got married”
(Mrs. E, para. 39).
Mrs. E also found consolation and reassurance “when I
can go to church” (Mrs. E, para. 45). She appreciated the
conversation with the priest: “We can laugh together […]
and on the other hand we can be really serious with each
other” (Mrs. E, para.47).
In Mrs. E’s case, all three coping dimensions could be
seen. However, the coping dimension ‘seeking attention
and care’ was the most pronounced in her descriptions.
These included ‘emotional release’, ‘attention and care’,
‘giving meaning’, and ‘religion’. ‘Social withdrawal’ as a
focus on oneself was also part of it. ‘Negative emotional
coping styles in the form of ‘active avoidance’, ‘self-pity’
or ‘release of anger’ served primarily to release her from
the demands on herself. ‘Relativizing’ and ‘valorising’ her
situation were used as coping dimension ‘diverting’.
Type C: “The Desperate Overburdened”
Mr. and Mrs. J had been married for about 40 years and
lived in their own house. The couple had been selfemployed.
Their only child currently lives further away
but visits her parents almost weekly to support them. In
addition to various internal diseases, Mr. J had a stroke
some years ago. He had a high risk of falling and therefore
used a wheeled walker. His last hospitalization was
for clarification of syncope.
Mrs. J felt strongly burdened by the care and support
of her husband. She repeatedly described the permanent
availability and the fear of falling as extremely stressful.
“You listen, you hear all this, you hear the toilet flush,
you think, hopefully it works. Then you hear the banging
at the door again, because that’s what happens. Actually
a permanent fear” (Mrs. J, para. 43). “Always the permanent
listening, at night in standby” (Mrs. J, para. 29).
She had quite different expectations of the time spent
together in later life, “because I didn’t imagine that we
would be hanging on each other all the time” (Mrs. J,
para. 37).
Friends of her husband would take him along to events
or excursions from time to time. “Then I am incredibly
grateful and very, very happy and I have an evening for
myself” (Mrs. J, para. 71).
The last hospital stays of her husband had been “terrible”
in her eyes. “Well, I could sleep pretty well at night,
because I knew he was safe. But in the daytime, what
should I expect when I go there? What do I have to take
with me? What do I have to think about? Laundry
brought in, other laundry taken out. The driving in, the
parking, […]. So there were three hours away like nothing.
And that was again the loss of time. You sit there at half
past seven in the evening […] actually you are exhausted
and tired” (Mrs. J, para. 65). The lack of time was a key
issue for Mrs. J.
Mrs. J described everyday life as “dragging along, letting
such a time pass, such waiting, now I do this quickly,
but then he is tired” (Mrs. J, para. 13), “at some point
you become speechless, because what do you still want to
talk about?” (Mrs. J, para. 65). She also appeared to be
resigned. She was no longer interested in activities like
going to the cinema or meeting her friends. In her circle
of acquaintances she felt little recognition and understanding:
“Actually, only those who have similar situations
at home or are just as restricted can understand
this” (Mrs. J, para. 182).
Mrs. J had the feeling that she had to do everything on
her own: “My husband always says we have to do it. So then I also know what he wants, but in the end it’s just
me. We have to do it” (Mrs. J, para. 108). Overall, she
criticized that her husband showed too little engagement
in performing therapeutic exercises.
With her child, Mrs. J can talk about her feelings: “It is
actually a sadness. [Name of the child] sometimes says,
you don’t get angry then? And then I said, no, I don’t feel
aggression and anger yet. Just, oh my God, this sadness,
but I am also taking antidepressants” (Mrs. J, para. 27).
Nevertheless, Mrs. J tried to find some time for herself
at home, which was difficult for her: “Talk to myself and
try to distract myself, including room scents, aromatherapy,
whatever comes to my mind” (Mrs. J, para. 132). She
relaxed through “Yoga, already ten years. So that my
agility and so still remains. So this is an hour which is
then belonging to me” (Mrs. J, para. 148). “My resting
point is actually the cat. […] She purrs with patience and
you really drive down. Silence. Calmness. Above all she
listens and does not contradict” (Mrs. J, para. 45–47).
Mrs. J looked to the future with worry. “Just with increasing
age you fear it will become worse. Therefore you
must always say, no progress must already be considered
as progress” (Mrs. J, para. 126).
Mrs. J felt emotionally and temporally burdened. She
did not engage professional care and assistance services.
By searching for ‘concentrated relaxation’, ‘emotional release’,
‘attention and care’ and as well as ‘social withdrawal’,
she applied the coping dimension ‘seeking
attention and care’. However, her statements revealed
her main coping dimension to be ‘negative emotional’
(i.e., ‘rumination’, ‘self-pity’, ‘resignation’ and ‘release of
anger’). There was no recognisable ‘diverting’ coping
style. It appears difficult for Mrs. J to integrate the
current situation into her life.
Discussion
This study investigated the relationship between caregiver
burden experience and the coping strategies of
spouses of geriatric patients by constructing a typology
using a mixed method design. Results indicate that coping
behaviour changes with an increasing perception of
burden and stress. As shown in Table 1, in most cases
our participants had a mix of coping strategies of different
dimensions, but one seems to be the most important
and was then grouped into the type.
Participants fitting Type A, “The Caring Partner”, focused
on the relationship with the partner. Decisionmaking
was done together and the “We” was in focus.
Additionally, the needs and the well-being of the partner
to be cared for were the center of attention. Kaplan has
described a similar type as “Til Death Do Us Parts”, in a
typology of partners of people with Alzheimer’s disease
in a care institution [28]. The “We” aspect has also been
described in the so-called “Adapter” type [27], although
here adult children also formed part of the “We” regarding
social support.
Spouses who described their caregiving burden as being
little to moderate tended to apply stress-reducing
coping styles. Gunzelmann et al. found that emotional
support is a predictor of coping by ‘diverting’ [24]. This
is consistent with our findings, although we could not
find a connection between formal/informal support and
the caregiver burden or stress. With Type A, even the
care-receiving spouses were considered a socioemotional
support and more benefits of caregiving were
identified. The EE score was also rather low.
Those fitting Type B, “The Affected Manager”, felt
more burdened and stressed. The burden was attributed
less to the care recipient than to the changed living situation.
The positive view of the relationship was based on
the shared past. The well-being of the partner was at the
center of activities. It bothered the caregiver when the
situation could not be managed alone and outside support
was difficult to accept. This difficulty was also
reflected in an increased EOI score. Caregivers fitting
this type tried to increase their self-confidence especially
through coping by ‘seeking attention and care’. Similarities
can be found in the “Case manager” type by Davis
et al., which described spouses who managed the situation
as a task to be done and organised it primarily on
their own, but without involving their partner [27].
Among all three types, participants fitting Type C,
“The Desperate Overburdened”, reported feeling the
greatest sense of burden and stress. Causes given were
both the changed living situation and the changed partner.
The life of the caregiver receded into the background,
social contacts were rare, and the feeling of
having to decide everything alone dominated. The “We”
rarely appeared in the statements, but the “I” dominated.
The aspect of “being alone” can also be found in the
“Struggler” [27] and “Struggling” type [29], which incidentally
also reported the highest stress levels. Unlike
our sample, “being alone” for “Strugglers” was caused by
resistance to caring for a partner with dementia. In the
present study, a perceived lack of cooperation and missing
emotional support and recognition were mentioned
as causes. The relationship to the partner was considered
to be rather distanced. The ‘negative emotional’ dimension
of coping was predominant, which could also
be due to a perceived low level of control [23, 24].
For all participants in the present study, social contacts
were reduced and essentially limited to the immediate
family circle or, where appropriate, contacts with the
(church-) community. This social withdrawal, however,
was interpreted differently depending on type. With
Type A, withdrawal tended to take place in the context
of focusing on one’s own partner and the time spent together
was experienced as very valuable. With Type C,however, withdrawal was more to focus on oneself, trying
to protect oneself from being overburdened.
Li observed that the kind of family caregiver worry
during the hospital stay of an older relative is related not
only to the patient’s conditions but also to the ability of
the family to provide post-hospital care [40]. This can
also be found in the presented typology. In Type A, the
main worry was about the sick partner. With Type C,
the stress of the organisational workload associated with
the hospital stay and the worry about providing care
after discharge were paramount. Both aspects could be
found in Type B.
The present study also tended to confirm that a higher
care burden is associated with poorer physical and emotional
health [6, 16]. Hessel et al. [23] associated a more
positive evaluation of one’s health with the coping dimension
‘diverting’ and poorer health with the coping
dimension ‘seeking attention and care’. This condition
was also reflected in our typology. The findings on differences
between men and women are heterogeneous
[11, 15]. We could not find any gender differences between
in construction of types. It has been observed,
however, that caregiving motivation influences caregiver
burden [41]. In this study, obligation motives were associated
with a higher caregiver burden and affection motives
were associated with a lower burden.
Daley et al. examined caregiving spouses of patients
with Alzheimer’s disease [26]. Utilizing Kaplan’s couplehood
typology [28], caregiving spouses were divided into
two groups based on expressed closeness to the partner:
“We/Us” and “I/Me”. They found no significant differences
between the two groups in terms of cognition and
functionality of the care recipient, or regarding levels of
anxiety, depression, burden or satisfaction with the relationship.
The authors, however, noted that relationship
satisfaction was higher in the “We/Us” group. Monin
et al. identified a significant correlation between relationship
satisfaction, depressive symptoms, and selfreported
health status [42]. Daley et al. also showed that
in the “We/Us” group, positive aspects were more often
mentioned regarding the care situation [26]. This was
also observed in the current study. In regular increments,
the positive aspects of care were less frequently
mentioned moving from Type A to Type C. Furthermore,
no association between type and attributes of the
care recipient could be found. Based on the interviews,
“We/Us” was more dominant in Type A and the “I/Me”
was more dominant in Type C. Both aspects were
expressed by Type B, in which the “I/Me” managed the
“We/Us” of the couple’s relationship.
There are some limitations to be mentioned. The data
are limited due to the small sample size. However, interpretive
consistency could be achieved using analytical
generalizations/case-to-case transfers despite a small
sample size [43]. Nine spouses of geriatric patients in a
single hospital were interviewed. Therefore, no attempt
at a definitive typology of caregiving spouses can be
made. For example, there were no couples living with
another relative in the same household or in the immediate
neighbourhood in the current sample. Such a situation
would certainly have influenced the typology. With
regard to characteristics such as level of care, gender,
duration of care, degree of care or type support, no correlations
were found in this typology. Larger samples in
further studies are necessary for sophisticating this typology.
The equal distribution in the study further precludes
the formation of a conclusion regarding the
actual distribution of types. Moreover, although no general
correlation was found based on the sample, the interviews
took place at different times in relation to the
last hospital stay. This might have influenced the experience
of burden and stress.
The analysis of qualitative data is open to various interpretations.
An attempt was made to limit this weakness
through a structured approach and a high level of
transparency to data collection, analysis and interpretation.
The mixed method design thus helped in the
search for a deeper understanding of social reality in the
context of geriatric care.
Conclusions
The development of this new typology of caregiving
spouses could help health care professionals better
understand caregiving arrangements. Previous studies
have focused on spouses with partners with neurodegenerative
diseases, particularly dementia. The current study
revealed that partners of patients without dementia can
also be exposed to higher stress levels. More relevant
than an underlying disease or the degree of dependency
on long-term care seems to be the quality of the relationship
to the care recipient. In this respect, members
of the health care professions should pay attention to
how the caregiving partners talk about their situation:
Are they more likely to speak of “we/us”, or “I/me”, or
are both forms present?
The transactional coping model of Lazarus and Folkmann
has been described as a dynamic process [19].
Dealing with stress and strain can be influenced by a reappraisal
of the situation and the coping strategies.
Thus, caregivers of Type C could be supported in identifying
positive aspects of care and the resources of their
partner. They could be encouraged to establish free
space for themselves and to use this space in a more
valuable way to strengthen their self-efficacy.
Type B spouses could be encouraged to strengthen
self-efficacy as well as use and expand existing coping
strategies from the dimensions ‘diverting’ and ‘seeking
attention and care’. As there is usually a 
positive  relationship with the partner and common interests, this should be recognised and used as a resource. At the
same time, caregivers should realise their own limits
without feeling that they have failed. Type B should be
empowered to accept support, especially in the organisation
and planning of care.
In the case of Type A spouses, it seems particularly
important to view the two spouses as a unit and accordingly
involve both partners in counselling and care.
These caring spouses can also have a caregiver burden
and here it is important to ensure that do not overburden
themselves and accept support in good time.