There are a number of interventions that have been found
to be effective or that have the potential of reducing the
burden of Alzheimer's disease (AD). These can be classified
according to whether the intervention is aimed at the
general population (to prevent the onset), or at patients
with AD (to improve or slow the progression of cognitive
decline). These interventions include lowering blood
pressure and cholesterol levels and the use of hormone
replacement, vitamins, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs to prevent the onset of AD and the use of
Cholinesterase Inhibitors (ChEIs) and cognitive behavioural
interventions to slow the cognitive decline. While
those with mild cognitive impairment are a high risk
group for the development of AD [1], and although no
specific interventions have been shown to be of benefit,
they should also benefit from the interventions that help
the general population. This therefore has a large potential
impact in view of the high risk that this population
runs of developing AD.
Of the potential preventive measures the best evidence,
from randomised control trials, is for treating hypertension
[2,3], although there is debate about this [4]. Similarly
ChEIs have the best evidence for cognitive
enhancement [5,6]. Hence, we chose these over other
potential preventive and treatment interventions [7-12].
We have developed new measures of the population
impact of interventions, which estimate the numbers of
people in a defined population who will benefit from an
intervention [13-18], and are population extensions of
the clinically relevant number needed to treat (NNT). The
measures require an estimate of the risk of the health outcome
we are examining, the benefits of the proposed
intervention derived from the literature, how common is
the condition and the current use of the intervention in
the population. These measures of health improvement
can be set against the cost of each intervention and appropriate
priorities could be established that will maximise
gain for the population. As examples of this, we have
shown that interventions for schizophrenia, going from
current to best practice in a population of 100,000, would
prevent between 6 and 40 hospitalizations and between 6
and 44 relapses in a year. Similarly, depression interventions
would lead to between 100 and 325 relapses prevented
[18,19]. After acute myocardial infarction,
increasing the use of beta-blockers would prevent 11
deaths in the next year among a population of 100,000 at
a cost of £158 per life-year saved, compared with 4 deaths
prevented at a cost of £423 per life saved by increasing the
smoking quit rate [17].
By comparing the population benefit of different interventions,
and their costs, it will be possible to make prioritisation
decisions about how to make the biggest impact
on reducing the disease burden of AD on the population,
and to make comparisons with the impact of interventions
for other conditions. This will be of value to policy
makers and consumers as well as to those at risk of suffering
from AD.
This study thus has aimed to quantify the population
impact of prescribing ChEIs, and compare with the treatment
of hypertension, on AD in a local population.
Methods
The study was located in Oldham, a borough in NW England
with a population of 217,000 people. Its aged care
services include two sector based old-age psychiatry community
mental health team with two consultant psychiatrists.
The community psychiatry teams and the social
services are well integrated to provide comprehensive
care. Oldham was selected as a typical urban borough
with availability of the required data from local surveys.
Ethics approval was not sought as the paper relied on
review of the literature and no new data were collected.
Step 1 – literature review to examine key interventions
with established or potential benefit for AD, among the
general population, among those with mild cognitive
decline and those with AD. We focused on the relative risk
reduction and assumed that they can be generalised to different
populations [20]. The main outcome measure was
taken as cognitive decline, as this is an important outcome
in AD and one for which measures of Relative Risk Reduction
are available.
Step 2 – we examined the current practice of the use of
preventive and treatment agents, where possible from the
relevant population (Oldham). This included a retrospective
audit on prescription of ChEIs, analysing the case
notes and pharmacy prescriptions from 2002 to 2005
conducted in Oldham and other health areas by the University
of Manchester psychiatry division co-ordinated by
one of us (NP) [21]. For hypertension, national figures for
proportions of the population being treated were used, as
published in the Health Survey for England [22]. These
allow an examination of the change from current to 'best
practice', defined as the proportion of people with the
condition who should be treated under ideal conditions,
adjusted for adherence to the therapy.
Step 3 – identify the population characteristics of Oldham
to identify the age structure. This allowed us to make estimates
from real populations to which the results can be
applied.
Step 4 – identify costs of different interventions. We used
estimates of drug costs where possible but did not make a 
more detailed estimate of the costs of the different interventions.
Step 5 – calculation of Population Impact Measures. This
involved application of the Relative Risk Reductions, to
the population we have identified, of both the total
impact amongst those with mild to moderate AD as well
as the change from current use of interventions. The measure
we used in this study was the Number of Events Prevented
in a Population (NEPP) which describes the
impact of the interventions and is defined as "the number
of events prevented by the intervention in your population
over a defined time period [15,19]." The Number of
Events Prevented in the Population (NEPP) is calculated
as follows:
NEPP = n*Pd*Pe*ru*RRR
where
n = population size
Pd = the prevalence of the disease in the population
Pe = the proportion eligible for treatment
ru = the risk of event of interest in the untreated group or
base line risk
RRR = the relative risk reduction associated with the treatment.
In order to reflect the incremental effect of changing from
current to 'best practice' and to adjust for levels of compliance,
the proportion eligible for treatment, Pe, is (Pb -
Pt)Pc, where Pt is the proportion currently treated, Pb is the
proportion that would be treated if best practice was
adopted and Pc is the proportion of the population who
are compliant with (adherent to) their medication.
Calculations of the NEPP for different outcomes were calculated
according to the above formula, using an on-line
calculator [23]. This provides 95% Confidence Intervals
using a simulation method with 10,000 iterations. The
calculation requires the population sizes from which the
various estimates in the formula are derived, and these
were taken from the sources used to derive the estimates
themselves. In addition, the Confidence intervals for the
Relative Risk Reductions are required, and these were recalculated
from the original trial data in the relevant publications,
using an on-line calculator [24].
Cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEI's)
The population of 31600 aged 65 or above for Oldham
was obtained, to reflect those at high risk of developing
AD and at whom services are targeted, by population projections
for 2006 from census data (Simpson and Gavalas,
Cathie Marsh Centre for Census and Survey Research,
internal publication).
The prevalence of AD was obtained from global consensus
data for dementia ≥60 years of 5.4%, and an estimate that
50–70% of those with dementia have AD, giving an
assumption that 3% of the population have AD (61% of
those with dementia) [25,26].
Memory assessment and treatment services (MATS) at
Oldham followed the 2001 NICE guidelines on prescribing
ChEI's which recommend that patients with mild to
moderate degree of AD are eligible for treatment [5] (this
changed by the time of the 2006 recommendation, which
limited treatment recommendation to those with moderate
dementia) [6]. Disease severity was based on the mini
mental state examination (MMSE) score which classifies
mild 21–26, moderate 10–20, moderately severe 10–14
and severe AD with a score less than 10. About 50–64% of
the patients suffer from mild to moderate degree [5].
From these figures, the proportion of the AD population
eligible for treatment was taken to be 0.55. Generally, very
few patients with AD have absolute contra-indications for
ChEIs and the local audit [21] found 78% of those treated
were still on treatment at 6 months (the figure we have
used for adherence to treatment). A similar figure of 82%
adherence was seen elsewhere [27].
The Relative Risk Reduction of cognitive decline by treatment
with ChEI's and the risk of event of interest in the
untreated (placebo) group or the base line risk was taken
from Livingston and Katona [28], and re-calculated from
the original trial [29]. The confidence intervals around the
Relative Risk Reduction were calculated from the original
trial data [29], using an on-line calculator [24].
Treatment of hypertension
The systolic hypertension in Europe study (Syst-Eur)
reported a 55% Relative Risk Reduction (95% Confidence
Intervals 24%, 73%) in dementia associated with treatment
in an extended follow-up study of 3.9 years [3]. Eligible
patients for the study had no dementia, were at least
60 yeas old (median 68) and had a sitting systolic blood
pressure ranging from 160 to 219 mmHg and the diastolic
blood pressure was below 95 mmHg. In order to assess
the outcome of AD alone, the original data in the paper
were used to calculate the Relative Risk Reduction and
95% Confidence Intervals as for ChEIs above.
The health survey of England 2003 [22,17] shows that
52% of men and 56% of women aged 65–74 as well as
71% of men and 65% of women aged 75 or more have
high blood pressure above 160/95. We took 55% as a
characteristic average of the above figures as the prevalence
of hypertension at 160/95 in the reference population.
The Health Survey of England 2003 also shows that
at a cut-off point of 160/95, 11.9% of men aged 65–74
and 23.9% of men aged 75 and more have either treated
hypertension (i.e. on treatment but still hypertensive) or
untreated hypertension. For women the respective figures
are 18% and 27.4%. We took 20% as a rough mean of the
above figures as the proportion who could benefit from
improved treatment, and took 78% compliance with
treatment to be consistent with the data for cognitive
enhancers above. Baseline risk of the development of AD
was taken from the control group of the randomised controlled
trial [3].
Results
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Table 1 shows the estimates and the results of the calculations.
If all the eligible patients in the population were to
be treated, (with compliance taken into account) we
could expect that it would prevent cognitive deterioration
(as measured on ADAS cog scale) in 123.6 (95% Confidence
Intervals (CI) 82.3, 169.1), 16.4 (95% CI 2.1, 31.2)
would show a mild improvement (4 points or more on
the ADAS – cog scale) and 2.6 (95% CI 0.2, 5.8) would
show an improvement of 7 points or more over a period
of 6 months. This would require the treatment of 406
patients with ChEIs.
To assess the benefit of going from current to 'best practice',
we used unpublished results from the local audit
data [21] showing that 46% of the eligible patients were
treated with ChEI's (although this may well be an overestimate
[30]). If we are to apply these findings in an
incremental manner from current practice to the best
practice, i.e. the rest of the eligible patients were to be
treated, we could expect an additional benefit of preventing
cognitive deterioration in 66.8 (95% CI 44.0, 92.6),
8.9 (95% CI 1.2, 16.8) showing a mild improvement and
1.4 (95% CI 0.11, 3.2) would improve by 7 points on the
ADAS-cog scale. This would require the treatment of an
extra 187 patients with ChEIs beyond current practice.
The annual drug cost for a patient to be treated with
ChEI's is taken as approximately £1,000 per year [5]. Since
going from current to 'best practice' would involve the
treatment of an extra 187 patients, the direct additional
cost for drugs at Oldham would be about £187,000 per
year. In addition the MATS clinic at Oldham takes onefifth
of the consultants' time, the nursing services and the
costs for routine investigations for each patient at the
beginning of treatment, and these costs would be
increased if the additional patients were to be treated. In
addition, there would be costs associated with the detection
of these extra patients and their recruitment to the
clinic and their on-going care.
Table 1 shows that increasing the current treatment rates
for hypertension by 20%, would lead to the prevention of
8.2 (95% CI 2.3, 16.8) incident cases of AD in the next
year. This would require the treatment of an extra 2711
patients with antihypertensive drugs.
Discussion
We have used Population Impact Measures to show the
benefits to a whole population of interventions aimed at
either slowing cognitive decline, or averting new cases, of
those with AD. The data are presented in terms of absolute
numbers amongst the whole elderly population of an area
such as Oldham in North West England. We have also
examined the impact of change from current to 'best practice',
defined as the proportion of people with the condition
who should be treated under ideal conditions,
adjusted for a realistic assessment of adherence to the
therapy. As well as the numbers of outcome events prevented,
we present the numbers of people who would
need to be treated to achieve these outcomes. The use of
cognitive enhancers to treat those already diagnosed with
AD is contrasted with treatment of hypertension in the
community to prevent the onset of AD, although both
outcomes are of potential value to the population. The
combination of different interventions could also be
investigated using this methodology, although it would
depend on the existence of original trial data to provide
estimates of the benefit.
Our methods take into account the local prevalence of the
disease, adherence to the interventions, current practice
and the services available. The prevalence estimates we
have made are from the literature, although local data
from the population in question would be preferable. Our
use of local audit data is an example of the value of local
data, although a study in a different population found
only 5% of eligible patients to be treated with ChEI's [30]
in contrast to our 46%.
In a cost-effectiveness analysis, such as that used by NICE
[5,6], value weights are assigned to each outcome,
whereas we suggest that the prioritisation in 'competition'
with other demands on resources is performed by the policymaker
on the basis of the impact on the population –
we have termed this 'population cost-impact analysis'
[17]. We have not produced full costing estimates, but
have indicated the kind of data that would be required –
such costs are likely to differ according to local settings.
Our conclusions shed a different light to those of NICE
clinical guidelines, although and part of this difference
may be due to choice of outcome measure. We have used
cognitive decline, not nursing home admission.
The calculation of population impact is a relatively new
and developing area of research [31]. Like other population
measures, our calculations may be criticised for being
crude measures. Their accuracy is dependent on the accuracy
of the data on individual variables in the equation.
For example, it is difficult to set an exact cost and benefit
in relation to cognitive functioning due to the lack of consensus
in this area as shown by the difficulties which arose
in the consultations leading to the recent NICE guideline
review [6]. Studies do show that the cost of care is more
with the worsening of cognitive disability [32], including
a UK study which assessed the cost of care for non-institutionalised
patients with AD over a 3 month period showing
the significance of cost variation according to the
severity of cognitive disability [33]. The total mean cost
for control subjects was £387, mild disability £6,616,
moderate £10,250 and severe £13,593 and more importantly
indirect cost as mainly the time spent by the care
givers was calculated as the main cost component in all
groups 68.6% followed by medical costs 24.7%. Our calculations
of the population impact of actual treatment for
a specific population need to be put in the context of the
estimated cost of dementia for that population.
In estimating the cost we have only used the rough estimate
of drug costs where possible, in addition the local
service planners could take into account the actual cost
involved in providing the services such as cost of investigations
and for the staff, and in particular the on-going
costs of long-term treatment and clinical care.
Our findings could be further supplemented by a local
qualitative study analysing the views of patients, carers
and clinicians regarding the benefits of interventions in
AD.
The relative risk reduction figures used for ChEI's are from
a study of a follow-up period of only 24 weeks [29]. There
are a number of other studies of the benefits of these
drugs, including a Cochrane Review [34], which confirm
a benefit in terms of reduction of cognitive decline. We
have chosen to make the calculations here based on one
randomised controlled trial, due to the presentation of
outcome by degrees of cognitive change and the ability to
incorporate estimates of relative Risk Reduction which are
necessary for the calculation of NEPP.
The impact of treatment of hypertension on AD is more
debatable. We have used long-term follow up from the
Systolic Hypertension in Europe study [3], which builds
on an earlier report of benefit [2], despite the fact that a
later meta-analysis [4] showed a much smaller and nonsignificant
effect. The meta-analysis concluded that there
were a number of methodological problems limiting the conclusions such as the pharmacodynamic properties of
the anti-hypertensive used and the increasing use of antihypertensives
over time in the control group, and suggested
further analyses. In the absence of a clear consensus
at this time, the data we present should be regarded as
indicative of the impact that treatment of hypertension
may have on the development of AD, and the potential
value of the kind of calculations we have made. We have
made a number of other assumptions from the data
reported in the trial, where the patients had elevated systolic
blood pressure between 160–219 mm hg with diastolic
blood pressure below 95 but the prevalence figures we
used are for blood pressure above 160/95 as the figures
specifically for the above category were not available. We
have made our own calculations of the Relative Risk
Reduction and 95% Confidence Intervals, from the raw
published data, for the outcome of AD, as these are only
reported for all causes of dementia [3]
Conclusion
Population Impact Measures are a new method to allow a
demonstration of the magnitude of the benefit for the
whole population following interventions. The use of
drugs to slow cognitive decline, or to prevent AD by treating
hypertension, can thus be assessed in a prioritisation
exercise in competition with alternative use of resources.