Dementia is not an inevitable consequence of ageing but
the risk of dementia increases sharply with advancing age
and prevalence is expected to increase dramatically over
the coming decades [1]. Dementia features an alteration
of memory and at least one other cognitive disorder such
as aphasia, agnosia, apraxia or a disturbance in executive
functioning [2]. Various etiologies are related to dementia,
such as strokes, head trauma, Parkinson's disease, and
substance abuse. Yet Alzheimer's disease is considered the most widespread form of all senile dementias, representing
more than half of all cases [3]. The onset of dementia
of the Alzheimer's type (DAT) is gradual and involves continuing
cognitive decline [2].
In addition to cognitive symptoms, persons with dementia
often present behavioral and psychological symptoms
which may increase their suffering, be difficult to manage
by caregivers, and precipitate institutionalization [4].
Behavioral symptoms of dementia include wandering,
screaming, and hitting, while psychological symptoms
include hallucinations, delusions, and depression.
Between 50 and 90% of dementia patients present with
behavioral or psychological symptoms [5]. The term "agitation"
is often used in reference to behavioral symptoms
associated with dementia [6]. Agitation was originally
defined as any inappropriate verbal, vocal or motor activity
which, according to an outside observer, does not
result directly from the needs or the confusion of the agitated
person [7]. Behavior which constitutes agitation can
be broadly classified as aggressive vs non-aggressive and
physical vs verbal [8]. A factor analysis of a measure of agitation
used with nursing home residents produced three
factors which make it possible to distinguish various
forms of agitation [9]: aggressive behavior (AB, e.g., hitting),
non-aggressive physical behavior (NAPB, e.g., pacing),
and verbally agitated behavior (VAB, e.g.,
complaining).
The specific determinants of agitation remain unclear [6].
Predisposing factors may include gender, personality,
poor health, functional impairment of activities of daily
living, as well as cognitive and neurological deterioration
[10,11]. Other factors may precipitate the occurrence of
agitation and include the characteristics of the physical
and social environment (e.g., too much noise, not enough
social interaction) as well as physical needs such as hunger,
thirst, and discomfort. Some of these variables, such
as sex, the severity of cognitive impairment and the level
of dependence in performing activities of daily living, are
well documented in the literature in terms of their relationship
with different types of agitation. For example,
males are more likely to be aggressive than females, NAPB
is more likely to be manifested by persons who are more
cognitively impaired, and VAB tends to be exhibited by
persons who are more functionally impaired [8]. Other
variables, such as hunger and light intensity, may be associated
with agitation but this association remains hypothetical
[12-14].
Several studies have examined environmental or contextual
determinants of agitation [15,16]. Considerably less
attention has been devoted to internal states which may
also trigger difficult behaviors. Discomfort, which is
defined as a negative emotional or physical state subject
to variation in response to internal or environmental conditions
[17], may act as an internal factor which precipitates
the occurrence of agitation [10,12]. Persons suffering
from dementia may behave in ways that are disruptive to
those around them but which, for these patients, serve to
communicate the discomfort they feel. For example, a
patient suffering from moderate dementia and who gradually
becomes aphasic may revert to shouting, emit odd
noises, become unruly or hit those around him to let
them know he feels pain during dressing and bathing.
Various studies have shown the importance of discomfort
in persons suffering from dementia [18-20] and a majority
of patients must deal with painful acute or chronic ailments
such as cancer, depression, cardiovascular disease
and musculo-skeletal disorders [21].
We searched the literature (PsycINFO, CINAHL, Ageline,
and Medline databases) and the reference list of selected
papers for empirical studies of the relationship between
discomfort and agitation in dementia. Two such studies
were found. The first study, by Buffum et al. [20], has
shown that more discomfort is associated with more agitation.
However, the authors considered agitation as a single
construct without considering its subtypes (i.e., AB,
NAPB and VAB). Given that the importance of the relationship
between different factors varies according to
these subtypes, [8,11,12], discomfort may be more
strongly related to certain subtypes of agitation than others.
In their review of the literature, Cohen-Mansfield and
Deutsch [8] indicated that all subtypes of agitation may be
associated with discomfort. However, the available evidence
strongly suggests this association in the case of VAB
whereas the reasons for both AB (e.g., cognitive impairment,
personality style, unsuccessful communication
with caregivers) and NPAB (e.g., need for exercise or stimulation,
performing previous roles) appear more diversified.
In the second study, Young [22] used the Cohen-
Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) [9] and reported
low but significant positive correlations between discomfort
and both overall agitation and AB. Unfortunately,
these results are difficult to interpret because it is unclear
whether the original 29-items version or a shorter 14-
items version of the CMAI was used and what scale was
used for rating each item. Moreover, the exact items used
in calculating scores for each agitation subtype are not
reported. Two additional scores of overall agitation,
obtained from the Functional Abilities Checklist [23] and
the Minimum Data Set, were also correlated with discomfort.
The goal of this study is to document the relationship
between discomfort and agitation (including agitation
subtypes) in older adults suffering from dementia. The
following hypotheses were tested: (a) the frequency of
overall agitation is related positively to the degree of dis comfort, and (b) the degree of discomfort is related positively
to frequency of VAB. To ensure more accurate
results, sex, the severity of dementia and disability in performing
activities of daily living, three variables whose
relationship with agitation is well documented in the literature,
were measured for control purposes.
Methods
Participants
This correlational study used a cross-sectional design.
Thirteen registered nurses (RNs) from three long-term
care facilities provided data on forty-nine residents. The
RNs were all women, had a mean of 15 years of education
and 22 years of experience working with older adults.
Residents were selected by the RNs according to the following
criteria: (a) being at least 65 years old, (b) having
a diagnosis of dementia documented by the medical file
(all had a diagnosis of DAT), and (c) having been living in
the same facility for at least three months. Residents suffering
from delirium or any form of psychosis were
excluded. Fifty-five residents were initially selected but
data could not be collected for six of them because a
respondent was not available during the data collection
period. The final sample therefore included 49 residents,
which is near the sample size estimate of 50 indicated by
a power analysis for Pearson correlation coefficient (r)
conducted prior to the study. This sample size estimate
was obtained for a power of 0.80, an alpha level of 0.05,
and an effect size of 0.40 determined from the correlation
obtained between discomfort and overall agitation by
Buffum et al. [20]. An effect size of 0.40 is halfway
between medium (0.30) and large (0.50) effect size conventions
for r proposed by Cohen [24]
Measures
Descriptive variables
The following information was drawn from the resident's
medical file and care plan: date of birth, sex, date of
admittance to the facility, medical conditions, as well as
diagnosis and type of dementia. Analgesics taken on a
daily basis were also recorded for control reasons because
these can influence the experience of discomfort. RNs,
who filled out questionnaires for the residents, were also
asked to provide descriptive information (gender, years of
education, and years of experience working with older
adults).
Severity of dementia
The level of cognitive impairment was measured using the
Functional Assessment Staging (FAST) developed by Reisberg
and colleagues [25,26]. The scale comprises seven
stages measuring function loss associated with cognitive
deterioration. Each resident was therefore given a score
between 1 and 7 where 1 refers to a normal cognitive function
and 7 to severe dementia with very severe cognitive
impairment. Intraclass correlation coefficients indicate
good test-retest reliability (0.86) and interrater agreement
(0.87) [27]. Previous studies have indicated strong concurrent
validity between FAST and various psychometric
and mental status assessments [26,27]. For example, Sclan
and Reisberg [27], found that increasing functional disability
assessed by FAST is significantly related to decreasing
cognitive functioning (r = -0.79).
Disability
The level of disability in performing activities of daily living
(ADL) was measured using a subscale of the Functional
Autonomy Measurement System (SMAF) [28,29].
This ADL subscale helps measure the level of impairment
for five activities (feeding, washing, dressing, personal
hygiene and using the bathroom), as well as urinary and
fecal incontinence. Each item is evaluated using a fourpoint
Likert-type scale where 0 indicates that the person is
autonomous while -3 denotes dependency. Hébert and
colleagues have found that the SMAF has acceptable interrater
reliability (mean Cohen's weighted kappa of 0.75)
and that the scale can be reliably used by both nurses and
social workers in either community or institutional settings
[28,29]. Results obtained by Desrosiers et al. show
an intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.95 for test-retest
and 0.96 for interrater reliability [30]. Concurrent validity
is supported by a strong correlation between SMAF scores
and the amount of nursing time required for care (r =
0.88) [28].
Agitation
Agitation was evaluated using the French version of the
Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI) [31,32].
The frequency of all 29 items of the CMAI is evaluated for
the previous two weeks using a Likert-type scale and scores
given for each item varies from 1 ("never") to 7 ("several
times per hour"). For each resident, an overall agitation
(OA) score as well as a score for each one of the three factors
of the CMAI (AB, NAPB, and VAB) were calculated by
summing across items. These factors have been identified
for the French version of the CMAI [31] and the corresponding
items are very similar to those of the factors of
the original version [9]: AB (6 items: hitting, grabbing,
kicking, scratching, pushing, and spitting), NAPB (6
items: pacing, trying to get to a different place, handling
things inappropriately, hoarding, hiding, general restlessness),
and VAB (6 items: complaining, repetitious sentences
or questions, negativism, constant requests for
attention, cursing or verbal aggression, screaming).
Deslauriers et al. [30] have demonstrated the interrater
reliability (r = 0.72), test-retest reliability (r = 0.72), internal
consistency (Cronbach's alpha from 0.75 to 0.77),
concurrent validity (r = 0.74) and construct validity of the
French version of the CMAI completed by nurses. Discomfort
The Discomfort Scale for patients with Dementia of the
Alzheimer Type (DS-DAT) [17] is composed of nine
behavioral indicators of discomfort determined following
interviews with caregivers working with persons suffering
from dementia. Thus, the authors of the scale gave particular
attention to content validity by identifying the kinds
of behavior most frequently associated with a sign of discomfort
in this population. The nine indicators are (a)
noisy breathing, (b) negative vocalization, (c) content
facial expression, (d) sad facial expression, (e) frightened
facial expression, (f) frown, (g) relaxed body language,
(h), tense body language, and (i) fidgeting. Each item
comes with a list of observable forms of behavior which
helps evaluators observe and record the signs of discomfort
as objectively as possible. This tool makes it possible
to evaluate the frequency (from 0 to ≥3), intensity (high
or low) and duration (long or short) of the nine indicators
associated with discomfort, as perceived by the observer,
in the course of an observation period usually lasting five
minutes. The level of discomfort is then derived from the
value attributed to these three components. Each of the
nine items is evaluated independently on a scale from 0
("no observed discomfort") to 3 ("high level of observed
discomfort"). Content validity was insured by initially
generating twenty-six items from interviews with nursing
staff from inpatient Alzheimer units and then retaining
eighteen items rated by independent nurses holding
advanced nursing degrees as relevant with an operational
definition of discomfort (the number of items was later
reduced to nine). The internal consistency of the DS-DAT
has been evaluated in two studies [17,22] with results
showing Cronbach's alpha varying from 0.74 to 0.89. The
interrater reliability (r varying between 0.61 and 0.98)
and test-retest reliability (r = 0.6) have also been verified
[17,22,33]. Nurses acted as raters in studies reporting the
psychometric properties of the DS-DAT [22,33].
Procedure
RNs working on the residents' units were asked to collaborate
in this study. A group meeting was called with the
principal investigator (ICP) to explain the study to the
RNs, obtain their consent, and provide them with information
so that they would be able to identify residents
matching the study criteria based on each resident's file.
The RNs were also given a presentation to demonstrate
how to complete each of the scales used in the study.
Because the administration and scoring of the DS-DAT is
complex, a large portion of the meeting was devoted to
demonstrating how to use this tool. Each item of the scale
was explained in detail, case examples were presented,
and staff members had the opportunity to practice scoring.
These instructions included Hurley et al.'s [17] recommendations
regarding the timing of the assessment.
The DS-DAT, the CMAI, the ADL subscale of the SMAF
and the FAST were completed by the RN most familiar
with each resident. They were given two weeks to complete
and return all scales (i.e., the CMAI was completed
at the end of the two weeks and all other scales were
answered during this period). The principal investigator
could be contacted during this period to answer questions
or provide additional information regarding the procedure.
Staff members were the participants in this study. Indeed,
the main variables reflect their perception of selected residents.
The residents themselves did not participate
directly in the data collection. Staff members did provide
the researchers with factual information obtained from
the residents' file to which they had authorized access as
part of their work. Prior to the study, the researchers were
granted permission to obtain this information by the Professional
Services Director of each participating facility.
Residents' rights were protected by concealing their identity
(a code was used instead of their name on each document
related to the study). Université Laval's Research
Ethics Committee approved this project.
Results
Data analysis was performed using SPSS software, version
11.0 for Windows, on an Intel Pentium 4 computer with
Microsoft Windows XP, Home Edition, Version 2002, as
the operating system.
Residents characteristics are shown in Table 1. It should
be noted that the sample was mostly comprised of women
and that the majority of residents had a medical condition.
In addition, nearly 60% of residents took an analgesic
on a daily basis. For two of the 28 residents taking
analgesics, the prescription was to take this medication if
needed (prn) while the remaining residents took regularly
scheduled analgesics at least once a day. This information
suggests that an important proportion of the residents
experienced chronic pain. Most residents were rated in the
three last stages of the FAST which indicates that the cognitive
functioning of most residents was highly impaired.
The mean score on the SMAF (-15.5) was near the lowest
score possible (-21), indicating that these residents were
very dependent on the nursing staff.
Table 2 shows the Pearson correlation coefficients (r)
between each score of agitation, discomfort, and the
remaining descriptive variables. Sex was coded as follows:
men = 1 and women = 2. Positive and significant correlation
coefficients are observed between discomfort and
each of the following agitation scores: OA, NAPB and
VAB. No other correlation coefficient was significant. The
power to detect significant correlation coefficients with
our data (n = 49) was examined using GPower software,version 3.0. for Windows [34]. Post hoc power analyses
were conducted for t tests with alpha level fixed at 0.05.
Power analyses for OA and VAB were for one-tailed tests
because of our hypotheses regarding these variables, while
analyses for two-tailed tests were done for NAPB and AB.
Power was high for tests using OA (0.99; effect size =
0.55), VAB (0.99; effect size = 0.53), and PNAB (0.95;
effect size = 0.47) but the test using AB had low power
(0.37; effect size = 0.23).
Hierarchical multiple regression analyses were next performed
to specify the relationship between discomfort
and each agitation score (except AB) while statistically controlling for sex, severity of dementia and disability in
performing ADL. For each analysis, these three last variables
were introduced in a first block of the regression (Step
1), followed by the level of discomfort at the next step
(Step 2). Results are shown in Table 3 which presents variance
explained (R2) at Step 1, incremental variance (ΔR2)
as a result of entering discomfort at Step 2, and total variance.
The other statistics presented are the unstandardized
(B) regression coefficients, the standard error of regression
coefficients (SE B), and the standardized beta (β) regression
coefficients at Step 2. The estimated β coefficients
indicate the relative contribution of each independent
variable in the prediction of the dependent variable (agitation).
As shown, discomfort contributed significantly to
the prediction of the variance of OA, NAPB and VAB,
beyond the residents' other characteristics that were statistically
controlled in each regression equation. The variance
of the different agitation scores specifically
attribuable to discomfort (ΔR2) varied between 18% and
30%. Further, estimated standardized beta coefficients show that only discomfort carries significant weight in the
regression equation for OA, NAPB and VAB.
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to document the relationship
between discomfort and the various types of agitation
in older adults suffering from dementia. As
hypothesized, our results show a positive and significant
relationship between the degree of discomfort and the frequency
of overall agitation. This confirms results obtained
previously by Buffum and colleagues [20] and Young
[22]. Our results further demonstrate that the relationship
with discomfort varies according to the type of agitation.
Also as hypothesized, we found that the degree of discomfort
is associated both positively and significantly with
VAB. Furthermore, our results show a positive and significant
relationship with NAPB. No significant relationship
was observed between discomfort and aggressive behavior
but it should be noted that the power to detect this specific
relationship was low and that the correlation coefficient
obtained from our data (0.23) is similar to the one
reported by Young (0.25).
Various authors contend that discomfort acts as an internal
factor which precipitates the occurrence of agitation
[10,12]. VAB possibly acts as a means of communicating
the patient's discomfort [8,35]. Matteau and colleagues
[35] have found that patients that display VAB also
present more language difficulties. Through behaviors
such as complaining and screaming, patients may attempt
to attract their caregivers' attention in the hope that they
will provide them some relief. The relationship between
discomfort and NAPB was unexpected and is less clear. It
is possible that several types of disruptive behavior related
to this type of agitation, such as wandering and pacing,
result from the discomfort experienced by the patient. For
example, a patient who feels sad and depressed because he
or she is homesick may attempt to leave his residential
facility to reduce this discomfort [8].
Algase and colleagues [12] have suggested that behavioral
problems associated with dementia result from unmet
needs which the patient expresses using his remaining
abilities. Given our results, the need for comfort appears
as one such need. From a practical point of view, the
occurrence of agitation deserves particular attention on
the part of caregivers since it may communicate discomfort.
Identifying and treating the cause of this discomfort
may help reduce agitation. Kovach and colleagues [36]
have recently reported findings which support this assertion.
In their study, nursing home residents with dementia
were treated using the Serial Trial Intervention which
selects an appropriate treatment based on physical and
affective needs assessments. Compared to a control group,
the treated group had less discomfort and more frequently
had behavioral symptoms return to baseline. Barton and
colleagues [37] have suggested a similar hierarchical
approach to the management of inappropriate vocalization.
The mean score on the DS-DAT in our sample (4.2) is
lower than mean scores found in some studies [17,20] but
similar to that reported by other researchers [22,33]. For
example, a mean score of 4.64 was reported by Miller et
al. [33] when their participants were assessed in situations
of unlikely discomfort (the equivalent of what Hurley et
al. [17] refer to as baseline discomfort). Also, the range of
scores on the DS-DAT reported in Table 1 is broad (min to
max: 0 to 14), suggesting that the DS-DAT was sensitive to
various levels of discomfort in our sample.
The scores on the CMAI in our sample also deserve some
comments. Looking at other's work, we found that CMAI
scores are reported for clinical samples in which participants
are selected because they present agitation [38,39].
These scores are higher than for the participants in our
study who were not selected on the basis of agitation. For
example, mean CMAI total scores vary between 65 and 78
across different samples in which participants present at
least mild behavioral symptoms [39] compared to 41 in
our sample. However, this mean score is similar to what
we found previously in a separate but similar sample
(mean scores of 42.6 and 40.7 at two separate times) [32].
Although there is no official cutoff for agitation on the
CMAI, the range of scores (min to max: 29 to 90) is quite
broad and suggests that some participants presented some
agitation while others did not.
Limitations to the generalization of our findings are the
relatively small sample size and the fact that the data were
compiled only during the day shift. Some authors have
indicated that the different types of agitation occur at different
periods of the day [40,41]. It is unclear whether the
same factors are equally important contributors to agitation
at different periods of the day and this should be
investigated. Another limitation is that it is uncertain
whether the FAST is valid and reliable when used by
nurses. However, it should be noted that the FAST is
widely utilized by healthcare professionals of various
backgrounds and requires minimal training because of its'
face validity [42]. Other limitations have to do with the
DS-DAT and have been pointed out in detail elsewhere
[43]. This measure of discomfort provides no specific
information as to the nature and origin of this experience.
Discomfort is a broad concept referring to a negative emotional
or physical state. Various conditions, including
pain, distress, depression, loneliness, lack of stimulation,
and lack of sleep can contribute to discomfort. Identifying
which of these sources of discomfort play a role in agitation
is essential for selecting appropriate treatment. Future studies, therefore, should identify the determinants of discomfort
that are related to agitation in dementia patients
and compare findings across different periods of the day.
Finally, we did not check reliability because of restrictions
in the availability of the RNs. The DS-DAT is a complex
measure and we did provide raters with detailed instructions.
Moreover, this limitation does not seem to pose a
threat to our conclusions since the results confirm our
hypotheses and are consistent with those of other
researchers.
Dementia creates a paradoxical context in which patients
are more vulnerable to various sources of discomfort
while, at the same time, being less able to modify these by
themselves or to communicate their discomfort directly to
their caregivers. Further understanding of the internal
determinants of behavioral symptoms in dementia will
ultimately lead to finer assessment and more effective
treatment of patients.
Conclusion
Our findings provide further evidence of the association
between discomfort and agitation in persons with dementia
and reveal that this association is particularly strong for
VAB and NAPB.