Introduction
Ensuring the availability of high-quality, affordable
health services for populations living in rural areas is a
major policy challenge in many low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs). In India, the distribution and retention
of doctors to serve in rural areas is an obstacle to
improving access to health services. Approximately twothirds
of the Indian population lives in rural areas, while
66% of doctors and 64% of health workers more broadly
live in urban areas [1]. The vast majority of these doctors,
80.4%, work in the private health sector [1].
Recruiting and retaining doctors to work in the government
sector, specifically to boost the availability of affordable
health services for poor and vulnerable
populations living in rural areas, is a longstanding policy
issue.
In this paper, we focus on the development of human
resources for health (HRH) policies to address
rural distribution and retention of doctors in the public
sector in the northern Indian state of Uttar Pradesh
(UP). Using a prospective stakeholder analysis,
our objectives are to 1) analyze stakeholder power in
influencing the adoption of policies; 2) compare and
analyze stakeholder positions on specific policies, including
their perspectives on the conditions for successful
policy adoption and implementation; and 3)
explore the challenges with developing and implementing
a coordinated, ‘bundled’ approach to strengthening
rural distribution and retention of doctors. We focus specifically
on policies to attract qualified doctors trained in
allopathic medicine to work in rural areas, recognizing
that a significant proportion of doctors in rural areas are
either unqualified biomedical providers or trained in traditional
forms of medicine.
The situation in UP reflects many of the challenges
with rural distribution and retention of doctors in India.
The state has approximately 4.9 doctors per 10,000
population, below than the national average of 5.9–6.1
[2]. Further, major maldistributions exist between private
and public sectors. For example, 80% of specialist
posts in the government sector are vacant [3]. Within
the public sector itself, there is a significant variation in
the distribution of doctors across the state. For example,
Siddharthnagar, a rural district, has 32 doctors per million
population while Lucknow, the largest city, has 188
doctors per million population [4]. From a governance
standpoint, the responsibility for HRH in UP, like many
other Indian states, is heterogenous. HRH policy is
spread across at least four different state level directorates
(Medical Education, Medical Health, Family Welfare,
and traditional medicine) as well as the central
government through the National Health Mission
(NHM), which directly employs approximately 40.5% of
health workers and 26% of medical officers in UP, and
provides additional funds for medication, equipment,
supplies, etc. [4]. Many of these challenges, particularly
the maldistribution of skilled health workers between
rural and urban areas, and high vacancies in rural areas,
mirror the problems faced in other LMICs [5, 6].
The Government of Uttar Pradesh (GoUP), in coordination
with the UP Technical Support Unit (UPTSU)
and the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health, is developing a comprehensive HRH strategy to
guide policy development in the state over a ten-year
period, which includes policies to address the distribution
and retention of doctors in underserved and rural
areas of the state. This HRH strategy builds on existing
efforts taken by the state to address rural distribution
and retention of doctors including increasing the number
of medical colleges in semi-urban or rural districts,
improving transparency in human resource processes,
non-financial incentives and compulsory rural service
bonds [7]. The strategy is built around the ‘lifecycle’ approach
of HRH and focuses on five main domains –
production, recruitment, retention, performance and
cross-cutting governance (Fig. 1). This approach is informed
by multiple HRH frameworks that examine
health workforce performance and processes across the
HRH lifecycle [8].
A key objective of the strategy is to ‘promote distribution
of health workers to rural and underserved areas’ in
the state. Achieving this objective requires a ‘bundle’ of
interventions that cut across these different domains [9,
10]. Table 1 outlines an initial list of proposed policies
to reach this objective around rural distribution and In this paper, we share findings from our stakeholder
analysis of HRH policy in UP, focusing specifically on
the rural distribution and retention of biomedical doctors
in the public sector of UP. Our paper is structured
as follows – first, we describe stakeholder power in influencing
the adoption and implementation of policies;
second, we compare and analyze stakeholder positions
on specific policies and their views on the conditions
needed for successful policy adoption/implementation;
and finally, we present cross-cutting challenges to developing
a coordinated, ‘bundled’ approach to strengthening
rural distribution and retention of doctors in this
context.
Methods
We conducted a prospective stakeholder analysis using
qualitative methods. Qualitative methods are commonly
utilized in stakeholder analyses in order to understand
individual and organizational policy positions, and to
examine stakeholder power, interests and relationships
[11, 20]. The research team consisted of researchers
from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health (based in Lucknow and in the U.S.) and UPTSU,
with support from GoUP officials.
We utilized three forms of data collection for this
study – document review, in-depth interviews and focus
group discussions.
1) Document review: We examined key documents
pertaining to HRH policy in UP, including
government policies, service rules, directives,
reports and news articles. A selective review of
national level HRH policies was undertaken along
with exploring the experiences of other states with
particular reforms.
2) Interviews and focus groups: We conducted
semi-structured interviews and focus groups with
key stakeholders engaged with human resources for
health policy in UP. We implemented the following
steps –
Stakeholder mapping and sampling
The research team drew upon a priori knowledge to iteratively
develop a mapping of stakeholders with interests
in the development and implementation of the
various policies in the strategy. In the mapping, we prioritized
stakeholders to groups of high, medium and low
relevance to policies in the strategy. We conceptualized
relevance as stakeholders who play a definitive role in
the policy process, for example, by influencing the adoption
of a policy in initiating, supporting or blocking a
policy, or influencing its implementation. We then held
detailed discussions regarding each of the 57 listed
stakeholders and utilized purposive sampling [21] to select
stakeholders to contact for interviews or focus
groups based on four parameters: 1) relevance to the
HRH strategy; 2) diversity of stakeholder categories (government,
professional associations, civil society, etc.); 3)
ability to arrange and organize interviews/focus groups
through networks, and 4) geographic proximity to Lucknow
(the location of the majority of the team).
Interview and focus group guide development
The interview and focus group guides were developed
based on guidance from Schmeer et al. (1999) [56], and
focused on capturing four main points of data as they
pertained to policies listed in Table 1, stakeholder positions,
interests, power, relationships, and views on conditions
for successful policy adoption/implementation, as
well as overall perceptions of HRH challenges in UP (see
supplemental data for interview and focus group guides).
The findings reported in this paper represent a portion
of the policies in the HRH strategy; interviews conducted
with respondents covered policies beyond rural
retention and distribution. Given the number of policies,
we shared the full listing of policies with stakeholders
and invited them to comment on those policies most
relevant to their positions and interests (as determined
by the respondents and the research team).
Data collection
Following the sampling process, we pursued interviews
and focus groups with 33 stakeholders. Seventeen interviews
and three focus groups were conducted by SH, VS
and/or RB (Table 2 provides the categorization of respondents).
We could not get appointments with three
stakeholders, one stakeholder declined, and we had informal
discussions with nine stakeholders (the data from
which are not formally reflected in this paper but informed
our background thinking). Data collection took
place between September and November 2019, in Lucknow,
New Delhi and one rural district in Uttar Pradesh
(name withheld for confidentiality).
Interviews and focus groups were conducted in private
rooms to ensure confidentiality. Participants for focus
groups were recruited based on existing networks of the
research team and snowball sampling. Front line medical
officers (n = 6) from a diverse range of districts within
UP were recruited during a training program at the
state-level training center. Frontline nurses were recruited
from the main nurses’ association in the state
(n = 13). District-level administrators (n = 3) in rural district
were recruited from the networks of research team
members. All but one interview/focus group was audiorecorded,
with the permission of the respondent(s).
Interviews were conducted in English or Hindi (or both), and
lasted between 15 min to three hours. Focus groups were conducted
in Hindi, and took approximately one to two hours.
Analysis
Audio recordings were translated and/or transcribed into
English, cleaned and checked. VS, SH, UL and SB developed
a codebook through several rounds of line-by-line coding.
The codebook and coding process was finalized through a
round of coding in which two analysts reviewed the same
transcripts, cross-checked their coding and discussed
differences in approach. Finally, the transcripts were
divided among VS, SH and UL for the final round of
coding. Codes were added, deleted or modified
throughout the coding process, and regular team
meetings were held to discuss the coding process, the
codebook and early ideas for theme development.
After all coding was complete, VS, SH and UL began
extracting data specific to rural retention and distribution
and categorized them into three main areas –
context, stakeholder power and interests, and stakeholder
positions on policies. VS, SH, UL and SB developed
themes pertaining to barriers and facilitators
through repeated analysis of the coded data.
This research was considered non-human subjects research
by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Board (Baltimore,
MD; IRB No: 00009035) and by Sigma Research and
Consulting (New Delhi, India; IRB No.: 10040/IRB/19–20).
Results
The results are structured as follows – first, we outline
the stakeholders interviewed for this project, their
interests as they pertain to the issue of rural distribution
and retention, and their power relative to other stakeholders;
second, we describe the position of these stakeholders
regarding the policies and the reasons behind
their positions; and third, we explore issues pertaining to
developing a coordinated strategy for rural distribution
and retention.
Stakeholder interests and power
Table 3 describes the interests, power and policy influence
of the stakeholders interviewed for this study. The UP Department
of Medical Health and Family Welfare2 (comprised
of various Directorates and centrally-funded programs such
as the National Health Mission) was considered most powerful
by respondents in terms of developing and implementing
policy. However, respondents also noted that groups such as
doctors’ associations had considerable ability to oppose policy
and impede their adoption.
Policies and stakeholder positions
Table 4 outlines positions for each of the policies (supportive,
supportive with reservations or opposed) and
perceived barriers and facilitators for adopting the
policies.
Policy 1: Increase opportunities for students
from rural backgrounds to enter medical college in the public sector, through providing
state sponsored training for the NEET for students
from rural areas (PRODUCE).
Respondents across stakeholder categories were largely
supportive of the policy measure, with some recognizing inequities
in the current privately-driven system of preparatory
‘coaching’ for NEET. However, several respondents
who were supportive also expressed hesitancy and uncertainty
about implementation and overall success. Two factors
appear to be driving this hesitancy. The first was a
sense from doctors at the frontlines, such as medical officers
and medical college faculty, that there would be practical
difficulties in organizing such a program, and that existing
challenges would remain for rural students upon entering
medical college. For example, respondents in a focus group
of medical officers noted that state-sponsored programs
would not be of high-quality and that students should instead
be given discounts to utilize private coaching centers.
“If the coaching centers are started by government
sector then I don’t think they would be able to deliver
high quality students....” Medical officer,
FGD01 Frontline medical officers.
“I think that if the student is from the rural background
then they can get a discount in the fees which they have
to pay at any coaching center where they want to
study....For example if the fees is Rs 40000 in the private
coaching they should just have to pay Rs 10000 for the
same coaching....” Medical officer, FGD01, Frontline
medical officers.
Some respondents also cautioned that even if the
NEET training was successful, rural students face numerous
educational and social barriers upon entering
medical college, such as the widespread use of English-language textbooks, a challenge given limited English
training in rural schools in UP, and broadly, poorer
quality basic education in rural areas across the state.
Second, some respondents also questioned the underlying
premise that individuals from rural areas would
want to go back to those areas upon graduating (IDI7,
IDI1, IDI16).
“… if a person has spent his whole life in poverty
why will he go back to that? He doesn’t go back.
Your purpose is to provide the opportunity to people
who belong to rural background so that they can
again go back in that society but they will never go
back.” IDI1, Health systems expert.
Finally, a few stakeholders, most notably frontline
health workers, noted that there were existing policies to
increase the number of rural students in medical colleges,
such as reservations (IDI2, IDI7, FGD1).
Policy 2: Develop and enforce a compulsory rural
posting policy requiring that all newly hired doctors
spend a minimum of three years in an underserved
community (priority districts/under-served rural facilities)
so as to increase the availability of health
staff in rural areas, after which they have the option
to transfer to another posting (RECRUIT).
Respondents were strongly divided on this policy.
Medical officers largely opposed it, highlighting difficult
living and working conditions for staff in many rural
facilities.
“Suppose your salary is Rs 60000 and you have to
spend Rs 20000 on traveling to the rural areas and in
case you face any problem then you have to pay money
to babus (local administrators) to sort it. So ultimately
the money which is left is just Rs 40000 and on top of
that there is no infrastructure and if you have to go to
the field then you have to travel on your own.” FGD1
(Frontline medical officers).
These views were shared by other respondents working
at the district or sub-district level. These respondents noted
that compulsory postings have not worked in this context
so far, and that the high levels of vacancies and absenteeism
is indicative of the problems with this approach. One regulator
noted that there was no ‘political will’ to take this forward,
and that policymakers should instead focus on
posting practitioners of traditional forms of medicine.
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in rural facilities.
“There are 2 things. One is by force and the other by
option. Both are being used. Well, both options are
okay. But in the long run if the people opt in
themselves only then will it be successful. In the short
run it can be successful by force but not in the long
run. People are going to opt for it when the overall
package will seem attractive to them” IDI16,
District-level admin.
In contrast, however, respondents who served in policy
and decision-maker roles supported the policy and suggested
that it had to be broadened in its scope. For example,
a health systems expert added that specialists
also needed to perform some form of mandatory rural
service.
Other respondents noted that while the policy was
needed, successful implementation would be a challenge,
as seen by the current levels of absenteeism and
absconding.
Doctors’ associations had mixed responses. The respondents
interviewed personally felt that the policy
would be appropriate but felt that the associations could
contest it – for reasons that include inadequate working
and living conditions. One respondent talked about how
personal views could become mixed with association
viewpoints.
“Even sometimes [doctors’ association] also oppose
because I am a parent I cannot say directly and so I
will say indirectly through [doctors’ association] saying
this policy should not be implemented. But this
policy is good if we want to give services to rural
people, then this policy is good.” IDI8, Doctors
Association.
Policy 3: Allow home district posting for clinical
cadres (RETAIN).
Respondents, particularly doctors in the public sector,
seemed broadly supportive of the policy. Doctors noted
that home district posting would boost recruitment and
retention by allowing medical officers to stay with their
families, secure educational opportunities for their children,
and attend to their parents. Finally, some respondents
noted that individuals in their home districts
would be less likely to abuse their position and take or
accept bribes.
“... if you send me to Agra or Azamgarh, then no one
knows me there, so, I can do anything there, I will
take 100 rupees for an injection, I will take so much
money and scam a lot of people. but if I live in my
own district, then people will say that, she is that
person’s daughter and she brought shame to her
family, she takes 100 rupees for an injection. So, I
would not take money because of that fear and I will
not talk rudely with anyone.” FGD2 (Nurses’
association).
However, district-level administrators noted the negative
implications of allowing home district posting, in
terms of limited accountability from their community
members, abuse of their office through private practice,
and potential lack of objectivity in medico-legal cases.
“The reason is if you allow home district posting
then the person becomes audacious. He will not
work-- he would put local pressure and prefer to stay
at home mostly than work.” FGD 3 (District-level
administrators).
Policy 4: Living conditions – Improve staff housing infrastructure
and security in rural facilities. (RETAIN).
Respondents widely agreed that improving living conditions
for health workers, particularly in terms of housing
and security, was essential to improving rural
distribution and retention.
“There is no fan or electricity and even if is there
and if it goes off nobody is there to repair it and if
you need it very much you can call your own electrician
and pay your own money and get it repaired.”
Medical officer 4, FGD1 (Frontline medical officers).
Frontline health workers also noted negative mental or
physical health impacts due to unsatisfactory or inadequate
living arrangements and security provisions. For
example, some female staff discussed uncertainties
around personal security and safe transportation. Solitary
living arrangements were also said to facilitate substance
abuse, such as alcohol abuse.
Another challenge stated by stakeholders with direct
experience was the diversion of funds set aside for improvements
to living arrangements, and inadequate inspections
and maintenance of housing infrastructure.
The following exchange emerged from the focus group
with frontline medical officers:
“R 4: The budget which comes should be properly
distributed and look into it like the budget is wasted
at certain places and not utilized properly.
R 1: Actually, whatever infrastructure have been developed
are 20 years old and no new infrastructure
have been developed.
R 2: And the quality of infrastructure is poor.
R 1: And whatever has been developed is not maintained
properly.
R 2: There is a lot of corruption in it.”
Doctors and district-level administrators noted that
building a residential colony or township for health
workers and other district-level workers from other departments,
an approach taken for central government
employees and army personnel, would address several
challenges. Such colonies or townships could also have
regular transportation for health workers.
Policy 5: Working conditions - Increase coordination
across health departments and agencies to ensure
that health workers have appropriate inputs
and supports to do their job including the availability
of functioning equipment, electricity, drugs and
other supplies. (RETAIN).
Respondents noted that while the Directorate of Medical
Health and Family Welfare, with support from
NHM, had necessary policy provisions and resources to
ensure adequate working conditions, in practice these
are not always met. Doctors interviewed noted that addressing
gaps in working conditions was also a question
of effective management by Chief Medical Officers and
other administrators.
“I was a superintendent of two CHCs for 3-4
years and there was not a single non-functioning
equipment and there was not a single case where
a lifesaving drug was required and it was not
there. Because we are already getting enough
funds from NHM and all …. So I never faced any
funds crunches so basically there is willingness
and there are some hospitals which are being
maintained very nicely with the same funds. So it
depends on whether the CMO is asking.” IDI6
(Doctors’ association).
In addition, a respondent representing civil society
noted the potential role of the Rogi Kalyan Samitees
(RKS) or patient welfare committees formed at hospitals/
CHCs and FRUs and their role in ensuring adequate
working conditions at the facility.
One challenge raised by an expert was the fact that many
of these issues were outside the scope of an HR policy.
“What can HR policy do for drug availability? I do
not think so because both are two different domains...”
IDI1 (Health systems expert).
Policy 6: Permit private practice for government
doctors and develop a policy that regulates hours
and conditions under which private practice can
occur and remove the non-private practice allowance
(NPA) (RETAIN).
of the NPA in preventing private practice, and doctors
were largely supportive of the policy measure. Yet, the
policy also triggered reactions regarding implementation
complexities. Concerns were centred around the removal
of the NPA itself, and the regulatory challenges
associated with private practice and its potential negative
impact on public-sector service delivery.
Government doctors’ association and frontline medical
officers, likely operating from a belief in the need to protect
the additional income earned through the NPA, believed
it was unacceptable to completely remove the
NPA from current government doctors and suggested
that the policy be made voluntary. Further, the opposition
of the government doctors’ association was viewed
as sufficient to stall any forced removal of the NPA.
Around the second theme of the ability of government
to regulate private practice, a respondent from a
national-level agency raised a range of concerns –.
“… so if I am a private practitioner, I am going to only
think about my practice so I won’t come on time, I
would not look at the patients that seriously, I perhaps
would not even treat them and say that you know I
have a clinic in the neighbourhood please come and
see, I have seen people who are practicing from their
own quarters just adjacent to their hospitals and unless
there is an inspection they just don’t go to the hospital
…” IDI10 (National-level health agency).
This respondent instead thought that it would be better
to remove the NPA but continue to maintain a ban
on private practice while significantly raising government
salaries as a retention strategy, as a way of closing
the large gap between public and private sector salaries.
Another suggestion offered by district-level administrative
officers was to allow private practice but provide
performance targets to doctors for their work in public
facilities, beyond which they could be free to pursue
private-sector work. However, a senior district-level administrator,
while agreeing with the policy option on
principle, said GoUP was currently poorly capacitated to
take on this regulatory function, and thought it better
maintain the ban on private practice. Similar sentiments
were echoed by the civil society respondent, who further
added that even community-based monitoring to regulate
private practice would have limited effectiveness in a
context like UP, where the power imbalances between
community members and doctors would hamper reporting
adverse events.
Policy 7(a): Support the shifting of tasks from medical
officers to AYUSH doctors in rural settings
through:
i. Assess the clinical competence of AYUSH doctors
in the provision of services previously provided by
MBBS
ii. Additional on-the-job and short-term training to
AYUSH doctors
iii. Supportive supervision to AYUSH doctors
(Planning, Regulation and Governance)
Doctors’ associations, district administrators and frontline
workers strongly opposed task shifting from medical
officers to AYUSH in primary health centers. Government
officers and doctors in particular questioned the
competence of the cadre, reflecting longstanding distrust
of traditional Indian systems of medicine by practitioners
of allopathic medicine in India [39]. They also
noted that there will be strong opposition from doctors’
associations due to the perception that such policies
promote unsafe forms of medicine or ‘quackery’, and
also a sense of ‘possessiveness’ about the domain of allopathic
medicine.
“everybody is against it. .. Their argument is this is
my domain and nobody should enter it. It is possessiveness,
unnecessary possessiveness.” IDI08 (Doctors’
association).
“Ayurveda has a whole different system. They have
different concepts. Homoeopathy has an altogether
different system and different concepts. Straight from
the name of diseases to how they occur, everything is
different. So, you cannot merely tell him the names
of 4 medicines and give him a bridge course. This
should not be done.” IDI16 (District-level
administration).
Doctors also mentioned that AYUSH task shifting did
not address the root causes of doctor shortages, such as
subpar living conditions, safety concerns and corruption.
“You are not able to attract doctors you are not
thinking how to attract doctors you are thinking how
to replace them with nonprofessionals this entire
logic is fraud. You are saying that we are over burdened
with this clinical work and managerial work,
so unburden us recruit more, this does not mean
that you will start giving our functions to anybody
else.” IDI06 (Doctors’ association).
Respondents supportive of AYUSH task shifting also
included the AYUSH doctors’ association and rural medical
practitioners. These respondents mentioned the allopathic
or integrated care due to the lack of doctors, and
noted the limitations faced by this cadre, including the
power asymmetry between allopathic and AYUSH providers
and the need for better training.
Policy 7(b) Explore further task shifting options
from MBBS to nurses (community health officers).
All respondents who discussed this policy option were
supportive, but some noted that for it to be successful,
proper education and training mechanisms would need
to be put in place. Respondents also mentioned the
often-poor quality and training of private nursing colleges
and additional support systems would be required
to address these competencies gaps.
“What is happening - our nursing colleges in last 10
years were very poor and lot of private nursing colleges
have come up who are not training at all, they
are just giving the degree. So we do not know which
nurses or which type, where they have been trained.”
IDI07 (Medical college leadership).
The nursing association was supportive of this policy
under the condition that proper allowances were provided,
and that sufficient guidelines and policies were
developed for nurses in these positions. Respondents
also mentioned absence of policies that protect nurses
who are already filling in the gaps during doctor shortages,
further highlighting existing structural and power
dynamics between the nursing and medical doctors.
Some limitations included existing restrictions to prescribe
medications and continued opposition from the
medical association.
“Doctor leaves the office at 2 o clock, but we continue
to do the dialysis until 7 o clock, there is no doctor
there, until DC is not filled, doctors don’t come there,
that is the condition of [facility name] and forget
about other places … these kids have the full power
to give any emergency drug, they have joined us 7
months ago, they have the full power to give injections
… they can give everything, they decide whether
you have to give oxygen to him or not, you have to
use the drip or not.” FGD02 (Nurses’ association).
National level respondents who were supportive of this
policy measure mentioned examples of past successes of
MBBS to nurse task shifting and highlighted examples
from other countries. Reiterating similar concerns mentioned
by nurses’ associations, national level respondents
mentioned legal barriers and existing acts which prohibit
nurses from prescribing medications.
“… one option is instead of interfering with each and
every legacy Act just have one new Act and new set
of rules … So, then that is a much simpler solution.
Rather than trying to amend each and every act, because
we have so many different Acts which kind of
affect this issue.” ID17 (National-level health
agency).
Cross-cutting challenges in developing and implementing
a coordinated approach to strengthening rural
distribution and retention of doctors
Fragmented governance structure and the absence of an
HRH unit
Respondents noted extensive fragmentation in governance
structures within the state, and nationally, that
made coordinated approaches to rural retention and distribution,
and HRH policymaking more broadly,
challenging.
“Uttar Pradesh is the only State where in the Medical
Health department there is medical health, family
welfare, medical education, Ayurved unani are
made into 4 parts and all 4 have ministers, there
are 4 principal secretaries (Pramukh Sachiv) …
There is nothing like this anywhere else in India.”
FGD2, Health worker association.
Addressing perceived corruption and weak accountability in
the health sector
Respondents spoke openly about their perceptions of the
lack of strong accountability mechanisms and the existence
of corruption in postings, transfers and other HR
processes such as promotion, benefits, leave, etc. Such
corruption in their view lead to major difficulties in both
attracting candidates and also ensuring that candidates
are deployed and retained in rural areas. Fully addressing
the types of corruption noted by respondents would involve
accountability or other policy interventions that
would likely face considerable opposition from those
cadres negatively impacted by such measures. For example,
respondents noted the need for regular transfers
of clerical officers at frontline facilities, district and subdistrict
offices in order to curb corruption within HR
processes.
In response to a question about the impact of perceived
corruption on HRH policy, a district administrator
noted,
“If these kinds of things [corruption] happen then the
interest to work also starts to diminish...In my mind
I am thinking that my children are living far away
from me and I should be able to meet them at least
once in a week. But I am unable to get any leave for
District-level administrators.
Power dynamics and health worker associations: The
power of health worker associations to facilitate or impede
certain policies was as an important factor in developing
and implementing a comprehensive strategy to
rural retention and distribution. Doctors’ associations
were reported to be particularly powerful in influencing
the process.
“If [government doctors’ association] opposes this
then it cannot go further. The government doesn’t
have so much power to go against [the government
doctors’ association] and implement a policy.” IDI1
(Health systems expert).
A few respondents noted that other health worker associations
also wielded power – albeit to varying degrees
– and could significantly impact policy processes. For
example, one respondent discussed how the association
representing clerical officers could stymie the initiative
to regularly transfer the cadre in order to reduce corruption
within HR processes.
Phasing and timing of policies within the bundle
Some respondents noted that certain policies need to be
implemented jointly with others in order to meet the
goal of rural distribution and retention. For example, a
representative of a doctors’ association noted that a policy
around rural postings should ideally be complemented
by investments in staff housing and good quality
options for educating school-aged children.
Conversely, a few respondents noted the potential for
adverse outcomes when bundling certain policies together,
such as home district posting and permitting
dual practice.
[Respondent explaining opposition to home district
posting] “Because one, they will get to be near their
relatives and friends, and going home will be on
their mind, they will think about going home. Their
efficiency will reduce; more focus will be given on
private practice ….” IDI14 (Rural medical practitioners’
association).
Opportunities for reform
Despite the many challenges, some respondents also
noted that there were several opportunities to strengthen
HRH policy in the state. Successes in improving rural
distribution and retention from other Indian states and
other countries with similar health systems provided
roadmaps for decision-makers to adapt. The growing
focus on primary care through recent policy changes at
the national and state level signaled an important opportunity
for strengthen availability of services at these facilities,
provided that various departments could
coordinate with one another effectively.
Discussion
Ensuring the availability of health workers in rural areas
is a persistent challenge in India and other LMICs. Recognizing
the complex, interlinked nature of the problem,
normative guidance increasingly focuses on ‘bundled’ interventions
which utilize a range of policy measures to
more effectively address the issue [10, 40, 41]. Adopting
this type of coordinated approach to health policy is
challenging in any context, and arguably, more so with
HRH policy. HRH policy is often complex, due in part
to governance bottlenecks, power hierarchies amongst
and between health workers and administrative cadres,
and ineffective or weak systems of accountability and
transparency [42–44]. However, few studies have explored
stakeholder perspectives across a range of HRH
policies [17], and even fewer specifically explored issues
of rural distribution and retention [14].
Our analysis reveals several barriers to developing and
implementing holistic policies to strengthen rural distribution
and retention in UP, India. We discuss three key
findings here -.
The lack of coordinated and effective governance in
the health sector is a major barrier to improving rural
retention and development in UP, an issue that has
emerged in the development of HRH policy in other
LMICs, such as Bangladesh [14] and South Africa [17].
Our study builds on this literature by describing the disconnects
between various units within the health sector,
and between health and other sectors. Rural areas in
Uttar Pradesh continue to face considerable inequities in
access to quality, affordable health care, education and
other social services, as well as limitations in coverage of
transportation, utilities and commerce. These challenges
have long been identified as major barriers to both supporting
students from rural areas to gain admission to
medical colleges, and also attracting health workers to
live and work in these regions [9]. The multisectoral action
needed to improve these conditions was found to
be lacking in this context, as it has in other settings and
other policy issues [9, 45].
The impact of power asymmetries amongst stakeholders
in shaping rural retention policy has been previously
discussed [14, 46]. Our findings add to this
literature by highlighting the policy role of health worker
associations, particularly various doctors’ associations.
Those policies that were contested by doctors’ associations
(i.e., AYUSH task shifting) would require considerable
political capital to be adopted and implemented.
Given the mix of policies required for improving rural
retention and distribution of doctors, decision makers
would have to carefully plan the selection and timing for
formulating and adopting policies, particularly those that
could result in opposition or blocking from health
worker associations.
Finally, stakeholders discussed major challenges in implementation
due to inefficient mechanisms for accountability
and perceptions of widespread corruption across
the health system. Similar issues have been identified in
HRH policy in other regions of India [47], as well as
other LMICs [42, 48–50]. Addressing these accountability
concerns may require additional policies – for example,
regularly transferring clerical cadres responding
for HR processes – that would likely result in resistance
from their representative associations. In other instances,
the development of complex policies such as the regulation
of private practice would require careful end-to-end
planning, particularly in terms of enforcement and accountability,
in order to avoid the emergence of new
problems brought about directly as a result of the policy.
The growing literature documenting anti-corruption, accountability
and transparency policies in LMIC health
sectors would offer important insights for stakeholders
working to develop and implement HRH policy [51–53].
Nevertheless, UP is at a unique moment in the development
of HRH policy. At the national and state level,
there appears to be strong commitment to expanding
rural distribution and retention of doctors, and considerable
resources invested in expanding supply of health
workers, including doctors. Several important policy decisions
have already been taken with regards to the policy
challenges noted in this paper. For example, the state
has transitioned from the system of having Chief Medical
Officers post medical officers, to the state managing
these postings centrally. Similarly, the state has taken
steps to improve the quality of nursing in the public sector
by increasing the level of qualifications for new recruits.
These developments suggest a window of
opportunity in the near term to develop and implement
policy solutions.
Policy implications
Our analysis has several implications for policy. We
modified the initial policy proposals and also identified
new approaches that addressed concerns raised during
the analysis (see Table 5). At the time of writing, plans
for further consultative processes to formalize these policy
options have been disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic;
we hope to re-initiate them as circumstances
allow. Here, we present approaches for addressing the issues
laid out in the analysis.
It is apparent that opposition to specific policies (in
the case of UP these included compulsory rural postings
and AYUSH task shifting) implies the need for careful
negotiation and/or high-level political support in order
to pass these policies in the face of opposition. Policymakers
should also consider bundling interventions strategically,
pairing a policy that will likely meet with
resistance, with one that will be favorably received
(home district posting and private practice, for example,
in the UP case).
While GoUP may have particularly acute challenges in
terms of fragmented governance for health this is a common
problem across other states and countries [45]. For
HRH issues in particular, it will be important to examine
existing health and multisectoral governance structures
and identify areas for improvement. For example, a unit
focused specifically on HRH policy that coordinates
across various ministries, departments and agencies
would be a first step in identifying and addressing gaps
and bottlenecks in the policy process. Such a unit may
also be tasked with looking within and beyond the health
sector for particular policy levers that can address various
challenges with rural deployment and distribution.
Finally, it is widely understood that policy adoption
does not translate to effective policy implementation,
and as part of any package of HRH policies it will be necessary
to rigorously plan for, monitor and evaluate policy
rollout and build in accountability measures and
safeguards. These include regular feedback mechanisms
for improving policies, processes for oversight (including
by community members) and transparent information
systems [54].
Our study had several limitations – 1) While we identified
an extensive list of stakeholders, we were unable to
secure interviews with certain key stakeholders due to
scheduling conflicts and logistical issues, particularly in
the case of senior government officials. As a result, these
findings should be interpreted recognizing this limitation
in our sampling; 2) Due to the narrow timeframe in
which to conduct the study, we could not conduct extensive
interviews and focus groups in rural locations
within UP; 3) Given the extensive nature of the HRH
strategy, respondents could not address all policies in
the context of the interviews; 4) Respondents discussed
their perceptions of corruption in the system, but we did not independently conduct research to verify their
claims; 5) We had intended to conduct a member checking
exercise as part of a consultative process with stakeholders
during the finalization of the HRH strategy, but
have delayed this step due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Conclusion
In this paper, we examined stakeholder perspectives on
the development of policy to strengthen the distribution
and retention of doctors in rural UP, India. We have
three main conclusions from this analysis – 1) adopting
a coordinated approach to rural retention and distribution
policy is negatively impacted by institutional fragmentation,
the absence of dedicated HRH policymaking
units, and other health and social sector governance
challenges in UP; 2) the opposition to these policies by
health worker associations creates difficult conditions
for decisive, wide-ranging policy development; 3) regardless
of policy adoption, policy implementation is severely
hampered by weak mechanisms of accountability and
pervasive corruption at local, district and state level, necessitating
fresh thinking around effective, transparent
implementation strategies.

