Patient and public involvement (PPI) is increasingly
common in health research and healthcare. In healthcare,
PPI refers to the ‘active participation of citizens,
users and carers and their representatives in the development
of health care services and as partners in their
own healthcare’ [1]. Two broad arguments are made for
PPI. The first is a moral argument: those affected by, or
paying for, research and health services should have a
say in what and how they are conducted and delivered.
The second is a consequentialist argument: it will improve
the quality, efficiency and impact of research and
healthcare [2].
PPI can be not only individual but also collective
[3]. As such, involvement is not geared towards the
individual level (i.e. the direct care setting, which is
the most common level of involvement or engagement
in cancer care [4]) but rather the clinic or
organizational level and the policy level [5]. Involving
patients in the design of healthcare systems and in
quality improvement efforts has been described as a
critical aspect of patient-centred care [6] and The
European Cancer Patient Coalition (ECPC) encourages
a strong partnership between researchers, cancer centres
and patients, where patients can share their
unique experiences and develop a more patientcentred
approach to cancer care and research [7].
Fundamentally, there are three main ways to organize
collective involvement in healthcare and in society as a
whole [8]. The first is to invite a group of representative
citizens, e.g. citizens’ juries, to voice their opinions,
which may then be used to deliver recommendations applicable
to policy and practice decision-making [9]. The
second is to involve organized civil society groups, e.g.
patient organizations or community groups. Research indicates
great diversity among European countries as to
the extent to which cancer patient organizations partake
in policy decision-making and with what impact [10, 11].
The third is to invite a specific group of citizens to participate,
the ones that are affected by a decision, e.g.
people with cancer (which may not belong to an
organization or similar).
Today, there is great variation in the methods and terminology
used in different healthcare systems when it
comes to involving particular groups, but there is a
growing body of literature on Patient and Family Advisory
Councils (PFACs). PFACs are groups of patients,
family members and caregivers who meet regularly and
serve as advisors in diverse healthcare settings, from individual
clinics and hospitals to healthcare systems [6,
12]. Although some researchers conclude that PFACs
can provide new insights that can assist healthcare providers
in optimizing current methods [13] and change
staff ‘culture’ or awareness [14], the impact of PFACs is
uncertain, in particular regarding healthcare decisions at
the population level [6, 14, 15]. Similarly, for PFACs in
cancer care, it has been suggested that they seem to play
an important role in the drive to make healthcare more
patient-centred, but there is very little information about
their efficacy [16]. In general, there is a lack of robust
evidence for the impact of PPI in healthcare policy and
service improvement [17–20].
As PFACs most often operate at the hospital level and
include healthcare staff, the vast majority of studies on
PFACs concern hospitals, i.e. the operational level within
a healthcare organization. However, although unusual, this
type of council may also operate at the managerial level,
i.e. in parts of the healthcare organization that do not deliver
healthcare but rather work to develop care and research.
One such example is PFACs attached to the six
regional cancer centres (RCCs) in Sweden. The RCCs have
been part of Sweden’s national cancer strategy from 2009.
The overarching goal of the RCCs is to work towards
more equitable, accessible and patient-focused cancer care
of high quality throughout the entire chain of care [21].
Although an overall assessment of the development of the
RCCs concluded that one of the greatest merits is
strengthened patient participation and patient-centring
[22], it is uncertain what the outcomes of the RCC PFACs
are, and if this is a type of involvement that leads to
changes in cancer services or policy. In the literature, the
outcomes or impacts of involvement are sometimes referred
to as the ‘effectiveness’ of participatory activities
[23]. The aim of the study was therefore to investigate the
effectiveness of one of the Swedish RCC PFACs operating
at the managerial level, with the aim to contributing to the
development of cancer care. Evaluation has been suggested
one of nine essential principles to optimize patient
and public involvement [24].
The RCC organization and patient representation
The responsibility for the funding and provision of healthcare
in Sweden is placed with 21 self-governing regions,
which work together in six larger clusters (cooperative regions).
Each of the six cooperative regions, which are divided
geographically, has a regional cancer centre (RCC)
that works in cooperation with the regions within its cluster
to develop and improve the quality of cancer care.
Organizationally, the RCCs are linked to the regions in
different ways because the regional forms of collaboration
and decision-making differ, but they are all anchored in
the regions’ leadership. The RCCs, which differ in size
from about 25 to 60 employees, are managed by an operations
manager that leads the work in a governing board
with representatives from the regions within its cluster
(health professionals and public officials).
The RCCs also work nationally to develop and improve
the quality of cancer care. For example, the RCCs
collaborate through a collaboration group where the RCC
managers meet regularly with the national cancer care coordinator
at the Swedish Association of Local Authorities
and Regions (SALAR). The collaboration group advises
the SALAR, the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs and
the National Board of Health and Welfare on cancer care
issues. For the period of 2020–2022, the RCCs focus their
work on ten common development areas, three of which
are prevention and early detection, staff competence, and
patients and next of kin.
The RCCs have the fundamental task of supporting the
patient’s position in healthcare. In practice, the involvement
of patients and their next of kin takes place at several levels
relating to the RCC’s work (Table 1). With the RCC as a
main coordinating body in cancer care improvement, with
a clear vision of involving patients and their next of kin, it
becomes relevant to explore the effectiveness of involvement
within the RCC setting. This article studies the councils
for patients and their next of kin, which target the
macro and meso levels within the healthcare organization
(Table 1).
Methods
Design
The method used for this study was a qualitative, singlecase
study [25]. The study was conducted in one of the
RCC PFACs, which have worked toward improving patient
and next-of-kin representation to increase their
influence.
Data collection
Two types of data sources were used to address the purpose
of the study: interviews with PFAC participants and
meeting minutes from the PFAC meetings.
The interview study was conducted by first presenting
the aim of the study to the PFAC participants at
one of their meetings in early 2020. Thereafter, participants
were invited to partake via email. They received
written information about the study purpose
and procedure and were informed that participation
was voluntary. Those who did not answer received
two reminders. At the end, ten of 15 potential PFAC
members agreed to participate, among which the duration
of participation, type of cancer and geographical
location differed. They were interviewed via telephone
since no face-to-face interviews were conducted during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The interviews lasted
between 24 and 57 min and were semi structured.
The interview guide was developed using an analytical
framework presented by Abelson et al. [22].
The document study was conducted by analysing
meeting minutes accessible from the RCC web page.
The minutes were written by the RCC coordinator and
confirmed by the PFAC participants. They contained
written information about what had been informed
about, discussed and decided during the PFAC meetings.
The meeting minutes were used as a complementary
source to the interviews, and the same
analytical framework was used. All eleven meeting
minutes presented at the web page were analysed.
This was for all PFAC meetings between the time
period from March 2018 to September 2020.
Analysis framework
Based on ideas about deliberation, Abelson et al. [26]
have described four general principles that can be used
to guide the design and evaluation of collective involvement
processes in the healthcare sector: (i) representation;
(ii) the structure of the process or procedures; (iii)
the information used in the process and (iv) the outcomes
and decisions arising from the process [26].
Table 2 summarises an adaptation of evaluation criteria
linked to the four principles as presented by Abelson
et al. This framework was used as a structured analysis
matrix and the interviews and meeting minutes were
thus analysed through deductive content analysis [27].
The framework is an adaption of Abelson et al., 2003 [26].
Results
Representation
Most of the interviewed participants were patients or
former patients and they had joined the PFAC between
one and eight years ago. A large majority of the participants
were women. Young people and people born in
another country were poorly represented. Some of the
PFAC participants were recruited by the RCC as members
of local cancer patient organizations, while others
were recruited by physicians or friends or without belonging
to an organization. A few mentioned that they
hesitated before taking on the task, questioning, for instance,
what they could contribute and described being
encouraged and reassured by RCC representatives.
However, most of the participants were, or had been, engaged
in other civil society organizations, such as the
Red Cross, or sports associations. The meeting minutes
show that some changes had been made during the last
couple of years to improve representation in the PFAC.
The PFAC did, for example, change their assignment description
to include two participants from each of the regions
attached to the RCC to increase its geographical
representation (minute 061218).
The participants seemed to agree that the PFAC
should represent cancer patients and their next of kin in
a broad sense. For example, one participant said: ‘You
cannot represent yourself when you sit there, because
then you do not do much good’ (Interview #1). A few
participants mentioned that although they were recruited
based on their experience of a specific type of
cancer, they had realized at the PFAC meetings that cancer
care needs are similar between different types of cancer
patients, and that the PFAC should work for all of
them. Some of the participants, however, found this
broad perspective difficult and mentioned that since they
were recruited from an organization focusing on a specific
type of cancer, they had a hard time leaving that
specific perspective behind. In line with this, one of the
participants mentioned that (s)he sometimes thought
that some participants were not over their own illness,
and that it affected their ability to focus on the situation
of cancer patients more broadly.
Among those participants that were recruited from a
local cancer patient organization, the majority tried to
inform the local organization about the PFAC’s work, although
some mentioned that their local organization
was not very interested. One of the participants described
that (s)he sent the organization the PFAC meeting
protocols: ‘…and then nothing happens, there is no
more feedback, or discussions about how to do with this
or that. They say thank you and that is that’ (Interview
#8). In two cases, the participants mentioned that they
routinely asked their local organization before the PFAC
meetings if it had any input to the meeting agenda. In improvement of the PFACs activities if local cancer organizations
were more involved.
Information
The participants mentioned that a large part of the
PFAC meetings consisted of information from the RCC,
and the meeting minutes confirm that almost all points
on the agenda began with some sort of information from
the RCC manager or the RCC coordinator. Some participants
thought that too much time was dedicated to information,
while others thought it was necessary to
invigorate and provide structure for discussion. Several
of the participants mentioned that that the RCC representatives,
who work with the issues on a daily basis,
had up-to-date information they wanted to hear. Referring
to the RCC manager, one of the participants said:
‘He is so up-to-date, and we need a lot of information
from him, for him to describe how things are now. That
is a prerequisite for understanding how it is’ (Interview #
4). One such example of information was when the
manager had informed about how the ongoing pandemic
had affected cancer care in their geographical area.
Process
Concerning the meeting agenda, the participants differed
in their views on how it was established. Someone believed
that most of the issues on the agenda came from
PFAC participants, while others held the view that most
were decided by the RCC. Yet a few others said it was a
joint effort by the PFAC chairperson and the RCC to establish
the agenda and that anyone could make suggestions
for what to bring up. For example, one of the
participants said: ‘If I had a suggestion and presented it,
and they liked it, it would become part of the meeting
agenda’ (Interview #2). Some of the participants mentioned
that they had initiated issues to discuss at the
meetings, while some had not, sometimes because they
felt uncertain in their role.
The participants seemed to agree that, in principle, all
had the same opportunity to make themselves heard,
even though some were more dominant. Nevertheless,
one of the participants brought up that they had to be
cautious since some participants may not be as vocal as
others, in some cases, because of their illness. A few participants
explained that it was a good strategy to hold
discussions in smaller groups, as they used to do during
the meetings, which helped some to speak up. Most participants
mentioned that they agreed with each other to
a high extent since everyone wanted to achieve improvements
in cancer care and since their illness had given
the participants the ability to listen to the experiences of
others. However, several of the participants also brought
up that the PFAC did not often have the type of
discussions that can result in disagreements. One of the
participants said: ‘There are not very many discussions,
not as it should be (…) it has not been anything we could
disagree on’ (Interview #8).
Furthermore, it was not clear among the participants
what it meant that the PFAC should have an advisory
and supportive function vis-a-vis the RCC board. Someone
mentioned that the PFAC did not come up with any
suggestions that could support the RCC board, while another
mentioned that the PFAC should be used more as
a referral group and obtain different questions from the
board on which to express their views. However, if the
advisory role was interpreted more loosely, one of the
participants reasoned as follows: ‘…they listen to what
we say, of course ... and then we are advisory in a way,
right?’ (Interview #6). It was repeatedly mentioned that
the RCC manager and the coordinator partaking in the
meetings, who were described as perceptive and professional,
listened to the PFAC participants, ‘took things
further’ and did not dismiss any ideas, not even very difficult
ones. One participant explained: ‘It is often they
say, ‘we will take this to the board, we will present it
there’ ‘(Interview #6). This was confirmed by the meeting
minutes illustrating that the RCC representatives took
suggestions and questions from the participants to the
board. The RCC representatives also gave feedback to
the PFAC on the process and explained if and how they
would continue to work with the suggestions (minutes
140219; 030619; 110520).
Most of the participants were satisfied with the advisory
role of the PFAC chairperson in the RCC board. The
meeting minutes show that the inclusion of the PFAC
chairperson in the board resulted from demands made
by the PFAC (minute 060318). One of the participants
said that (s)he thought the important thing was that the
PFAC had a representative on the board and that someone
making decisions was listening. (S)he also said that
‘the further up in the organization we have representatives,
the more likely it is that we get through something
we suggest’ (Interview #2). Many of the participants mentioned
that they saw the PFACs representation on the
board as way to ‘take another step’ or ‘move up a level’;
however, they recognized that it requires quite a lot being
the representative on the board among all professionals.
Notwithstanding, a few participants meant that
even if questions were brought up to the board, it did
not guarantee any influence on the board’s decisions.
One participant exemplified ‘… we can just initiate issues
and hope that they [the board] discuss it, and then; well,
if they think it is an important issue, they will hopefully
pursue it further’ (Interview # 7). By pursuing it further,
the respondents meant that the RCC should take it to
the relevant national authorities or decision-makers
within the regions.Outcomes
The participants had different views on the PFAC’s actual
input on the work carried out by the RCC and the
issues handled by the RCC board. Some of the participants
did not know what input the PFAC had, while
some believed it had considerable influence because
quite a few of the issues addressed by the board had
been brought up by the PFAC. As a rule, the participants
thought that the RCC representatives were good at listening
to the PFAC participants and that this in itself
signalled influence on the RCC’s work. Based on the
meeting minutes, the RCC representatives often asked
for the PFAC’s perspectives in their work, and the RCC
also sought counsel from the PFAC when, for example,
developing a new regional cancer plan (minute 030918).
When it came to improvements in cancer care, the
participants emphasised that the RCC did a great job,
but some were unsure about the PFACs contribution.
Most of the participants could not share any specific
examples of actual outcomes that the PFAC had had
on cancer care. Yet some could, and one example
was contact nurses, which was described as an issue
pursued intensely by the PFAC. Another example was
digital care plans, which a participant said was originally
discussed in the PFAC. These plans were described
as important for all cancer patients: ‘…it is an
important documentation that the patient can return
to when they get home, to remember what the doctor
said during the meeting’ (Interview #6). However,
nearly all participants considered the PFAC together
with the RCC to be a good forum for providing information
to cancer patients and their next of kin, e.g.
by producing pamphlets with information concerning
issues as involvement and rehabilitation but also by
providing resources for meeting points for cancerspecific
or local groups. A few participants thought
that the PFAC had a lot of relevant information to
share but had a problem reaching out and had discussed,
for example, how to get information onto the
hospitals’ ‘rolling tv screens’.
In several ways, the participants expressed that a lack
of knowledge about the healthcare system’s organization
was a hurdle to achieving change, although they had
taken part in an introductory program for PFAC participants.
One gave an example of when the lack of knowledge
stopped a PFAC activity. The PFAC had come up
with an idea – to place small cards in the waiting areas
at hospitals reminding women to ask for ‘my care plan’
– but were told by the RCC coordinator that it could
not be done in that way. This was confirmed in the
meeting minutes. Another example is that the PFAC
wanted to discuss the possibilities of working with
smoking cessation in general but learned from the RCC
manager that the RCC should mainly focus on secondary
prevention for patients that already had received a cancer
diagnosis (minute 300518).
Furthermore, one participant explicitly argued that the
PFAC was acting on a ‘strange level’ in between the regional
and national levels, which in his/her opinion
made it harder to exercise influence. (S)he believed that
the local cancer councils in the regions were a more direct
way to change cancer care. Another participant mentioned
that changes at local hospitals had been made
quite a few times after criticism voiced by PFAC members
in the local cancer councils, although it depended
on how open the hospital management was to changes.
A few participants also stressed that whether or not the
PFAC achieved changes depended to a high extent on
the people working at the hospitals, if they listened and
changed. Some participants also mentioned that their
experiences as cancer patients sometimes came to use in
an even better way in the RCC care process groups. One
of the participants expressed it like this: ‘…there they are
more interested in me and my experiences and of the
care I received and how I felt, and why I felt that way’
(Interview #8).
Overall, despite some hesitation about outcomes, the
participants said they were quite satisfied with the effectiveness
of the PFAC on improving cancer care. Several
mentioned that they would have given a lower rating before,
but that many improvements had been made in recent
years. Furthermore, the participants reported a high
degree of personal satisfaction from being in the PFAC,
e.g. being part of a pleasant group and becoming energized.
Several expressed that it felt good being able to
contribute and help people who were in a difficult situation.
One participant expressed it like this: ‘I use to say
that if it helps one person, I am happy. And hopefully I
have helped more than that by being in this group’
(Interview #7). A few also stressed that they had become
more knowledgeable about cancer.
Discussion
Representation
In terms of representation, which is a recurring theme in
studies of PPI [28, 29], the findings suggest that the
PFAC participants were recruited with the aim of
achieving so-called descriptive representation, where the
representative is supposed to have characteristics in
common with those represented (in contrast to formal,
symbolic or substantive representation) [6]. The descriptive
representation was foremost geographical, but there
was also a spread in the types of cancer that the participants
had or had had. Although most participants tried
to take on the perspective of cancer patients in general,
it was unclear whether participants recruited from local
cancer patient organizations represented their
organization or not, pointing to some uncertainty about 
role, expectations and responsibilities. It was difficult for
some to transition from being a member of a local cancer
patient organization to being a PFAC participant
with a broader perspective. Since several of the participants
mentioned that they wished the local organizations
would engage more, or actively sought the input from
their local organizations, it appears as if the PFAC participants
preferred a delegate model of representation,
where representatives act on the stated preferences of
those represented, in contrast to a so-called trustee
model in which representatives follow their own
thoughts regarding the right action [6].
Information and process
Concerning information, the findings suggest that the
RCC had a large part in setting the meeting agenda (an
enabler/barrier mentioned by, for example, Bombard
et al. [30]) and that an important aspect of the PFAC
meetings was information sharing by the RCC representatives,
which many participants saw as necessary for
relevant discussions. The findings related to the process
suggest that power seemed to be distributed evenly between
the participants, but it was mentioned that the
participants’ personality played a major role in how
much space they took and that those with greater selfconfidence
and physical ability spoke more [31]. Research
on preferred characteristics of PFAC members
has suggested that they should have good communication
skills, be ‘good listeners’ and have a ‘passion for
helping’, and those aspects were mentioned in the interviews
as preventing conflicts from taking place and as a
driver of participation.
Furthermore, the PFAC participants emphasised that
the RCC representatives were crucial for the functioning
of the PFAC, and in a similar way, it has been pointed
out in previous research that support is necessary both
for practicalities such as meeting rooms and meals and
to keep the PFAC on track by providing an agenda,
keeping minutes and providing guidance to keep the
PFAC on topic during meetings [6, 32]. In this case, the
RCC representatives organized and prepared the meetings
and provided resources. Importantly, it has been
noted that this may compromise the independence of a
PFAC [6]. In a similar way, it has been suggested that
patient organizations may have a dependent position visà-
vis providers or insurers, which results in a risk that
they are put to instrumental use [8], i.e. that the inclusion
in policy processes or decision-making may be used
as a way to add legitimacy to decision-making bodies.
However, this was not reflected in the interviews; rather
the PFAC participants saw the RCC representatives as
allies against the regions or hospitals when cancer care
did not function properly and the RCC representatives
could thus be thought of as external facilitators [30] in
the relation between patients/next of kin and cancer care
services and policy-makers.
Outcomes
The literature points out that outcome evaluation is difficult.
It is, for example, difficult to evaluate how and
when influence occurs and to establish the right endpoint
or timeframe for effects [26]. Some outcomes may
be proximal, while others may be distal, and institutional
or societal effects can take years to appear. In line with
this, our findings show that the PFAC participants
thought it was difficult to know whether the council’s
activities had led to any changes to cancer care or policy,
but were very positive towards the RCC’s work to improve
cancer care. The PFAC participants generally
thought it was a positive outcome if the issue they had
raised ‘was taken further to a higher level’ by the RCC
and were all enthusiastic over the opportunity to make
their voices heard in this type of forum, which at least
gave a potential for influence because someone with
power over cancer care listened. This means that the
PFAC responded to the moral argument for PPI: i.e. that
those affected by a health service should have a say in
what is done and how it is done. However, it is uncertain
to what extent it responded to the consequentialist argument:
i.e. whether it improved the quality or efficiency
of cancer care [2]. By that, the impact of PFACs is still
uncertain regarding healthcare decisions at the population
level [6, 14, 15]. Future studies should focus on how
to measure the outcomes of PFACs in organizational
change or policy, what Dukhanin et al. [28] refer to as
internal outcomes of PPI on the services provided by an
organization or system and on the organization or system
itself. This type of organizational impact is more difficult
to measure than impact on the participants, such
as increased knowledge, skills or satisfaction [20, 33].
Challenges: system knowledge and clarity of role and
rationale
Earlier research has suggested that participants should
be familiar with the healthcare system within which the
PFAC is located [6], and this was mentioned as an obstacle
in the interviews. Although the participants
thought it was a positive outcome that an issue ‘was
taken further to a higher level’ by the RCC, it was often
unclear to them which level was referred to and what
the decision-making capacity was at that level. The
PFAC participants were generally familiar with how local
cancer care provision worked but were less familiar with
how the system works at the managerial level (mesoand
macro-levels), e.g. where different types of decisions
are being made and which channels should be used to
push for different types of changes. Furthermore, in previous
research, it has been put forward that PFACs need way that it could make real decisions and have a meaningful
impact [6]. In the interviews, it was questioned if
this was the case with the PFACs attached to the RCCs,
which work in between the national and regional governing
levels – again pointing to uncertainties about the
PFAC’s role and rationale. Some participants saw more
directly how the patient experience could be used in the
local cancer councils in the regions or in the care
process groups, which include responsible healthcare
staff, and are closer to the operational level in the
healthcare organization. This indicates that it is more
challenging for patients and their next of kin to partake
in involvement activities at the organizational and policy
levels, making it particularly important to create a receptive
context where participants have sufficient guidance
and support [30]. This may include offering participants
relevant education and training [24, 29] and trained facilitators
that have a comprehensive knowledge about
how the healthcare system works and who can support
the participants in navigating the managerial level of the
healthcare system. This may require additional training
of the facilitators as well [34].
Institutional commitment is often described as a facilitator/
barrier to successful involvement [30, 31] and the
RCCs have established a multifaceted system for involving
patients and next of kin. It can, however, be discussed
to what extent the current PFAC mandate
incorporates the potential for influencing policy and service
improvement. According to its mandate, the PFAC
is to perform an advisory and supportive function vis-àvis
the RCC board, but some of the representatives did
not fully understand what that entailed and what was expected
of them, thus being a barrier to action. Furthermore,
the potential for influence is dependent on how
the participatory activity is set up [31]. Often, the level
of control over decision-making in PPI is described as
stretching from consultation (an opportunity to express
views) to partnership (shared planning and decisionmaking
responsibilities) to lay control (autonomous
decision-making authority) [35], with a first level sometimes
being added: information (being informed). Because
the chairperson only has the right to speak in the
RCC board and not take part in decisions, its role is by
definition consultative. As such there is no guarantee
that the PFAC will have an impact on the development
of cancer care or policy, only that the participants get an
opportunity to express their views (which they wished
they were asked to do in a more systematic way). Thus,
if the PFAC is to be guaranteed influence within the
RCC, a change of the mandate is necessary, e.g. to give
the chairperson authority to take part in decisions in the
RCC board. However, this would raise the demands for
more formal accountability procedures and a more
formal process for recruiting participants to reach the
desired type of representation, which has previously
been described as sensitive and time-consuming [31].
Overall, our results point to the importance of discussing
and clarifying roles, expectations and rationales
linked to PPI activities in order to optimize their
effectiveness.
Limitations
Lastly, there are some limitations to this study. One is
that the study only investigated one of six RCC PFACs,
which may work differently. Also, the sample of participants
is relatively small, although this was remedied in
part by validating the interviews against the meeting minutes
from the PFAC. Another limitation is that the
study did not include observations of the meetings,
which would have contributed with a deeper understanding
of the dynamics in the PFAC. Furthermore, it is
not possible to know whether the PFAC participants
who refrained from partaking in the study were more
negative towards the PFAC or if they differed regarding
some other aspect. In addition, there may be a difference
between perceived and actual outcomes, which may in
turn be linked to recall problems. Also, outcomes may
appear only after some time and may thus not be possible
for the participants to detect at a particular time.
Since there was variation in how long the PFAC participants
had partaken in the council, they may also have
had different opportunities to assess the PFAC's
outcomes.
Conclusion
The effectiveness of PFACs is uncertain, and the investigation
of a PFAC for cancer care operating at the managerial
level in a healthcare system shows that, although
the representativeness and the participatory processes
had been improved, there was uncertainty about the role
and expectations of the participants and of the PFAC’s
outcomes. It was difficult for the PFAC participants to
know whether their efforts had led to any improvements
to cancer care or policy. The participants were, however,
satisfied with being listened to but felt they needed to
understand the meso- and macro level functioning of
the healthcare system better to improve their work. The
study thus suggests that it is more difficult for patients
and family members to participate at the managerial
level in healthcare organizations compared with the operational
level with which they are usually more familiar,
although it is at these levels strategic decisions about
priorities in cancer care and service configurations are
made. Thus, there is a particular need for guidance and
support for PPI to work successfully at this level, which
may include relevant education and training in system
knowledge.

