Background
Evidence-based practice (EBP) is a widespread expectation
in the delivery of mental health services [1, 2]. The
process informed by EBP is fundamental to psychological
growth and relevant change in the lives of consumers.
Several theoretical and conceptual frameworks,
as well as principles, have been proposed to govern the
implementation of EBP, which encapsulates personcentred,
strength-based and people-first service
provision, and the active involvement of consumers in
decisions about treatment and recovery [1, 2]. The
process incorporates individual clinical expertise with
the best available evidence from systematic reviews, randomised
clinical trials, quasi-experimental, pre-post and
correlational designs, as well as continuous clinical education
and upskilling [1, 2].
Scholars have proposed several initiatives that could
enhance the evidence-based process in mental health
services [1, 2]. For example, Anthony and Mizock [1]
recommended that the process of EBP should encompass
a positive therapeutic relationship, goal-setting, expectations
and hope, consumers being taught new skills,
self-awareness, as well as consumers feeling supported.
The therapeutic relationship, which constitutes a key
component of EBP, is a multi-faceted concept used to
describe a collaborative and transformative relationship
formed between Mental Health Professionals (MHPs)
and consumers and their family caregivers [1, 3, 4].
Specifically, Kornhaber, Walsh [5] described this relationship
as caring, supportive and non-judgemental
behaviour, embedded in the process of delivering services.
Achieving this relationship is underpinned by several ethical
principles, including mutual trust, respect and dignity,
as well as the nurturing of hope [6, 7].
Several studies have suggested interrelated attributes for
characterising this therapeutic relationship [5, 8–10]. The
therapeutic relationship has largely been characterised as
building a rapport [8, 9], therapeutic listening and responding
to consumers’ emotions [5]. The relationships are
mostly categorised into individual (consumer, family caregivers
and mental health professionals) and organisational
attributes (environmental attributes) [3, 11]. The individual
attributes align with factors in consumer and family caregivers
as well as MHP factors that enable or hinder the establishment
of the therapeutic relationship. This might
include consumers’ insights, knowledge, humour and communication
challenges (verbal and non-verbal), and work
fatigue, skills, competency and attitudes of MHPs [3, 11,
12]. Conversely, the organisational attributes constitute factors
influenced by the treatment setting or environment.
These attributes may include the philosophy of care (e.g.
paternalistic and medical model traditions, organisational
policies and practices, increasing workload, staff shortages
and a large number of patients [3, 11, 13, 14].
Research has highlighted that the therapeutic relationship
could have a positive effect on the quality of mental
health services [1, 8, 15]. For example, for consumers,
the therapeutic relationship promotes personal recovery,
increased satisfaction with services, quality of life, reduced
symptoms and functionality [4, 15, 16]. Given
these significances, mental health stakeholders are increasingly
advocating for an evidence-based process to
enhance quality mental health services. Although some
studies have suggested the need to understand the
evidence-based process in mental health nursing, there
is little evidence to support the development of effective
therapeutic relationship building, particularly in clinical
practice. Research on therapeutic relationship building
has been limited to general health services, particularly
in developed countries, eg. Australia [8, 12] UK [17]
USA, and Germany) and Middle Eastern countries [3,
18], eg. Iran and Saudi Arabia).
In developing countries including Ghana, there is limited
evidence on issues related to EBP, which is integral
to the recovery of consumers. Although there has been
increasing efforts to improve the living conditions of
consumers with mental illness and, thus has resulted in
increasing empirical studies on mental health services, to
date, the evidence has focused on weaknesses in the
health system [19], challenges in policy implementation,
enablers and barriers in accessing services [20], and
treatment pathways using conventional middle-range
theories [21, 22]. None of these studies has attempted to
understand the perspectives of MHPs regarding the
evidence-based therapeutic process. To address this gap,
a qualitative study, using realistic evaluation as part of a
concurrent mixed-methods approach, was undertaken to
explore mental health professional’s views on the
evidence-based therapeutic process in psychiatric facilities
in Ghana.
Middle-range theories supporting evidence-based
therapeutic processes
Several theories have been proposed to inform EBP in
health service delivery, which applies to mental health.
Examples of these middle-range theories include the
Donabedian theory of quality of care [16] and Hildegard
Peplau’s middle-range theory of interpersonal relationships
[23–25].
The process component of the Donabedian middlerange
theory describes EBP as the actual treatment stage
and is comprised of consumer-based interpersonal relationships
and the technical skills of the mental health
professionals. According to the Donabedian theory,
consumer-based interpersonal relationships highlight the
therapeutic relationship between consumers and providers.
The technical skills describe clinicians’ knowledge
about appropriate interventions and best practices, as well as their ability to accurately assess consumer problems
[16].
Hildegard Peplau’s middle-range theory states that
consumer-based interpersonal relationships must go
through three phases, including orientation, working
(identification and exploitation) and termination (resolution)
[23, 25]. The therapeutic interaction between
consumers and service providers is central in each of the
three phases. For example, at the orientation phase, providers
meet consumers and gain essential information.
Service providers make assessments about consumers
through a collaborative and interdisciplinary plan of care
at the working phase, to determine the best evidencebased
interventions. Finally, service providers create discharge
plans, which include symptom management and
recovery planning at the termination phase [24, 25].
Methods
Study setting
The study was conducted between June 2019 and November
2019 at three psychiatric facilities in Ghana.
Two of the facilities are specialised psychiatric hospitals,
while the third was a unit within a general hospital. The
two psychiatric facilities are located in the Greater Accra
region and the psychiatric unit is located at the Komfo
Anokye Teaching Hospital in the Ashanti region. All
three facilities operated based on a shared goal and focus
of treatment.
Research design and approach (phase 1 – initial theory
and assumption)
This paper focuses on the qualitative component of a
larger, concurrent mixed-method study design, which
draws on the principles of realist evaluation to explore
mental health professionals’ perspectives on evidencebased
processes in the provision of mental health services.
This qualitative component explores the subjective
views of mental health professionals in the process of
delivering mental health services. In particular, the qualitative
data was used as secondary to the quantitative objective
measure of the outcome of mental health
services. It enabled the researchers to interact with mental
health professionals and to listen to their subjective
experiences in the process of providing services to consumers.
It also helps to generate a rich and in-depth exploration
of the therapeutic process in mental health
service delivery [26]. The naturalistic, holistic view of
qualitative methods is relevant to better understand the
therapeutic process, rather than simply the quantitative
measure of outcome. Specifically, the realistic evaluation
cycle was conceptualised into phases and started with
initial theory development [27, 28]. Data were captured
through semi-structured interviews, surveys, and a review
of the literature. The literature review [19, 21],
concepts [16, 26] and quantitative components [29, 30]
informing this realistic evaluation have previously been
published. The realistic evaluation provides a unique
perspective on services and is grounded in theory [27,
31]. The central tenet of this realist methodology is that
the services may work differently in different contexts
[28, 32].
This study offers ways to address what works (or not),
when, why, for whom and under what circumstances to
promote evidence-based therapeutic interaction in service
provision [33, 34]. The therapeutic processes in
mental health services have traditionally been tested and
evaluated through middle-range theory (e.g. Donabedian
theory or Hildegard Peplau’s theory). However, such theories
do not offer ways to identify contextual factors, nor
mechanisms that could promote the therapeutic interaction
between consumers and providers. This realistic
evaluation involves the development and refinement of a
program theory, which is explained according to Pawson
and Tilley’s (1997) formula: Context + Mechanism =
Outcome.
The Donabedian middle-range theory and Hildegard
Peplau’s theory on interpersonal relations were used to
explain the therapeutic processes of providing mental
health services [35].. The qualitative data were empirically
tested to develop a final program theory that explains
contextual factors and mechanisms that enhance
the evidence-based therapeutic processes in delivering
mental health services (Tables 2 and 3). The experiences
of MHPs based on their therapeutic interactions with
consumers were used to refine the program theory. The
next step involved developing the underlying assumptions,
to articulate the program theory [27, 31, 36].
Data collection (phase 2 – recruitment and fieldwork)
Qualitative methods including field notes and in-depth
interviews were used to collect data from MHPs. The
clinical coordinators in each psychiatric facility facilitated
the recruitment of participants. The researchers
reviewed the list of MHPs in each of the selected facilities
and selected those who met the eligibility criteria.
MHPs were included if they had worked for at least
three years in the respective psychiatric facility and provided
daily routine mental health services. Based on the
inclusion criteria, we invited 38 MHPs through email,
face-to-face or telephone call. The invitation contained a
letter of introduction, participant information sheets,
and consent forms. Similarly, the head of each psychiatric
facility sent a memo detailing the research and advertised
it on the notice boards in each department. A
total of 30 MHPs agreed and were purposively recruited
to participate in an in-depth interview. The data were
collected until saturation, when no new information
emerged.
The interviews were conducted using a structured
interview guide (Additional file 1) and captured information
on contextual factors and mechanisms that could
improve therapeutic processes in mental health services.
The interview guide was developed using relevant information
according to the Donabedian middle-range theory
[16] and Papau theory on interpersonal relations.
Specifically, the content of the interview guide covered
questions on the evidence-based therapeutic process in
providing mental health services. For example, the questions
focused on the technical skills of providers, the
training and professional development plan and
consumer-based interpersonal relationships [23–25]. In
particular, the questions also covered clinicians’ knowledge
of appropriate interventions and best practices, as
well as their ability to accurately assess the problems of
consumers [16].
In the interview sessions, MHPs were briefed about the
research objectives, procedures and the consent process.
The right of participants to safeguard their anonymity and
integrity was respected. Each MHP was informed of the
study’s aims, methods, and consent to participation, potential
risk/benefits and privacy/confidentiality. The
MHPs signed an informed consent form prior to participation.
The lead author conducted the interviews and
therefore read the questions and recorded (with permission)
responses, using an audio recorder. The interviewer
has several years of experience in conducting qualitative
interviews, particularly in the health facility setting. Although
the interviewer understands the mental health systems,
thus based on previous research, he did not have
any work, social and emotional links with the participants.
The interviewer also monitored all the interview process,
including gestures and memos. We assigned unique identifiers
to the audio recordings, to maintain the confidentiality
of the participants. All interviews were conducted in
English, which is the primary language of conversation in
formal settings in Ghana. The interviews were conducted
at the psychiatric facilities, in the clinical staff common
rooms, privately and separately; that is, no interview was
witnessed by a clinical coordinator or service provider.
Each interview took approximately 45 to 60 min.
Data analysis (phase 3 – analysis and configuration of
CMO)
The data from field notes and in-depth interviews were
analysed using thematic analysis, conducted according to
Braun and Clarke [37] approach to categorising and connecting
data, to develop a realist theory (Tables 2 and 3).
This process involved transcribing, reading, familiarising
with the data, generating initial codes, searching for themes,
reviewing themes, and rigorous interpretation of data.
An independent transcriber transcribed the 30 deidentified
audio recordings into an MS Word document.
The interviewer listened to the audio recordings and
reviewed the transcripts and field notes. The transcribed
data was then entered into NVivo 12 for analysis. The lead
author, working closely with all co-authors, performed the
coding process. As recommended by Saldaña [38], initial
coding were conducted to develop inductive codes. The authors
revised the initial codes to better understand which
ones to include in new inductive codes. The authors then
performed focused coding, thus successive coding, of all the
remaining data to identify additional codes. In the focused
coding, the most significant initial codes were used as
provisional categories for checking across all the transcribed
data. The focused coding continued until saturation
was reached – no new ideas emerged from successive
coding.
The analysis identified a total of 49 inductive codes. The
codes were categorised into two major themes that explain
the evidence-based therapeutic process in mental
health service delivery (Table 2). For example, theme 1
“technical competency stimulates evidence-based mental
health services” consist of 19 inductive codes, whilst theme
2 “therapeutic alliance-building ensure effective interaction”
consist of 29 inductive codes (Tables 2 and 3).
Memos were written throughout the coding process to
record emerging conceptual links and observations from
the data. The identified codes were then used to develop
the context, mechanism and outcome (CMO domain) categories.
The context describes the policy background and
mental health systems as well as the organisational setting
where the services are being delivered [27, 39]. Also, the
mechanism describes what makes the services work. They
refer to the intentional and unintentional approaches and
strategies that are implemented to improve the therapeutic
process in mental health service delivery [27, 39].
The outcome in our realistic evaluation refers to the
intended or unintended changes that are achieved in the
lives of consumers as a result of the efforts by the therapeutic
process [27, 39]. The first CMO configuration
(theme one) and second CMO (theme two) consist of all
codes that explain contextual factors, and mechanisms
that could enhance the outcome of mental health services
(Tables 2 and 3). A visual model was developed to establish
the patterns of CMO across codes and cases. As illustrated
in Table 2, the patterns denoted the causal
pathways, and thus the contextual elements that could
trigger or influence mechanisms, to produce mental health
service outcomes. The most prominent quotes and words
from MHPs that were relevant to each of the context,
mechanism and outcome are used to support the findings.
Results
Background information
Table 1 provides demographic data from MHPs. The
average age was 36.4 years and more than half of MHPs (17/30; 56.67%) were female. Most MHPs (20/30;
66.67%) were married, while 30% were single. A third of
the MHPs were registered mental health nurses, while
23.33% were psychiatrists. The highest level of education
was a postgraduate degree (e.g. MPH, MSc, MPhil and
MBChB), and the average professional experience was
36 years.
CMO configurations from the analysis
The thematic analysis identified two contexts, mechanism
and outcome configurations (themes) as per the
program theory (Tables 2 and 3). The findings are presented
according to these contexts, mechanism and
outcome, and are supported with relevant verbatim
quotes from the transcribed data.
CMO configuration 1: technical competency stimulates
evidence-based therapeutic process in mental health
services
This context, mechanism and outcome configuration describe
the effects of technical competency on the
evidenced-based therapeutic process in mental health
services. This context, mechanism and outcome was
configured using 19 inductive codes emerging from the
analysis. Most MHPs reported that they had received
specialist training, practical skills, certified licensing as well as being regulated, monitored and supervised. The
MHPs perceived that they had insights on the theories,
concepts and practical skills in providing mental health
services. Most participants expressed that their clinical
competencies were achieved through mechanisms such
as continuous learning, in-service training, professional
development, multidisciplinary team involvement and
clinical and academic training sessions (tutorials, presentations
and discussions). Most participants confirmed
that they received in-service training opportunities every
quarter (e.g. at least 2 to 4 times a year). Some participants
mentioned that as part of the professional development
plan, the psychiatric facilities annually requested
the training needs of every staff member. Several clinical
and academic training sessions (tutorials, presentations
and discussions) were organised in the psychiatric facilities
for specific days to update MHPs on specific issues.
The participants explained:
Yes, almost every morning here we have our morning
tutorials or meetings where we have discussions
on various topics and we more or less teach each
other, we have CPDs where we have lecturers from
this country and sometimes from outside the country
also coming to update us on relevant information
so we always make sure that we update
ourselves with relevant information and current information
(Participant 7; psychiatrist; Facility 3).
Three MHPs (occupational therapist, psychiatrist and
clinical psychologist) elucidated that the various professional
associations for prescribers and allied health services
organised training and academic sessions for
MHPs to renew their certification and licence:
As part of our allied health association every year
you have to go for professional development programs
and accumulate a minimum of 12 points to
be able to renew your registration with the council;
yes so for that one throughout the year we go for
continuous professional development programs to
add on to our knowledge’ (Participant 10; Occupational
therapist; Facility 2).
The contextual factors related to technical competencies
and the unintended and intended mechanisms adopted by the psychiatric facilities influenced the outcomes of
mental health services. For example, some MHPs reported
that clinical competence, in-service training and
professional experience mostly helped them to deliver
quality mental health services to consumers. Three
RMHNs also mentioned that their clinical competence
and working within the multidisciplinary team helped
consumers to build confidence and trust in the care provided,
which in turn led to reducing in-patient bed days:
If the nurse is knowledgeable in how to ensure that
the client gets well, he/she puts the knowledge into
practice so that eventually the client doesn’t spend
so much time on the ward because spending so
much time on the ward means you are paying more,
so that if there is the need for a progress report and
maybe talking to a prescriber to ensure that the
right thing is done it helps the nurse and it also
helps the client in the long run. (Participant 21;
RMHN; Facility 2).
If you can communicate well with your clients and
your clients have confidence in you it will help them
to come back for treatment whenever the need
arises and it will also help the client to trust you because
they know that you know what you are about.
(Participant 16; RMHN; Facility 2).
Further, some MHPs (e.g. clinical psychologist, occupational
therapist and RMHN) related that the in-service
training had improved their knowledge and skills on
current treatment methods, and subsequently enabled
them to provide effective and efficient services to
consumers:
It informs us of current trends in treatment, it informs
in current trends in diagnosis and identifying
psychopathologies and then also basically making our
treatments as straightforward and as precise as possible.
(Participant 4; Clinical psychologist; Facility 3).
Although participants believed themselves to have adequate
clinical competence, they suggested several training
needs that could further equip them with skills and
practice to enable the provision of quality mental health
services. For example, most participants suggested that
they needed training in aggression and conflict management,
in using psychological tools and tests, infection
prevention, operating ECT, dealing with difficult family
caregivers and health promotion, as well as customer
care and communication skills:
We interact with these patients and we get patients
becoming aggressive, so training in aggression,
conflict management, training in the various therapies
that we have and the current therapist that are
being used elsewhere … we also need training in
customer care, communication skills … training in
even conflict management among staff, not just
about the patient we care for but among the staff.
(Participant 26; RMHN; Facility 1).
Moreover, participants described some challenges that
could compromise their competence and the use of
evidence-based treatment, including inadequate clinical
and allied health specialties in child and adolescent
mental health, forensics, geriatric psychiatry,
addiction, substance abuse, social work and psychological
services:
It would be good for us to have specific training in
the different branches of psychiatry, further training
in the different branches of psychiatry like forensic
psychiatry, geriatric psychiatry, child and adolescent,
addiction because we are more or less general psychiatrists
so it would be good if we got like further
training in these areas to make us even more efficient.
(Participant 7; psychiatrist; Facility 3).
Yes, for the subspecialties, child, we need psychiatrists,
we need forensics, we need substance addition
subspecialists so all those things we are specialists
providing the care but it could be better if we had
people who have fellowship training such specialty
skills but that’s our vision that in the next 5 years
we are hoping to develop all those subspecialty
trainings to get some of us to train in those fields as
well. (Participant 6; psychiatrist; Facility 3).
… training is in general adult psychiatry so when it
comes to such specialty services like child and adolescent
forensics we have the general training. Our
best-trained subspecialists are myself and my colleague
who recently joined me. I have a masters in
child and adolescent mental health which is not a
clinical fellowship but at least some focused training
in child and adolescent mental health and that’s
about the best we have, everybody else here has
general adult psychiatry so the geriatric service we
are rendering, the forensic course reports are all
based on general adult psychiatry knowledge that
we have so in that sense we are probably not as
resourced-rich as western countries. (Participant 6;
Psychiatrist; Facility 6).
Some MHPs also added that while there was no local
protocol to inform EBP, they adhered to international
standards in the clinical practice. Some MHPs further
recommended that there is an ongoing deliberation regarding
the need to get a local protocol:
We adapt international standards slightly but we
most of the time comply with international standards
and if we have to make a few adjustments concerning
local protocols cost usually has a role to play but
most of the time international standards evidencebased
medicine that is what we roll with and we keep
modifying our treatment protocols as and when we
need to. (Participant 7; Psychiatrist; Facility 3).
CMO configuration 2: therapeutic relationship building
ensures effective interaction
This context, mechanism and outcome configuration describes
the influence of therapeutic relationship building
on effective interaction between consumers and MHPs.
This context, mechanism and outcome was configured
using 29 inductive codes emerging from the analysis. As
per the context of the program theory, most participants
stated that they built therapeutic relationships through
psychoeducation, consultation, diagnosis and family
therapy sessions. The MHPs recounted that they involved
consumers in the care plan, built rapport with
them and ensured their dignity and respect. The analysis
revealed that the involvement of consumers in the care
plan was dependant on their educational background
and the nature of admission (e.g. voluntarily or involuntarily).
The MHPs believed that consumers who were
educated or admitted voluntarily mostly knew about the
condition and treatment options, and therefore, participated
actively in the care plan:
… patients especially the more educated patients
like to have interaction, like to be involved in the
decision making on the treatment … by all means
go online to be involved in the decision with the
side effects profile, we weigh the options. (Participant
30; psychiatrist; Facility 1).
We don’t only involve patient or clients but we involve
clients and their relatives to understand the
condition the patient is going through … before the
admission, we make this known to them … while
the patient is going through the treatment, we make
the relatives understand what the patient is going
through so that even the management of the patient
in our facility, they should also be able to better
manage the patient after discharge. (Participant 24;
Social worker; Facility 1)
… with the voluntary, because they have insight,
they admit that they are mentally ill and they need
help for coming here. So most voluntary cases are
difficult when you are giving them their medicine
because they understand that they have to take it.
(Participant 22; RMHN; Facility 1).
In contrast, some MHPs (e.g. psychiatrist and RMHN)
suggested that consumers with little or no education, including
those admitted involuntarily, participated less in
the care plan. This notwithstanding, some MHPs said
that irrespective of the background of consumers, they
made several attempts to involve them as much as possible,
as a fundamental human right to make them aware
of their choices:
Having said all that as a fundamental human right I
try to make sure that the patient is involved and is
aware of the choices and makes the choices themselves
to the best of their educational and you know
socioeconomic background. (Participant 6; psychiatrist;
Facility 3).
… we interview them to know why they are being
admitted – whether it is voluntary or involuntary.
Did they come by their own or they were forced. So
if there were brought here involuntary then we explain
to them why because some of the allegations
are threatening. For example, there is an allegation
that the consumer is threatening to kill someone
and he's saying that he will commit suicide … That
is involuntary admission. So we explain to them
why they have come to this place and why there is
the need to seek the services. (Participant 22;
RMHN; Facility 1).
The analysis highlighted that therapeutic relationship is
established through several mechanisms, according to
the program theory. For example, some participants
emphasised that the therapeutic relationship naturally
starts by building rapport with the consumer and family
caregivers; in particular, getting to know their condition
while instilling hope and realistic expectations. Most
participants found that the therapeutic relationship was
realised through recognition of several ethical principles,
which included respect for consumers’ privacy/confidentiality,
dignity, preferences, comfort and seeking informed
consent, as well as consumers’ backgrounds,
including religion, gender, age, belief systems and culture.
For example, some MHPs (e.g. RMHN) expressed
that they ensured these ethical principles were upheld,
to build the therapeutic relationship, to avoid being
physically attacked or injured by angered consumers and
to promote the quality of mental health services:
… every patient needs equal treatment, every patient
has an equal right, you know with the condition
they have a perception already, some hallucinate
and some have a delusion, so if you discriminate
and stigmatise and align with what the patient is
thinking, it may cause the patient to become aggressive
towards you the service provider. There is some
time that we have a shortage of staff, so if the patient
feels that you discriminate against him based
on religious or cultural identity, they can attack you
when you are alone in the ward. (Participant 26;
psychiatrist; Facility 1).
A clinical psychologist with three years’ experience described
that consumers having a Muslim background
placed significance on the superiority of men over females.
Therefore, MHPs could consider such cultural
and religious perceptions when providing services to
these consumers:
The participant described this issue as follows:
“ … a woman in a Muslim society does not have
much recognition … Its cultural specifics, women
are second to the man. So when a Muslim has a
psychological condition and they walk into the consulting
room and see a woman, their bias is certain.
It depends on you the therapist to be competent
enough to be able to overlook the fact that you are
being looked down up based on your gender. That
is very important, if not, you will not be able to give
your best because you may already have a perception
that he’s already looking down upon you. (Participant
27; Clinical Psychologist; Facility 1).
So when the client comes and he is not conversant
with females you can approach your colleague to
come and then talk to the client based on what the
client believes in, so you are not here to undermine
any religion, no we are to give our best of care so
that is what we do. (Participant 13; RMHN; Facility
2).
As per the program theory, the contextual factors of
evidence-based therapeutic process, together with the
mechanisms, helped to achieve some positive effects on
the outcomes of mental health services. For example,
most MHPs expressed that the therapeutic relationship,
as well as involvement in the consumer care plan, was
relevant to promoting the quality of mental health services
provided, particularly respecting consumers’ fundamental
human rights and dignity, and helping
consumers to be aware of their rights and choices. The
MHPs said that the involvement of consumers and family
caregivers helped to equip them to manage the condition,
especially when discharged from psychiatric
facilities. In particular, this involvement could enhance
consumers’ knowledge and understanding as well as successful
compliance with medications.
Further, three MHPs (clinical psychologist, occupational
therapist, art therapist) also noted that the therapeutic
relationship is very important to help consumers
feel accepted, adhere to their prescribed medications,
and involve them in the service:
Yes so therapeutic relationships start with rapport
building, first getting to know the condition then
you know how to approach the condition, so before
you approach a patient you should know a little
about what is going on, then you know the approach
you are going to use in handling or engaging
the patient and the family so you build rapport, let
them be an integral part of the whole care you just
don’t impose things on them because they also have
a say in what is going on so that together we all can
plan and give however it comes. (Participant 2; Occupational
therapist; Facility 3).
Two MHPs further expressed that several recommendations
had been made regarding the need to stop the
wearing of uniforms as mandatory among providers, to
avoid distinguishing consumers and providers on duty.
The MHPs expressed this as follows:
Some are even advocating that we shouldn’t wear
uniform in nursing so that they will see that there is
equality … you enter the ward and see that I am in
mufti and you are also in mufti, you will see that
these are the patient or the service providers … we
are all equal. So when you come and we are doing
recreational therapy, it is not just the patient who is
dancing or singing … you realise that all the nurses
are equally doing so. (Participant 26; RMHN; Facility
1).
Despite the increasing measures to build therapeutic alliances,
the analysis demonstrated a contextual challenge
related to barriers in consumer–provider communication,
particularly for consumers with hearing impairments
and those from linguistic minority backgrounds.
Professional–consumer communication barriers were
exacerbated by MPHs’ limited knowledge of sign language
when communicating with consumers with hearing
impairments. Most MHPs noted that while they did
not know sign language, there was no designated sign
language interpreter to support communication challenges
for consumers with hearing impairments:
With people with disability, it is a difficulty that we
are becoming more and more aware of … we do not
necessarily have an insider translator for people who come and use sign language. (Participant 5;
Psychiatrist; Facility 3).
No [no knowledge in sign language] so far we only
have one patient that has a problem like that, that is
how to sign but she even comes with her daughter
who interprets for us so we don’t have to. (Participant
21; RMHN; Facility 1).
These people are naturally by their disabilities not
able to access facilities like this. Especially when it
comes to psychological services, being deaf and
dumb and living in a society where the majority of
the people do not accept such population makes it
inaccessible. (Participant 27; Clinical Psychology;
Facility 1)
Six MHPs narrated that, despite these challenges, they
were able to use translators, mostly family caregivers
and teachers or instructors, to provide sign language
support. Participants occasionally relied on health professionals
from other units who knew about basic signing
to provide such support:
Sign language, for now, I think we have one person
on the ward that understands sign language, so
when the need arises we call that person to leave
his/her unit and come and help here. (Participant
16; RMHN; Facility 2)
I am not trained in sign language I could do a few
basic sign language but then not entirely everything
but as I said I also don’t work alone I work with
other professionals so if I would need to and get
some kind of communication barrier or something
then I have to rely on the other professionals. (Participant
8; Lay Art Therapist; Facility 3)
The analysis suggests that participants’ inability to provide
adequate sign language interpretation for consumers
with hearing impairments affected the quality of
mental health services provided to such consumers.
Also, an RMHN added that there are sometimes
professional-consumer communication barriers, particularly
for those who cannot communicate in the same
language with the providers. The providers sometimes
resort to help from other professionals who could communicate
effectively in their language, as exemplified in
the quote below:
Even sometimes language is a barrier … people
come and depending on the staff they meet if they
cannot speak their language, then it becomes a barrier.
So most of the time, you have to find a colleague
who can understand so that that person will
do the interpretation. Even in the consulting room,
we call someone to do the interpretation when the
need arises. (Participant 26; RMHN; Facility 1)
Discussion
This paper has answered the research question by identifying
two context, mechanism and outcome (CMO) configurations
that explain the evidence-based therapeutic
process in mental health services. This CMO configuration
includes that 1) technical competency stimulates
evidence-based therapeutic process in mental health services,
and 2) therapeutic alliance-building ensures effective
interaction. The context-mechanism-outcome
configurations identified from this analysis can facilitate
the transferability of insights to other settings and
context.
CMO configuration two (theme one): technical
competency stimulates evidence-based therapeutic
process in mental health services
EBP in mental health services has been identified as fundamental
to psychological growth and change [1, 2]. According
to Donabedian middle-range theory on quality
of care, the central tenet to evidence-based treatment is
building the technical competency of MHPs [16]. Anthony,
Ellison [2] have also concluded that the technical
competency of MHPs could support consumers’ goalsetting
and skills development. As a contextual factor in
the current program theory, MHPs were perceived to
have technical competencies, aligned with their specialist
training, practical skills, certification, as well as with the
regulatory bodies that monitored and supervised their
services. The technical competency of MHPs was specifically
achieved through continuous learning, in-service
training and professional development planning, as well
as being part of a multidisciplinary team. The program
theory further suggests that these technical competencies
could promote quality mental health services, particularly
improved knowledge and skills on current
treatment methods, ability to provide effective and efficient
services, and enhancing consumers’ confidence and
trust in the care. In particular, we identified that MHPs
needed training in specific skills to improve their technical
competence, in particular to provide holistic mental
health services to consumers. For example,
participants expressed the desire to gain skills in aggression
and conflict management, psychological tools, customer
care, health promotion, communication skills,
infection prevention and dealing with difficult family
caregivers. Although MHPs could obtain these skills as
part of their professional training, refresher training in these areas is important as part of continuing efforts to
provide holistic and integrated mental health services.
The findings of this study confirm previous studies in
developed (eg. UK) [13, 17] and developing countries,
which have recommended that in-service training and
professional development plan are significant attributes
for promoting the therapeutic relationship. For example
Bee, Brooks [17] reported in the UK that the relational
skills of professionals are the core facilitator of involving
consumers in the care, though there appear some deficiencies
in conventional staff training programs. More
so, past studies have concluded that MHPs need to develop
specific skills that promote the recovery journey of
consumers [2, 16, 40, 41]. For example, Anthony, Ellison
[2] recommended that MHPs providing mental health
services and rehabilitation counselling be encouraged to
gain skills in goal-setting as well as various therapies that
could promote recovery of consumers. Such MHPs are
encouraged to gain technical competencies in recovery
based interventions, including integrated services (e.g.
illness management, mindfulness-based interventions,
music-creation therapy and active leisure or recreational
activities), vocational rehabilitation [40, 42, 43], as well
as narrative photovoice and art-making services [44–46].
Given this, the study recommends that government
stakeholders should prioritise policy commitment and financial
incentives that promote in-service skills development
for MHPs, particularly in areas that promote
evidence-based therapeutic processes.
CMO configuration two (theme two): therapeutic
relationship building ensures effective interaction
Contemporary care philosophies have widely advocated
for consumer empowerment, contrary to the longstanding
socio-medical constructs of mental health services
[1, 2, 11]. Therapeutic relationship building constitutes
measures used to strengthen such empowerment and involvement.
Such a relationship could promote collaboration
between MHPs and consumers and their family
caregivers [1, 2, 47]. The study’s findings indicate that
MHPs build therapeutic relationships with consumers
and family caregivers through psychoeducation, consultation,
diagnosis and family therapy sessions. These
therapeutic relationships were used to involve consumers
in care planning and in promoting adherence to
ethical principles (e.g. respecting consumers’ privacy/
confidentiality, dignity, preferences, informed consent
and comfort, as well as, religious, gender, age and belief
systems). Consistent with previous findings [4, 6, 15],
the program theory demonstrated that the therapeutic
alliance equipped consumers in illness management; for
example, in adhering to medications. The therapeutic alliances
were also relevant in promoting the personal recovery
for consumers; thus, improving their knowledge
and understanding, creating a sense of acceptance, hope
and expectation, as well as active participation in mental
health services. In similar findings from Canada, Thibeault
[4] reported that a strategic approach such as being
mindful was used by professionals to achieve
therapeutic connection, and this helped consumers to
demonstrate openness to engagement, willingness to
share uncomfortable experiences, and visions of the
future.
Therapeutic relationship building appears to be a relevant
platform to promote the meaningful involvement of
consumers in care planning. However, several factors
could hinder or enable such therapeutic relationship
building. Consistent with previous studies [3, 11, 12],
our findings identified several individual as well as organisational
factors that influenced therapeutic relationship
building between consumers and MHPs. For
example, individual factors such as consumers’ educational
background affected the therapeutic relationship.
In particular, consumers with little or no education as
well as those from linguistic minority backgrounds were
not adequately involved in the care plan, indicating a
weak therapeutic relationship. Specifically, the findings
confirm a previous study, which concludes that several
consumer-related factors impeded the therapeutic relationship
in psychiatric wards in southern Iran [3]. In
previous findings, limited knowledge of consumers concerning
their condition was a key factor that hindered
effective therapeutic relationship with MHPs [3].
Moreover, the organisational factors that affected the
building of a therapeutic relationship between consumers
and MHPs were the philosophical approach to
care and lack of sign language interpreters (nurse–consumer
communication barrier). Consistent with previous
findings [14, 17], the philosophical approach to practices,
such as paternalistic and medical model traditions,
which promote involuntary admission of consumers, was
identified as a key hindrance to consumer participation
in care planning, leading to a limited therapeutic relationship.
For example, Bee, Brooks [17] concluded that
while the technical skills of MHPs could promote consumer
involvement, the philosophical tensions between
consumers and professional accountability could impede
therapeutic alliance-building in the UK secondary care
mental health services.
Also, as per the program theory, contextual factors
such as the lack of sign language interpreters in the
mental health systems created barriers in provider–consumer
communication, particularly for consumers with
hearing impairments. The lack of sign language interpreters
in providing communication support for consumers
with hearing impairments could affect the
quality of mental health services provided to them. This
finding confirms previous studies, which have identified
communication as a main contextual factor that could
enable or hinder therapeutic relationship building [3, 6,
8, 12]. For example, Belcher and Jones [8] have suggested
that provider–consumer communication involves
a two-way process; thus listening to consumers problems,
have a social conversation and further explaining
to them any procedures to be undertaken. Providing adequate
and effective verbal and non-verbal communication
is an important part of the provider–consumer
interaction. This position consumers to be equal partners
and further help them to achieve wellness [6]. In
addition, Haydon, van der Reit [12] have concluded that
while provider–consumer communication is vital to promoting
person-centred care, the use of humour in the
therapeutic relationship should not go unrecognised.
Some studies have also recommended that MHPs should
consider humour as a useful tool in the therapeutic relationship
[6, 13]. Given this, stakeholders are encouraged
to enforce and monitor policies and regulations that
support adequate provision of sign language interpreters
in all levels of mental health service provision.
Limitations
Several limitations need to be acknowledged. First, the
study was limited to responses from purposively selected
MHPs in three psychiatric facilities, without the perspectives
of mental health policy planners from government
ministries or from family caregivers. Despite this, the researchers
have enhanced the trustworthiness of data collection
and documentation according to the seven
criteria of Pawson and Tilley [39], which are transparency,
accuracy, purposivity, utility, propriety, accessibility
and specificity. The methodology informing this context,
mechanism and outcome configuration was collaboratively
developed by experts in mixed-methods research.
The research team first developed, confirmed and discussed
the methodology before implementing it. Moreover,
the thematic analysis process was subjected to
coding by consensus, member checking and a series of
debriefing sessions. The findings have been compared
with those of the international literature on quality mental
health services.
Conclusion
This study sought to use a realistic evaluation to explore
the evidence-based therapeutic process in mental health
services, from the perspective of MHPs. As per the program
theory, contextual factors such as the technical
competencies of MHPs stimulated the evidence-based
therapeutic process in mental health services. For example,
MHPs perceived that they had technical competencies,
attained through mechanisms such as
continuous learning, in-service training, professional development
planning and the multidisciplinary team
environment, as well as through clinical and academic
training sessions. As per the program theory, these contextual
factors and mechanisms were relevant to achieving
outcomes such as mental health service quality
through reduced hospitalisation days, improved knowledge
and skills in MHPs on current treatment methods,
as well as building the confidence level of consumers.
Contextually, the MHPs established therapeutic relationship
through psychoeducation, consultation, diagnosis
and family therapy sessions. These therapeutic alliance
were built through mechanisms such as involvement of
consumers in the care plan, considering consumers’ individual
factors (e.g. education background), philosophy
of mental health services (e.g. voluntarily or involuntarily
nature of admission), building rapport and adhering to
high ethical principles (e.g. dignity and respect, choices,
respecting consumers privacy/confidentiality, dignity,
preferences, informed consent, comfort as well as religious,
gender, age and belief systems). As per the program theory,
these contextual factors and mechanisms helped to equip
consumers in management of their conditions; enhanced
consumers’ knowledge and understanding, compliance with
medications, active participation in the care plan, feeling accepted,
having hope and expectations, and making the service
participatory. Despite these factors, there was a barrier
to consumer–provider communication, particularly for
consumers with hearing impairments and those from linguistic
minority backgrounds. This contextual challenge resulted
in communication barriers for this category of
consumers.
Implications for mental health policy and practice
The study’s findings have identified some contextual factors
and mechanisms that could enhance the evidencebased
therapeutic process in mental health service delivery.
The findings are relevant to informing policy, mental
health nursing practices and the education of MHPs
and students. As per the program theory, we recommend
that government stakeholders and policymakers
should prioritise the current mechanisms used to promote
technical competencies for MHPs. For example,
policies, periodic monitoring and adequate financial incentives
should be provided to support continuing inservice
training as well as professional development
planning for MHPs. Health service planners and administrators
are encouraged to prioritise ongoing clinical
and academic training sessions as well as collaborative
and multidisciplinary teamwork. Such measures could
enhance the technical competencies of mental health
professionals and subsequently improve the therapeutic
process in the services. As per the program theory, the
current mechanisms used to promote therapeutic relationships
between mental health professionals and consumers
and their family caregivers should be promoted and monitored periodically to ensure effective consumer
involvement and participation in the care plan. In particular,
mental health professionals should be encouraged
to adhere to the existing ethical principles as well
as promote a consumer-centred or strength-based approach
to therapeutic relationship building. These principles
should be integrated into the routine practice to
ensure that consumers are involved at all stages of the
service delivery. Such integration could help mental
health professionals to adhere to treatment guidelines.
These mechanisms could also help consumers to adhere
to treatment and medication, and further promote their
clinical and personal recovery journey.
Moreover, based on the contextual challenges – for
example, consumer–provider communication barriers –
government stakeholders and health services planners
are encouraged to prioritise legislation that supports the
provision of sign language interpreters to support consumers
with hearing impairments. Finally, the identified
program theory enhancing the evidence-based therapeutic
process should be prioritised in educational programs
for mental health professionals and students.