Human resources, one of the major inputs of health care
systems, refer to “the different kinds of clinical and nonclinical
staff responsible for public and individual health
intervention” [1]. The COVID-19 pandemic has necessitated
rapid, responsive planning of health services to
meet both growing and new types of demand. Such
changes have implications for human resources, including
their allocation to new roles (e.g. transfer from elective
to emergency care), and affected the experiences of
the healthcare workforce due to uncertainty about the
risks associated with an unknown virus, the implementation
of new protocols, changes in working conditions,
and the widespread need for personal protection
equipment (PPE) [2, 3]. For instance, one study conducted
in three Latin American countries, including
Colombia, reported that the majority of healthcare professionals
lacked access to resources such as PPE to respond
to COVID-19 [4].
Much of the literature covering the impact of COVID-
19 on healthcare human resources has covered the perspectives
and needs of health professionals providing
frontline care [3, 5–9]. However, the roles and experiences
of healthcare managers in coordinating organisational responses
to COVID-19 remain underexplored [10, 11].
Healthcare managers are not only affected by the pandemic;
they are key actors in the planning and implementation
of organisational activities that affect frontline
workers and other human resources. Using the narratives
of hospital managers, and representatives of scientific and
professional associations, the objective of this paper was
to describe and analyse the organisational actions relating
to hospitals in Bogotá, Colombia, that aimed to mitigate
the effects of COVID-19 on healthcare workers.
The findings presented cover the first six months of
the COVID-19 outbreak in Colombia (March-September
2020). Colombia was part of the ‘third wave’ of countries
that were hit by the virus after Asian and European nations.
This paper aims to contribute to the literature on
health system responses to COVID-19 in Latin American
contexts that faced the emergency once Asian and
European countries had documented some epidemiological
and clinical evidence about the virus and the disease.
Table 1 summarises key elements of Colombia’s
health system.
Methods
Study design and participants
This paper is derived from an ongoing qualitative study
that is analysing how the Colombian health system
responded to COVID-19 [15]. The methodology we
followed was a case study approach [16] in order to
understand the response to the emergency taking into
account the narratives of the actors who have been directly
involved in system planning to face the pandemic
and the implementation of health services for patients
with COVID-19. Case studies emphasise the relevance
of the particular context of the organisations and their
healthcare teams [17], in understanding the response to
the pandemic. The Consolidated criteria for reporting
qualitative studies (COREQ) checklist was used as a
guide to describe important domains concerning the research
team, study designs, analysis, and findings [18].
Procedures
Twenty-two semi-structured interviews were conducted
between June and September 2020 in Bogotá, Colombia.
Study participants, recruited through purposive and
snowball sampling, were governmental bodies (e.g. ministries,
institutes, and secretariats) (n = 2); hospitals (n =
10); and local scientific associations (n = 10) (Table 2).
Purposive sampling was used to ensure that a range of
organisations at different levels of the health system in
Bogotá were approached for interview (including governmental
and planning organisations, healthcare providers,
and intermediary organisations like scientific
associations). Snowball sampling involved asking interviewees
if they were able to provide contact details for
other interviewees that were relevant stakeholders in the
response of Bogotá’s health system to COVID-19. A key
characteristic of the sample is that we aimed to conduct
interviews with senior representatives (e.g. director level
or equivalent) of each organisation that participated in
the study. Interviewees were approached by email, telephone,
or instant messaging (WhatsApp). In total, 47
participants were approached for interview, representing
a participation rate of 46.8 per cent; the main reasons
for non-participation were the lack of a response to our
requests for an interview or repeated postponement of
interviews. No participants withdrew from the study
once they had participated in an interview.
Ethics approval for this research was received from the
institutional review board at Universidad de los Andes.
All participants provided written informed consent before
the interview. Audio files were saved using a unique
code, and all transcriptions were anonymised by replacing
participants’ names with codes. Given that data
collection took place while Bogotá was observing physical
distancing measures, all interviews were conducted
virtually using either telephone or virtual communication
platforms (typically Microsoft Teams). Audio or visual
recording were utilised to carry out the interviews.
Interviews lasted 55 min on average. The interviews
were informed by a topic guide that has been published
previously as a supplementary file alongside the study
protocol [15]; however, the questions were adapted to
each interviewee’s context [19]. The topic guide was not
piloted formally but it was reviewed by the team periodically
and aspects of its use were adapted (e.g. considering
additional verbal prompts to follow-up on the
questions posed). Interviews were conducted by female
researchers, NN (PhD), CS (MD), NB (MD), all of whom
were employed as trained researchers on this study (all
authors have previously undertaken formal research
training in qualitative research methods). Only the participants
and members of the research team were
present at the interviews. Transcripts were not returned
to study participants, nor did they provide feedback on
the interviews. Repeat interviews were not carried out.
Relationships with participants were not established
until commencement of the study. All interviewees were
issued with a participant information sheet which explained
the aim and objectives of the study and the
purpose of the interview with regard to fulfilling those
objectives. It was made clear to the interviewee that the
interviewer was conducting the interview as part of a nationally
funded research study and that fulfilling the
goals of this study was the driving interest for performing
the interview.
In addition to the interviews, the collection of legal
documents and guidelines (n = 10) informed our understanding
of the conditions in which health professionals
were situated before and after the emergency was declared
in Colombia.
Data analysis
All the interviews were transcribed verbatim and coded
using New NVivo software. An interdisciplinary research
team trained in public health, medical anthropology and
management collectively read the interviews and analysed
the data thematically. All interviews were dual
coded by more than one researcher. Themes were derived
from the dataset and developed using both
deductive and inductive analysis [20], meaning that our
approach was informed by the particular focus and objectives
of our study, while being open to novel ideas
discovered through the narratives expressed in the empirical
data. For example, we were surprised by the significant
impact of COVID-19 on the physical and
mental health of the workforce which was not a particular
theme in our study protocol [15]. Deductively, the
objectives of the wider study from which this paper is
derived - and an interview topic guide that was developed
response to those objectives [15] - informed the
types of themes explored in the interviews. Inductively,
we first analysed the dataset by exploring how each participant
described the particular experience of their organisation
facing COVID-19. Second, we coded for
organisational responses to COVID-19 drawing on ideas
and examples expressed in the interview data. Having
developed and analysed 32 codes on organisational responses
to COVID-19, we focused on data classified
under the code “human resources”. The coding tree related
to this code contained actions, challenges, enablers,
barriers and labour conditions of the health workforce
involved in responding to COVID-19. Quotations are
presented within the results to illustrate key ideas within
each theme; all quotations are identified by an anonymised
participant number.
Results
The results are divided into three major themes: adaptations
to retain human resources, addressing workers’
mental and physical health, and actions to maintain a
trained workforce. The relationship between the major
themes and the data relating to each theme, including
minor or subthemes, is presented in Table 3.
Retaining human resources
Managers stressed the organisational adaptations that
hospitals had to implement in order to retain their human
resources. These actions changed over the six
months that we explored in our study. In general, during
the early stage of the emergency (March to approximately
May 2020), some hospitals closed their outpatient
services in preparation to receive a high volume of
COVID-19 patients. Opposed to what was expected,
some hospitals reported having their facilities relatively
empty during the first months after the emergency was
declared in the country. Due to that, some of the regular
hospital services programmed such as elective surgery,
outpatient clinics, radiology among others were closed
temporarily, having a negative financial impact in the
hospitals.
Within a context of significant financial uncertainty,
managers had to implement several strategies to maintain
the hospital’s human resources while balancing this
with the organisation’s sustainability. Managers
highlighted the importance of protecting as many jobs as
possible not only as a way of caring for their workforce
but also because they foresaw all their trained and experienced
personnel were going to be needed at some
point during the emergency. Administrative personnel
within closed services were asked to take holidays, and
in one case, the hospital negotiated reduced staff salaries
temporarily to maintain their contracts:
“The clinic’s billing fell to 50 % in April. That is a
terrible drama. In other words, imagine yourself with
expenses of more than 150 %, and billing half (…)
One of the first things we did was to send people on
vacations. With some administrative staff and professionals
in outpatient services, we agreed to reduce
a percentage of their salary” (SH-B-015, hospital
manager).
Once hospitals began to experience a higher volume of
COVID-19 patients (approximately June 2020 onwards),
managers reported new challenges associated with human
resource availability. During this second stage of
the pandemic, the hospitals relied on all available
personnel and in some cases, they had to contract new
staff. Managers highlighted how workforce roles were
made flexible, so they were available to attend to the
emerging needs of the hospital. In some cases, managers
asked some staff to be reallocated to homecare services
and telemedicine, while in other cases, doctors and
nurses working from home were asked to attend the
hospital to care for non-COVID patients:
We had to transfer human resources from the emergency
centres that were underutilised, and strengthen
and grow in services that were being demanded massively
by the pandemic, such as home care services,
telephone counselling services, teleconsultation services,
which is what we call “extramural services”
(SH-A-005, hospital manager).
In summary, hospitals faced different challenges
throughout the first six months of the pandemic. During
the early stage of the emergency, hospitals faced a reduction
in activity as fewer patients attended hospital services.
This organisational context represented a barrier
to keep the workforce of hospitals in post and potentially
available in case they were needed. After the first two
months, and when most of the hospital services were
open, managers’ decisions were oriented to reallocating
their personnel and adjust their roles according to the
emerging needs of each hospital.
Addressing workers’ physical and mental health
The interviews highlighted health care managers’ concerns
about the impacts of COVID-19 on healthcare
workers’ physical and mental health. A recurrent theme
was the barrier faced by managers about the lack of PPE
for staff during the preparation and early phase of the
pandemic, and uncertainty over those responsible for its
acquisition. Managers had to invest in higher volumes of
PPE as never before. In the words of a manager, the organisation
had:
“the need for use and protection, with personal protection
elements, defined by the Ministry, aligned by
the Ministry, also led us to invest in human resources,
personal protection elements that were not
used before the pandemic were consumed [in such]
volumes, because they are specific personal protection
elements for a type of virus, which this was not
seen before” (SH-B-005, hospital manager).
Within hospitals, on-site drills and biosafety protocols
were implemented on the proper use of PPE to mitigate
the contagion that existed among health workers, which
worsened the lack of available health personnel and
make them more familiar with the routines for treating
patients safely:
“We started to do drills, patient drills, and that made
us a little less afraid of people. Drills of taking off and
putting on personal protection equipment, drills of intubation
with the equipment, taking the equipment to
that stressful part of the drills, I think that was very
useful for us.” (SH-B-017, Service coordinator).
In response to concerns about healthcare workers’
mental health (e.g. associated with fear and uncertainty),
a representative of a hospital described the use of inhouse
psychiatrists to accompany their emergency team.
Managers faced the barrier of health professionals afraid
of being rejected and stigmatised by society. Having professionals
working under these conditions was also presented
as a challenge for managers as it made it difficult
to motivate people to continue working. A hospital director
declared that:
It has been difficult to motivate the staff that feels
this way, so they continue working, they stay. This is
one of the key elements we have to prioritise in case
there is another pandemic, that there is always emotional
support and ways to support human resources’
wellbeing.” (SH-A-006, service coordinator).
An emergency care manager stated that the wellbeing
and mental health of healthcare workers in intensive
care units and emergency care was supported by inhouse
psychiatry and psychology services such as Balint
groups (regular meetings with a trained facilitator for
debriefing).
Other measures to foster and enable staff motivation
and wellbeing included establishing regular refreshment
breaks or ‘hydration situations’ and having daily prayers
which led to more emphasis on teamwork. A service coordinator
stated that wrap-up meetings among the
healthcare staff allowed the introduction of a new motto:
“We started to do each other’s watch, the vigilance of
the other and with the motto of ‘if you protect yourself,
you protect me’” (SH-B-017, service coordinator).
Interviewees expressed concerns about fear of contagion
and death, confinement measures, economic difficulties
and social factors that affected some members of
the general population’s attitudes toward healthcare
workers, generating stigma and violence towards health
personnel as potential sources of contagion. In the
words of an interviewee:
“the reality overwhelmed the surveys because the
reality, for example, in the attacks on doctors and
health personnel went from being a survey to threats
with flower crowns, with obituaries sent in a threatening
way to workplaces, with threatening calls,”
(SH-A-003, president).
Thus, a manager of a hospital implemented personalised
transportation within the city for healthcare staff to
guarantee their safety:
“we had to have buses as school routes because they
began to attack our people, we only had physical
aggression in one, but there began to be all those difficulties,
so we set up transport routes, shared transport”
(SH-B-011, hospital manager).
Technological tools were developed to follow up and
monitor working conditions and attacks on medical doctors.
Professional associations had a critical role in this
task for the surveillance of COVID-19 cases in the
healthcare workforce and their working conditions. At
the system-wide level, scientific associations advocated
provision of legal support for the healthcare staff, to incorporate
details for monitoring infected healthcare
workers into the official records and launched an app
for the surveillance of attacks on medical personnel. In
summary, the physical and mental health of healthcare
workers were pivotal topics that emerged in the interviews
with managers and scientific associations that
faced COVID-19.
Workforce knowledge, training, and availability
Participants stressed that the Colombian health system
had a shortage of specialists, general practitioners, and
nurses, among other healthcare workers. In addition to
this shortage of professionals, the COVID-19 pandemic
caused a high inflow of patients due to the fact that the
COVID-19 virus has a rapid speed of contagion, generating
a new challenge: the need to have more human
health resources available to care for these patients.
In response to this need, hospitals, governmental agencies,
and universities collaborated and developed agreements
to expand the availability of general practitioners
and specialists in the country by graduating both general
practitioners and residents early, increasing workforce
capacity:
“Last week in my program six but the country graduated
about 25 in total, even so, there are very few
intensivists, each intensive care unit should have an
intensivist, that is, there are not 7,000 intensivists in
Colombia. The availability increased to around
1,500 residents” (SH B 013, president).
Scientific associations, hospitals and academic entities
came together with the aim of improving knowledge and
skills for the management of patients in Intensive Care
Units (ICU). System-wide collaboration produced online
training, continuing education programs (e.g. managing
complex patients in ICU, mechanical ventilation, respiratory
therapy) to systematise clinical knowledge on managing
COVID-19 patients:
“We would not have been able to do all this without
the participation and commitment of scientific associations,
universities and providers, who joined an initiative of continuous training […]. We, therefore,
have some virtual courses that have a level of accompaniment
and tutoring when technology and the
time of the health team allow it.” (SH-A-023,
Manager).
Other academic institutions allowed open access to
online training libraries through a national repository
(500 to 600 free teaching activities from 55 medical
schools in the country), facilitating access to training
resources:
“from the point of view of human resource training
in health, so one of the first decisions we took was to
ask all the medical faculties in the country to collect
their virtual courses for us to make a national repository.”
(SH-B-013, President).
In summary, inter-organisational cooperation across
the health system underpinned human resource planning,
with the aim of enhancing existing health care
workers’ knowledge and skills and increasing the availability
of human resources to respond to the pandemic.
Discussion and conclusion
Since COVID-19 emerged, qualitative research on its
impact on the health workforce has focused predominantly
on health professionals’ experiences on the frontline
[3, 9, 11]. Research has focused attention on the
individual experiences of healthcare staff treating
COVID-19 patients in the early stages of the pandemic.
Coping and self-care strategies, feelings of growth under
pressure, and the simultaneous occurrence of positive
and negative emotions of the health care workforce have
been documented [21]. Psychological and/or psychiatric
care provided to professionals in hospitals or other
healthcare settings are highlighted as priorities for managers
[5, 22]. Authors such as Halcomb et al. [23] have
reported job security as a concern of the health
personnel during the pandemic. Little is known about
how the organisational context, including managerial
decision-making, affects the human resources available
to respond to COVID-19. For instance, the types of actions
taken by hospital managers to retain the workforce
[24] in the early stage of the pandemic, how those decisions
were made, and their implications for service
provision considering the financial restrictions faced by
hospitals [21].
This paper adds to this area of research by focusing on
how organisational level responses to COVID-19 affected
human resource planning in hospitals in Bogotá
from the perspective of managers within individual hospitals
and representatives of nursing and medical associations
at the health system level. The narratives of these
actors and how they describe their experiences developing
actions to protect the health workforce is scarce in
the literature at the timing of writing. Our study makes
three contributions to an organisational perspective on
COVID-19.
First, it describes processes of responsive planning of
health services by hospital managers to meet growing
and new types of demand for services. Shifting roles and
responsibilities of healthcare workers have been exposed
in the literature from the perspective of the impact on
frontline personnel [25, 26]. However, this study highlights
that COVID-19 also affected the roles of hospital
managers as they become more engaged in responsive
planning. Organisational interventions that emerged
from such planning had implications for human resources
by shaping the retention, protection, and continuing
training of healthcare workers. Hospital
managers’ emergent roles included allocating staff to
new roles and responsibilities (e.g. transfer from elective
to emergency care), mitigating uncertainty among staff
about the risks associated with an unknown virus, the
implementation of new protocols and technologies, making
changes in contractual working conditions, securing
the availability of PPE, and participating in changes to
health workers’ education [2, 3, 27, 28].
Second, it highlights the challenges faced, and actions
taken, by hospital managers to mitigate the effects of
responding to COVID-19 on the physical and mental
health of healthcare workers. Hospital managers needed
to address not only the physical and psychological safety
of the workplace, but also the potential risks to staff outside
the workplace linked to negative attitudes towards
healthcare professionals.
Third, the important role of inter-organisational relationships
at the local health system level for responding
to COVID-19 was identified. For instance, scientific associations
played a key role in the defence and surveillance
of healthcare staff wellbeing, and the types of
adaptations the managers undertook to respond. Staff
training within provider organisations in Bogotá was
supported by the development of partnerships between
hospitals, universities, and scientific associations which
produced system-wide online courses, continuing education
programs, and shared repositories of training
material.
With regard to existing research on health system
change, the findings show a pace and approach to
change not typically associated with the health care sector,
which is often characterised as slow to change and
subject to challenges concerning collaboration across
professional and organisational boundaries [29–31]. By
contrast, our findings suggested the importance of
system-level coordination in response to COVID-19 to
develop the capacity and training of the workforce and,
at the provider level, concern among hospital managers to
introduce organisational interventions to improve staff
wellbeing. Our findings support the concept that COVID-
19 gave “permission” to introduce innovations [32]; implementation
of workforce change was underpinned by the
coordinating role of system-wide actors and managerial
focus on working conditions on the front-line of care delivery.
The latter has been documented in qualitative research
worldwide [33]. However, given that COVID-19
has represented a pressing and severe threat to life, and
health system responses have been subject to intense public
and media scrutiny, it is not clear whether these aspects
of the motivating context of change associated with
COVID-19 will be sustained over time or generalisable to
other contexts of care.
Policy and practice implications
The novel nature and widespread impact of COVID-19
has presented challenges for human resource planning
and staff training. Presentation of the disease was uncertain
and management guidelines were not available
which made it necessary to develop training courses on
topics related to pathophysiology of the disease and critical
management of patients [28, 34]. In Europe [26],
Asia [25] and North America [27], health systems have
faced common challenges with regard to the process of
training undergraduate and graduate students in nursing
and medicine. Our findings in relation to Bogotá point
to the importance of facilitating inter-organisational collaborations
across the health system to strengthen human
resources. Clinical training in response to the
pandemic in Colombia was coordinated through joint
planning between hospitals, universities and professional
associations. To expand clinical capacity, a favourable
measure was the early graduation of trainee doctors
which was enabled by the Ministry of Education and implemented
by hospitals and universities. These interventions
correlate with similar measures that have been
implemented in other countries to continue health
workers’ academic training [27, 28].
Hospital managers played an important role in attending
to the psychological impact of COVID-19 on healthcare
workers, within and beyond the workplace. Existing
research by Tomlin and collaborators propose a model
about how health organisations and managers can respond
to mitigate the psychological impacts on healthcare
workers across the different stages of the pandemic
[35]. For example, the importance of flexible work approaches,
supportive leadership, regular debriefing, and
communicating a clear plan for assessment of and capacity
escalation of the response to further waves of
COVID-19. Additionally, this study highlights the value
of daily team-based activities to improve staff morale
and preparedness for responding to COVID-19, which
mitigates uncertainty around new workplace routines
(e.g. using PPE and handling COVID-19 patients) and
acknowledges the psychological impact on staff of
responding to COVID-19.
Study limitations
A limitation of this study was that interviewees gave their
insights at different times within a six-month period following
onset of the pandemic in Colombia. This might
contribute to varying and incommensurate views in relation
to changing conditions during the pandemic. Our results
distinguish between ‘earlier’ and ‘later’ organisational
responses to COVID-19 in Colombia concerning demand
for healthcare services (i.e. before and after the anticipated
“tsunami”, as one hospital manager put it). As the pandemic
is likely to affect health services for the foreseeable
future, researchers should specify the time period of their
research and aim to capture shifting organisational responses
to COVID-19 over time.
The study was undertaken in the upper-middle income
country of Colombia, relying on interviews with health
system actors in Bogotá, and may not be generalisable to
other contexts. However, given the international spread
of the pandemic, we have observed similarities between
the organisational response in Colombia and other
countries. For example, simulation training for staff has
also been used by other countries such as Canada in different
hospital settings with good results [36]. As in the
United States, modifying shifts, hours and hospital attendance
for residents and students was another of the
measures successfully adopted in Bogotá [24–26]. Further
research could examine, in other health system contexts,
the shifting roles of healthcare managers in
coordinating human resources, the influence of systemwide
organisations including scientific and professional
associations in supporting such coordination, and the
particular challenges and risks faced by healthcare managers
associated with the country context.
Conclusions
This study highlights the impact of COVID-19 on the
health care workforce, and the role of hospital managers
and system-level actors in supporting workforce capacity,
training and wellbeing in response to COVID-19
over the first six months of the pandemic in Bogotá,
Colombia. It highlights how COVID-19 encouraged a
pace and approach to health system change not typically
associated with the health care sector; further research is
needed to examine the sustainability of collaborative approaches
to change associated with COVID-19 identified
in this study (e.g. managerial engagement with front-line
challenges and system-level coordination of workforce
training and capacity building) and its relevance to other
care contexts.
