Background
Colorectal cancer ranks third in terms of cancer incidence
but second in terms of mortality worldwide [1].
Thus, there is an urgent need to improve every treatment
method for colorectal cancer, including surgical procedures.
Minimally invasive techniques have allowed
the use of laparoscopic approaches in the treatment of
patients with colorectal cancer based on similar or better
perioperative and oncologic outcomes [2, 3], and they
have been regarded as an alternative to conventional
open surgery [4–6]. However, in rectal cancer, a laparoscopic
approach is quite different and more difficult than
that in colon cancer. Procedures such as dissection deep
into the pelvis to accomplish total mesorectal excision
(TME) and to obtain a specimen with complete margins,
as well as a safe anastomosis, are technically challenging.
Surgeons are faced with challenges such as a narrow pelvic
cavity, anatomical complexity, and restricted surgical
view during laparoscopic surgery, although previous
studies reported that laparoscopic rectal cancer surgery
was feasible [7, 8]. However, laparoscopic rectal surgery
has been associated with limited dexterity with nonarticulating
unstable instruments, unnatural hand–eye coordination,
and flat 2-dimensional (2D) vision [9]. Thus,
the robotic system seems potentially suited for the surgical
treatment of rectal cancer because of its theoretical
advantages, and it has been introduced in many centres
since its first adoption in 2001 [10].
The current robotic surgical system provides advanced
technology and has advantages in rectal cancer resection.
Several previous studies documented that robotic surgery
is equivalent to laparoscopic surgery with respect to
perioperative and oncologic outcomes [11–13]. To date,
few reports with data have evaluated the short-term and
long-term outcomes of robotic surgery compared with
laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer. No sufficient data
from a large cohort are available to support the adoption
of the robotic system for rectal cancer instead of laparoscopic
surgery.
Our centre is one of the earliest hospitals to introduce
the da Vinci
® surgical system (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale,
CA, USA) in China. Here, We evaluate the oncologic
outcomes of rectal cancer by robotic surgery or
conventional laparoscopic surgery including the primary
endpoint of survival outcomes and the secondary endpoints
of the general conditions of the operation, postoperative
complications and pathological characteristics.
Methods
Patient selection
The prospectively collected records of all patients at
the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University
between March 2011 and December 2018 with histologically
proven rectal adenocarcinoma were retrospectively
reviewed. All patients were separated into two groups:
a robot group in which the patients received robotic
surgery, and a laparoscopy group in which the patients
received laparoscopic surgery. All patients included in
this study met the following criteria: (1) the disease was
histologically defined rectal adenocarcinoma; (2) all the
patients underwent TME; (3) tumour size was measurable,
and pathological evaluation records of pelvic lymph
nodes were complete; (4) the patient had no history of
malignancy in other organs; and (5) the clinicopathological
and follow-up data of the patients were complete. The
exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) age > 80 and < 18 y;
(2) other malignant tumours; (3) TNM stage at 0, IV; (4)
multivisceral resection; (5) palliative resection; (6) restaging
surgery; (7) abdominal and pelvic exploration only;
and (8) incomplete patient information.
Before surgery, all patients were informed of the
detailed characteristics of both robotic and laparoscopic
surgical procedures. After informed consent was
obtained, the patients decided their preferred approach.
The study protocol followed the Ethical Guidelines of the
1975 Declaration of Helsinki, revised in 2000. All related
procedures were performed with the approval of the
Internal Review and the Ethics Boards of the First Affiliated
Hospital, Nanchang University.
Data collection
The following clinical and demographic information was
collected: age, sex, body mass index (BMI), carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA), American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) class, tumour location from the anal
verge, preoperative chemoradiotherapy (CRT), and clinical
T stage. The intraoperative and perioperative conditions
(e.g., operation time, intraoperative bleeding, and
complications), postoperative complications (e.g., anastomotic
leakage, bleeding, wound problems, urinary
retention, and the development of an ileus) and survival
time were also collected. The baseline characteristics of
patients at enrolment were assessed within 24 h before
robotic or laparoscopic surgery.
Outcome evaluation
The primary endpoint for this study was survival outcomes,
including overall survival (OS) and disease-free
survival (DFS). The secondary endpoints were the general
conditions of operation, postoperative complications
and pathologic characteristics. The general conditions
of the operation included operation time, bleeding volume,
time to 1st gas passing and length of hospital stay.
The postoperative complications associated with robotic
and laparoscopic surgery included short- and long-term
complications, which were defined as complications
that occurred less than 30 days or more than 30 days
after the operation, respectively [14]. The recorded longterm
complications were ileus, urinary retention, adhesions,
incisional hernias, anastomotic strictures and
rectovaginal/rectovesical fistulas. The pathologic characteristics
included TNM stage, differentiation grade,
lymph nodes retrieved, lymphovascular invasion and circumferential
resection margin (CRM) involvement.
Patients were followed up with for 5 years or until Dec
31, 2018. Operative death was defined as death within
30 days of the operation or any time after the operation if
the patient did not leave the hospital alive.
Surgical procedures
In our retrospective study, patients who underwent elective
laparoscopic or robotic surgery for stages I–III rectal
cancer between March 2011 and December 2018 were
included. Patients who underwent palliative surgery,
intersphincteric resection, abdominoperineal resection,
or lateral pelvic lymph node dissection or patients
who had hereditary colorectal cancer or distant metastasis
were excluded. Since the robotic system was introduced
in March 2016, selection of the surgical approach
was determined after discussion with patients about the
differences and higher costs of robotic surgery. Before
March 2016, patients were chosen to undergo laparoscopic
surgery. All procedures, including robotic surgery
using the da Vinci
® surgical system and laparoscopic
surgery, were performed or supervised by a single surgeon
(T-Y Li). Briefly, the same principle and steps were
applied in both the laparoscopic and robotic surgery
procedures: ligature of inferior mesenteric blood vessels
close to the origin, mobilization of the sigmoid colon
and rectum using sharp dissection, complete splenic
flexure takedown for mid- and low rectal cancer, clamping
below the tumour, and washing of the rectal stump
with 10% povidone-iodine before rectal transection.
End-to-end anastomosis was then performed by either
mechanical circular stapling or manual anastomosis. The
anastomosis was tested with air inflation. Abdominoperineal
excision was performed when the levator ani muscle
had been invaded by the tumour. In some patients, a
temporary ileostomy was conducted to protect the anastomosis,
with digestive tract reconstruction performed
3 months later.
Statistical analysis
In the univariate statistical analyses, the χ2 test or Fisher’s
exact test was used for categorical variables. Student’s
t-test and the Mann–Whitney U test were used for continuous
variables. The results are presented as the frequency
(percentage), mean ± standard deviation (SD)
or median (interquartile range). Survival curves were
obtained by the Kaplan–Meier method, and the OS and
DFS rates were compared by the log-rank test. The Cox
proportional hazard regression model was used to identify
factors that were independently associated with OS
and DFS. The candidate covariates for univariate analysis
included age, sex, BMI, CEA, ASA class, tumour location,
robotic surgery, preoperative CRT, previous abdominal
surgery, lymph nodes retrieved, proximal resection margin
(PRM), distal resection margin (DRM), TNM stage,
differentiation grade, circumferential resection margin
(CRM), and lymphovascular invasion. Only factors with a
P < 0.05 in the univariate analysis could be included in the
multivariate analysis using a stepwise method, and variables
with a P < 0.05 and hazard ratio (HR) > 20% were kept
in the final model. A two-tailed P < 0.05 was considered
significant. All statistical analyses were performed using
the SPSS 22 software package (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois,
USA).
Results
Patients and clinical characteristics in the robot
and laparoscopy groups
A total of 629 patients were initially screened, and
534 patients with rectal adenocarcinoma were finally
enrolled in this study; 314 patients were in the robot
group, and 220 patients were in the laparoscopy group
(Fig. 1). The clinical characteristics of the two groups of
patients are presented in Table 1. A similar sex distribution
was observed in the robot and laparoscopy groups,
and most patients were men. Age, BMI, preoperative
serum CEA, ASA class and previous abdominal surgery
were not significantly different between the two groups.
Tumour location from the anal verge was significantly
shorter in the robot group than in the laparoscopy group
(5.9 ± 2.6 cm vs. 8.5 ± 3.6 cm, P < 0.001).
Survival analyses and prognostic factors
The OS rates at years 1, 3 and 5 in the robot and laparoscopy
groups were 96.6%, 88.7%, and 87.7% vs. 96.7%,
88.1%, and 78.4%, respectively (P = 0.925, Fig. 2A). The
DFS at years 1, 3 and 5 in the robot and laparoscopy
groups was 98.6%, 80.2-, and 73.5% vs. 96.2-, 87.2-, and
81.1% (P = 0.451, Fig. 2B). No significant differences
were observed between the two groups. In the univariate
analysis, the factors associated with 5-year OS and DFS
were age, CEA, tumour location, TNM stage, differentiation
grade and lymphovascular invasion (Table 2). After
adjusting for independent prognostic variables, TNM
stage and differentiation grade were independent prognostic
indicators for 5-year OS and DFS [HR (CI): 1.622
(1.068–2.464) and 1.919 (1.241–2.969) for OS and 1.664
(1.093–2.535) and 1.660 (1.116–2.469) for DFS, P < 0.05,
respectively, Table 2]. The surgical approach (robot or laparoscopy)
was not associated with significantly higher OS
or DFS (P = 0.925 and 0.451, respectively, Table 2). These
findings indicated that robotic surgery did not improve
long-term survival compared with laparoscopic surgery.
The general conditions of the operation
The general conditions of the operation are listed in
Table 3. The operation time was significantly decreased
in the robot group compared with the laparoscopy
group (163.5 ± 40.9 vs. 190.5 ± 51.9 min, P < 0.001). The
time to 1st gas passing [2 (1) vs. 3 (1) d] and length of
hospital stay [7 (2) vs. 8 (3) d] were significantly shorter
in patients with robotic surgery than in those receiving
laparoscopy surgery (P < 0.01, respectively). No significant
differences were observed with regard to intraoperative
bleeding volume or time to 1st soft diet or
bowel movement.
Postoperative complications
The type and proportion of postoperative complications
associated with surgical treatment are described
in Table 4. Postoperative complications occurred in 50
of the 314 patients in the robot group, which was significantly
lower than that in the laparoscopy group,
with 71 of the 220 patients (15.9% vs. 32.3%; P < 0.001).
No significant differences were observed between the
two groups with respect to the occurrence of short- and
long-term complications, including anastomotic leakage,
anastomotic bleeding, wound problems, ileus, intraabdominal
abscesses, anaemia, ascites, adhesions, incisional
hernias, anastomotic strictures and rectovaginal/
rectovesical fistulas (P > 0.05, respectively). However, the
occurrence of short- and long-term urinary retention
in the robot group was significantly lower than that in
the laparoscopy group (1.9% vs. 7.3% and 0.6% vs. 4.1%
P < 0.05, respectively). The above findings indicated that
robotic surgery was associated with a decreased prevalence
of postoperative complications.
Postoperative pathological assessment
The postoperative pathological characteristics and outcomes
of patients in the robotic group were significantly
different from those in the laparoscopy group (Table 5).
TNM stages II and III were more frequently observed in
the robot group than in the laparoscopy group (94.3% vs.
83.2%, P < 0.001). There was no significant difference with
respect to lymph nodes retrieved between the two groups
[13 (7) vs. 13 (6.3), P = 0.389]. The prevalence of lymphovascular
invasion and CRM involvement also showed no
significant difference between the two groups (23.9% vs.
20.0% and 1.3% vs. 0, P > 0.05, respectively).
Discussion
In this retrospective comparative cohort study, we found
no beneficial survival effect of robotic surgery on patients
with rectal cancer compared to those receiving laparoscopic
surgery. However, a decreased postoperative complications,
operating time, hospital stay and time to 1st
gas passing were observed, which revealed a short-term
advantages of robotic surgery.
In addition, we found that patients who underwent
robotic surgery had a lower tumour location and
advanced clinical stage than those who underwent laparoscopic
surgery. Operation on these patients especially
those with a lower tumour location usually means a more
challenging procedure and requires higher skills with
surgical techniques than for those without; thus, indicating
robotic surgery may have advantages in rectal surgery
on more sophisticated cases because of its better visualization
and the ability to perform a finer and more dexterous
pelvic dissection within a narrow pelvic cavity [15].
Importantly, the time to 1st gas passing and 1st soft diet
and the length of hospital stay were significantly shorter
in the robot group, indicating that robotic surgery might
enhance recovery after surgery. No significant difference
was observed with respect to most postoperative shortor
long-term complications, while the incidence of urinary
retention was significantly decreased in patients
who underwent robotic surgery compared to those who
underwent laparoscopic surgery, which also indicated the
superiority of robotic surgery to laparoscopy for easier
identification of the inferior hypogastric plexus.
The postoperative pathological parameters that can
measure the quality of rectal surgery are CRM positivity
and the number of harvested lymph nodes of the
resected specimen; both of which were not significantly
different between the robotic and laparoscopic surgical
approaches. The CRM involvement rate in this study was
1.3% vs. 0% between the robot and laparoscopy groups,
which was comparable with previous studies (0–16%) [5,
7, 12, 16]. In the robot group, there were a total of four
patients (4/314) with positive CRMs, and local recurrence
occurred in two patients with positive CRMs.
However, in the laparoscopy group, there were no cases
with positive CRM, and local recurrence occurred in 12
cases (12/224) with negative CRM. A positive CRM did
not seem to be translated to local recurrence. That CRM
was not a prognostic factor for predicting survival by
multivariate analysis, which could support this finding.
Cumulative OS and DFS, the gold-standard prognosticators,
indicate long-term oncologic outcomes and
reflect the superiority of surgical techniques in cancer
resection. Few previous studies have shown the cumulative
OS and DFS between the robot and laparoscopy
groups. Baek et al. [17] reported that the 3-year OS and
DFS were 96.2% and 73.7%, respectively, for patients with
stages I-III rectal cancer who underwent robotic surgery
in a 1-arm case series study. Pigazzi et al. [18] presented
similar 3-year oncologic results of robotic rectal cancer
surgery with data from three different centres. Baek
et al. [19] also compared the short- and long-term outcomes
between robotic and laparoscopic ultralow anterior
resection and coloanal anastomosis and reported no
difference in local recurrence, 3-year OS, or DFS between
the two groups. Park et al. [12] reported that the 5-year
OS was 92.8% in robotic surgery and 93.5% in laparoscopic
surgical procedures, while the 5-year DFS was
81.9% and 78.7%, respectively. Here, we found that the
5-year OS and DFS were 78.4% and 81.1%, respectively, in
patients receiving robotic surgery.
Robotic surgery requires that a surgeon take a long
time to learn to adapt to new surgical techniques, such as
controlling consoles, manipulating new instruments, and
cooperation with the surgical team [20–22]. Our team
has adequate experience in robotic surgery, with nearly
200 cases of robotic surgery on rectal cancer per year,
which is why our study demonstrated that the operation
time and intraoperative bleeding were both significantly
less than those of laparoscopy. The high cost of robotic
surgery is also a problem, which makes it unable to be
widely recommended for patients. Nevertheless, the
robotic system is continuously being improved, and more
advanced technologies will be developed, such as a novel
Senhance
® robotic system (TransEnterix Surgical Inc.,
Morrisville, NC, USA), which has been proven to be feasible
and safe in general surgery, gynaecology, and urology
[23]. We suppose that the cost of robotic systems will
become increasingly acceptable.
Conclusion
Robotic surgery was not associated with improved survival
compared to laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer,
however, robotic surgery is a safe and feasible surgical
procedure, especially for some sophisticated cases with
lower tumour locations. Further prospective randomized
trials are needed to clarify these findings.