[3, 4], is associated with high case fatality rate and leads
to substantial increase in the demand for hospital beds
and shortage of medical equipment. Up to January 2021,
the hospital and intensive care unit (ICU) occupancy and
the new admission due to COVID-19 increased in several
European countries, reaching 82% of the peak ICU
occupancy observed during the pandemic [5]. Descriptive
studies on the natural course of COVID-19 have
revealed that the disease progression occurs typically
at an early stage of the illness, usually within 7–14 days
after the onset of symptoms [6, 7] with or without acute
severe respiratory distress syndrome [8]. Given the lack
of standardized treatments for patients with COVID-19,
the identification of patients at higher risk of short-term
complications is of utmost importance to ensure the best
possible clinical care and to optimise resource allocation.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, several prognostic
predictive models combining various clinical and laboratory
parameters have been developed to estimate risk
of patients experiencing poor outcomes. A systematic
review of ten prognostic models observed that the most
reported predictors of disease progression and mortality
were age, sex, C-reactive protein (CRP), lactic dehydrogenase
(LDH) and lymphocyte count [9].
All the published models were computed using the
trend of clinical and laboratory information starting from
the admission day onward [10–12], with the result that
the data was related to a wide range of disease length as
opposed to specific time points. To the best of our knowledge,
no prognostic models have been developed taking
into account a homogeneous time point across patients,
such as the onset of symptoms, for the assessment of disease
progression.
This study aims at identifying a panel of clinical and
laboratory parameters that could support the prediction
of disease progression based on symptoms onset in hospitalized
patients with COVID-19.
Methods
Study design and participants
This is a prospective cohort study. All adult patients
(aged ≥ 18 years) with microbiologically confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection admitted from 1st March to 31st
May, 2020 at the University Hospital of Verona were prospectively
followed during the hospital stay and included
in the COVID 19-VR registry (registered on ClinicalTrials.
gov, 18/05/2020, Number: NCT04497194). The study
protocol is performed in accordance with the relevant
guidelines. The study was approved by the hospital Institutional
Review Board (“Comitato etico per la sperimentazione
clinica delle province di Verona e Rovigo”,
2577CESC). A written informed consent for study participation
was obtained from the patients or from the legal
guardian on enrolment. Infection with SARS-CoV-2 was
microbiologically defined by a positive real-time reversetranscriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay
from nasopharyngeal swab.
Data collection
Patient-level demographic (age, sex, ethnicity), chronic
underlying diseases (hypertension and/or coronary
artery disease, diabetes, dyslipidaemia, pulmonary disease
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, active
tuberculosis, asthma or obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome),
chronic kidney disease, neoplastic disease, thyroid
disorders, neurological/psychiatric disorders, liver
diseases, obesity (body mass index higher than 30), and
clinical parameters (body temperature, respiratory rate,
blood pressure, heart rate, peripheral oxygen saturation)
were gathered at study inclusion and entered into a predefined
case report form. Laboratory parameters, including
lymphocytes (reference range: 120–400 109/
L) and
neutrophils (reference range: 180–800 109/
L) count, LDH
(reference range: 135–214 U/L), CRP (reference range:
< 5 mg/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST, reference
range: 5–45 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT, reference
range: 5–45 U/L)), creatine kinase (CK, reference
range: 30–200 U/L) were extracted from routine blood
testing at fixed time points: at hospital admission, day-5
(± 1) and day-10 (± 1) from onset of symptoms and in
case of transfer to ICU/sub-intensive unit, discharge, and
death.
Outcomes
COVID-19 progression was defined as PaO2/
FiO2
ratio < 200 and/or transfer to ICU and/or in-hospital
death occurring by day-11 after symptoms onset.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics included means with standard
deviations (SD) and frequency analyses (percentages)
for categorical variables at day 5 after onset of symptoms.
T-test for independent samples, χ2 test, or Fisher’s
test were applied to compare differences between
patients with or without disease progression. Logistic
regression was performed to evaluate univariate and
multivariate associations with the outcome. Results
were presented as odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
interval (95% CI). A p-value less than 0.05 was deemed
as statistically significant. In order to enter the model
as categorical variable, the cut-off of each laboratory
parameter was set at the best point of sensitivity and
specificity identified through the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve. The selected parameters
with correspondent cut-offs were: CRP > 80 mg/L, neutrophil
lymphocyte ratio (NLR) > 4.5, LDH > 250 U/L,
CK > 80 U/L, and ALT > 40 U/L. Candidate predictors
to enter the logistic multivariate regression were variables
with p < 0.05 in univariate analysis. Variables independently
associated with the outcome at multivariate
analysis together with those deemed as critically relevant
in accordance with literature evidence and clinical
experience were selected to fit the prediction model.
The performance of the model was assessed by calculating
the ROC curves and the corresponding area under
the curve (AUC) values. The Hosmer–Lemeshow test
was applied to assess the goodness-of-fit. All statistical
analyses were carried out using International Business
Machines (IBM) Statistical Package for the Social
Sciences (SPSS) 21 (IBM Corporation: Armonk, NY,
10504).
Role of the funding source
The funders of the study did not have any role in data
collection and in study design, data analysis, data interpretation,
or writing of the report. The corresponding
author had full access to all data in the study and
had final responsibility for the decision to submit for
publication.
Results
A total of 235 patients with COVID-19 were prospectively
included in the cohort. Demographic and clinical
characteristics of patients enrolled in the study are displayed
in Table 1. The majority of patients were male
(148, 63%) and the mean age was 71 (SD 15.9). One hundred
and ninety patients (81%) suffered from at least one
underlying illness, most frequently cardiovascular disease
(47%), neurological/psychiatric disorders (35%), and
diabetes (21%).
The majority of patients had fever prior to admission
(193, 82%). Cough and dyspnoea were reported in 106
(45%) and 87 (37%) cases, respectively. The mean time
from onset of symptoms and admission to hospital was
3.6 days (SD 3.2), while mean length of hospital stay was
13.2 days (SD 11.5). Patients received antiviral therapy
according to national and regional recommendations (see
Table 1). Steroids (methylprednisolone or dexamethasone),
if prescribed, were administered for at least 5 days.
In 26 (11%) cases non-invasive ventilation was required,
while 30 (13%) patients underwent invasive mechanical
ventilation.
Eighty-eight (37%) patients experienced poor outcome,
e.g. PaO2/
FiO2 ratio < 200 (37 patients, 42%), transfer
to ICU (30 patients, 34%), and death (47 patients, 53%)
by day-11 after symptoms onset. At univariate analysis
(Table 1), patients with poor outcome were more likely to
be older than 65 years (OR 2.02; 95% CI 1.12–3.65 years,
p = 0.020), to suffer from cardiovascular disease (OR
2.85; 95% CI 1.55–5.23, p = 0.001), and to have experienced
dyspnoea during the 5 days prior to admission (OR
2.83; 95% CI 1.63–4.92, p < 0.000). Blood test performed
by day-5 of symptoms onset showed that mean values of
CRP, NLR, LDH and CK were significantly higher compared
with patients not experiencing progression of
COVID-19 (Fig. 1). After applying the cut-offs set at the
best point of sensitivity and specificity identified through
the ROC curve, an association between disease progression
and the above mentioned variables showing values
above the cut-offs was observed (CRP: OR 7.38; 95% CI
3.83–14.23, p < 0.000; NLR: OR 3.43; 95% CI 1.77–6.64,
p < 0.000; LDH: OR 6.70; 95% CI 2.14–21.04, p = 0.001;
and CK: OR 3.83; 95% CI 1.56–9.39, p = 0.003) (Table 2).
Multivariate logistic regression showed that at day
5 presence of cardiovascular disease (OR 2.29; CI 95%
1.12–4.68; p = 0.023), dyspnoea (OR 2.40; 95% CI 1.19–
4.84; p = 0.015) and at least three abnormal laboratory
findings among CRP > 80 U/L, ALT > 40 U/L, NLR > 4.5,
LDH > 250 U/L, and CK > 80 U/L (OR 2.80; 95% CI
1.35–5.81; p = 0.006) were independently associated with
COVID-19 progression (Table 3). A model combining
the above mentioned variables with age > 65 years old and
male sex showed an AUC of 0.73 (95% CI 0.66–0.81) for goodness of fit test did not reach statistical significance
(p = 0.427), indicating a good match of predicted risk
over observed risk. The ROC curve for COVID-19 progression
is displayed in Fig. 2.
Discussion
This study proposes an easy-to-use panel of five clinical
and laboratory parameters to aid in the prediction of
disease progression in COVID-19 patients. The model
including age > 65 years, male sex, cardiovascular disease,
dyspnoea and at least three abnormal blood parameters
among CRP (> 80 U/L), ALT (> 40 U/L), NLR (> 4.5),
LDH (> 250 U/L), and CK (> 80 U/L) shows fair discrimination
ability (AUC 0.73). To our knowledge, this is the
first study assessing predictors of disease progression at
specific time-points starting from the onset of COVID-
19 symptoms.
Since the start of the pandemic, a wide range of predictive
models and scores has been published with the
common goal of informing clinical decision making and
optimising resource allocation. An observational cohort
of 1157 patients acutely admitted to two London hospitals
analysed several demographics, clinical, laboratory
and imaging factors likely to predict mortality, highlighting
a correlation of male sex, older age, hypertension,
chronic lung diseases and higher levels of lymphocytes,
CRP and creatinine, among the others, with critical care
admission and/or death [7]. A systematic review of ten
prognostic models revealed that the most reported predictors
of disease progression and mortality were age,
sex, CRP, LDH and lymphocyte count [9]. Recently, the
predictive value of NLR measured at hospital admission
has been assessed in a prospective cohort, showing a high
value in predicting disease deterioration, shock and death
(all the areas under the curve > 0.80) [13]. The vast majority
of these models assessed the predictors by considering
the hospital admission as baseline time-point [10–13],
and share therefore the common drawback of including
patients at varying stages of the disease.
In our cohort, more than one-third (37%) of patients
experienced disease progression by day-11 of symptoms
onset. Descriptive studies on clinical course of COVID-
19 revealed that the median time from onset of illness to
acute respiratory distress syndrome and to ICU admission
was 8–12 days and 9.5–12 days, respectively [14].
These findings would seem to indicate that clinical deterioration
with the need of higher level of care may occur
at a very early stage of the disease and suggest that setting
“onset of symptoms” as baseline time-point leads to
inclusion of patients with homogeneous disease length.
Older age and the presence of cardiovascular comorbidities
were associated with a higher risk of unfavourable
outcome, as highlighted by other studies [7, 15,
16]. Comorbidities, secondary bacterial infections, and
altered cellular and humoral immune functions are
more common in the elderly, thus increasing the risk of
developing severe illness. A meta-analysis of 51 studies
including a total of over 48,000 patients with confirmed
COVID-19 infection showed that fatal outcomes with
COVID-19 infection were strongly associated with diabetes,
hypertension and cardiovascular diseases across
all age groups, thus suggesting that the risk of poor outcome
associated with cardiovascular diseases may be not
affected by age [17]. In the present cohort, no statistically
significant differences between male and female were
observed with regards to the outcome, while in most of
the studies the severity and mortality of COVID-19 have
been reported to be higher in males than in females.
Sex-related differences in immune system responses
to pathogens has been observed, with female eliciting
higher immune responses. Furthermore, RNA clearance
has been reported to be delayed in male patients with
COVID-19 [18].
Laboratory assessment on day-5 of symptoms onset
showed several parameters with significant mean differences
between patients with or without poor outcome.
In particular, poor outcome was associated with
higher NLR, CRP, LDH, and CK, according with several
studies [12, 19]. Lymphopenia and elevated neutrophil
count suggest an alteration of lymphocyte function and
are associated with elevated secretion of IL-6 and TNFalpha,
since these inflammatory markers contribute to
lymphocyte apoptosis as well as decreased proliferation
of lymphocytes [20]. Several mechanisms are responsible
of this alteration, including direct infection of the lymphocytes
with SARS-CoV-2 virus, causing lymphocyte
death or dysfunction. Furthermore, the pro-inflammatory
state with increased cytokines is inversely correlated
with the induction of granulopoiesis (resulting in neutrophilia)
and suppressed lymphopoiesis in the bone marrow
of patients with SARS‐CoV infection [21].
This inflammatory state, when persistent and uncontrolled,
may lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome
and rapid deterioration of the clinical conditions. IL-6
upregulates hepatic CRP production, thus suggesting the
plausibility of the clinical use of this inflammatory biomarker
as a prognosis predictor for COVID-19 patients
[9]. Similarly, LDH blood level increases in case of cell
damage and is a marker of various inflammatory states.
A systematic review and meta-analysis of 28 studies
reporting LDH levels in severe vs. non-sever COVID-
19 patients confirmed that LDH level can be used as a
COVID-19 severity marker and is a predictor of survival
[22] CK, a marker of muscle damage, has been associated
with a more severe COVID-19. Currently, it remains
unclear whether increased levels of CK in COVID-
19 patients is due to a virus‐triggered inflammatory
response or direct muscle toxicity [23]. Elevation of liver
transaminases during SARS-CoV-2 infection has been
frequently reported. Possible pathophysiology mechanisms
include direct effect of the virus, liver injury mediated
by uncontrolled immune response drug toxicity and
ischemic hepatitis due to multiorgan dysfunction [24].
Based on these evidences and on our findings, patients
affected by COVID-19 may benefit from blood testing
including inflammation markers, complete blood count
and transaminases within the 1st week after symptoms
onset to evaluate the risk of developing a life-threatening
disease.
In a recent work, a large group of Italian experts
was invited to complete an online survey through the
PAPRIKA (Potentially All Pairwise RanKings of all possible
Alternatives) method [25] with the aim of determining
the weights of several criteria for prioritizing
COVID-19 patients for hospitalization [26]. Among a list
of criteria, including age, body mass index, comorbidities,
findings at chest X-ray, CRP, and duration of symptoms
among others, the highest weights were attributed
to PaO2
and peripheral oxygen saturation, denoting the
well-known central role of respiratory findings in the
assessment of the risk of rapid deterioration of COVID-
19 patients. These findings, alongside those outlined in
our study, suggest that in addition to considering symptoms
onset and duration, the typology of symptoms
should also be taken into account in an early risk assessment
of COVID-19 deterioration.
This study has several limitations. First, the sample size
limits the accuracy of the findings. Second, the study was
performed in a single centre, hampering the generalizability
and the applicability of the results to other settings.
Third, the model did not undergo external validation and
might be at risk of overfitting. However, we tried to mitigate
overfitting by decreasing the number of predictors.
The results from this study highlight the importance of
relying on homogeneous populations with same length
of disease in order to build the best possible prediction
model for disease progression in COVID-19 patients and
allow optimal treatment and resource allocation.
This study shows how an easy-to-use panel of five laboratory
and clinical parameters applied in patients with
COVID-19 at day-5 of symptoms onset can predict disease
progression with fair discriminatory power. It further
suggests that the onset of symptoms might represent
a useful and reliable baseline time-point for developing
prognostic models. The assessment of few variables
at the right time may contribute to early identification
of patients at major risk of developing life-threatening
COVID-19. The model can also play a role as a tool to
increase homogeneity of population in clinical trials on
COVID-19 treatment in hospitalized patients. A validation
study is needed to evaluate whether this model
can reliably inform decision making and identify proper
level-of-care requirements for hospitalized patients.