Background
Campylobacter infection is a zoonotic disease, observed in
most parts of the world. The disease is caused by Campylobacter
jejuni, or less commonly Campylobacter coli. It is estimated
to cause 5–14% of diarrhoea, worldwide [1], and
also in the Western world Campylobacter infection has
emerged to be the most important bacterial cause of gastrointestinal
infection. Animals (variety of fowl, swine,
cattle, sheep, dogs, cats, and rodents) are the major reservoir
for the bacteria. Campylobacter does not easily grow in
food, but the critical infective dose is low [2]. Unlike salmonellosis
with well-known routes of transmission, the
epidemiology of campylobacteriosis is still largely unclear
[3]. Known risk factors for the disease include ingestion of
undercooked meat, contaminated food and water or raw
milk, direct contact with pets, farm animals and small
children, and swimming in lakes, but also travel abroad
[2,4-6]. Direct person-to-person transmission between
adults appears to be uncommon. In temperate regions,
campylobacteriosis has a distinct seasonal pattern, with
the peak incidence in the summer months [3,5,7,8]. Identified
risk factors for Campylobacter infections, that may coincide with the summer peaks in the temperate regions
include direct animal contact, eating barbecued meals,
swimming in lakes, and drinking untreated water from
streams and other natural sources [4-6,9]. However, all
these factors could at most explain 50% of the sporadic
cases [3]. Instead we put forward the hypothesis that flies
play a more important role in the transmission of the bacteria,
than has previously been recognized.
Discussion
The fly hypothesis
The common houseflies (Musca domestica) and other muscid
flies thrive in excreta and other filth. They could act as
mechanical vectors, by carrying bacteria on the hairs and
surface of their bodies or on the glandular hairs on their
feet, but they could also act as biological vectors by passage
through the alimentary tract, where pathogens have
opportunity to multiply [10]. The houseflies are important
mechanical vectors in the transmission of many
infectious diseases with low infective dose, such as shigellosis,
typhoid fever and E. coli infection [11,12]. Fly control
has shown to be effective in preventing childhood
diarrhoea in Pakistan and The Gambia [13,14], and shigellosis
in Israeli Army personnel [15]. Already in 1983,
Rosef and Kapperud postulated that flies might play a
linking role by transmitting Campylobacter from animals
to human food [16]. Since then several researchers have
unravelled the role of flies in the epidemiology of avian
campylobacteriosis [17-19], but the idea of flies as important
vectors for human Campylobacter infection has been
largely neglected [20]. Six factors speak in favour of our
hypothesis.
1. Infective dose
The infective dose of Campylobacter can be as low as 800
bacteria [21], which is in the same magnitude as that of
Shigella spp, Salmonella Typhi, and E. coli, pathogens that
are known to be transmitted by flies [11,12,15], and much
lower than the infective dose of Vibrio cholerae (108 bacteria),
and non typhoidal Salmonella species (105-1010 bacteria).
Although less tolerant to desiccation than some
other food-borne pathogens [22], Campylobacter can survive
on dry surfaces for at least seven days [23], thus enabling
the bacteria to survive for several days both on the
body of the fly and in desiccated fly faeces.
2. Flies as a possible vector
Studies have shown that Campylobacter could easily be
transmitted from the environment to flies [17,24], and
thus making flies a reservoir for the bacteria. Campylobacter
could also be transmitted from flies to chickens
[19]. In a recent study, Campylobacter could be isolated
from 4 of 49 (8%) of flies caught outside a broiler house
in Denmark. Furthermore, Wright showed that Campylobacter
could be isolated from five of 210 (2.4%) living
flies, isolated from three different locations [25]. From
these results the author drew the conclusion that the
health hazard from the transmission of Campylobacter
from animals to human food is small. On the contrary,
giving the numerous contacts between flies and human
food, we find it highly likely that if one out of every 40
flies carries Campylobacter the health hazard would be significant.
3. Presence of the pathogen in the environment
Shigella is a strict human pathogen, while the major
source of Campylobacter is the faeces of both humans and
animals such as chickens, cattle and pigs, which are often
kept in close proximity of humans. Stanley and Jones have
previously shown the importance of cattle and sheep
farms as reservoirs of Campylobacter [26]. Campylobacter is
also common in the droppings from wild birds [27,28],
and ubiquitous in the environment. Campylobacter spp
have been isolated from sewage contaminated water [29],
contaminated soil [30] and aquatic sediments [31], and in
sand from bathing beaches [32]. There are therefore likely
considerably more Campylobacter than Shigella in the close
vicinity of humans. Since flies have been shown to be an
important mechanical vector of shigellosis, it would be
surprising if they could not also be so for campylobacteriosis.
Direct transmission from the soil could probably
account for some of the cases in children, but less likely
for adult cases.
4. Seasonality of the disease
The distinct seasonality in the temperate regions
[3,5,7,8,33] fits well with the fly hypothesis. The summer
is the only season in temperate countries when people are
in close contact with flies – often while having picnics or
otherwise eating outdoor in close proximity of cattle and
other environmental sources of Campylobacter. Some of
the recorded association between barbeque and campylobacteriosis
could very well be due to contamination of the
food by flies, rather than undercooked meat or cross-contaminations,
as has previously been postulated. A recent
study from the UK has shown a close temporal association
between the incidence of campylobacteriosis and fly density
[34]. Although there is a seasonal pattern in the density
of flies in the tropics, flies are present year round
[13,14]. Therefore, if our hypothesis holds true, there
should not be the same distinct seasonal peaks in the tropics.
However seasonal data on campylobacteriosis from
tropical regions are largely lacking. Instead we have
recently compared Swedish notification data on travelrelated
campylobacteriosis with an extensive database on
the travel patterns of Swedish residents (denominator for
monthly risks per region). While a distinct seasonal pattern,
as previously described, could be discerned in travellers
from all temperate regions, the risk of
campylobacteriosis in travellers from the tropics were more dispersed over the year [35]. Lack of detailed data on
seasonal fly density and quite large geographical regions
for our risk estimates of campylobacteriosis, prevented us
from making any correlations between risk of campylobacteriosis
and the presence of flies in the tropical regions.
5. Age profile
Small children are less able to protect themselves from
flies than older children and adults, and are more likely to
have their hands on fly-soiled surfaces. In the tropics, the
Campylobacter infection is largely confined to children
below the age of two years, and the decreasing incidence
thereafter has been attributed to a lasting immunity [20].
On the contrary, in Sweden and other Western countries,
the highest incidence is seen in young adults, with a
smaller peak in pre-school age children [20,36]. Then,
how about western travellers going to the tropics? If the
major transmission route of Campylobacter was ingestion
of contaminated food, one would expect the infection to
be relatively evenly distributed among the largely nonimmune
westerners coming to high prevalence countries.
Again we turned to the risk estimates for campylobacteriosis
in returning Swedish travellers. While, the incidence
pattern in travellers returning from temperate countries
closely mimicked the age pattern of indigenous Swedish
cases, we noted that among travellers returning from tropical
areas of Africa and Asia, the youngest children had
twice as high risk as young adults, and more than four
times the risk compared to older children [35]. This age
pattern thus suggests other major routes of transmission
than food or water, e.g. direct or indirect transmission
from environmental sources. The flies would fit well in
this concept.
6. Dominance of solitary cases
If intake of chicken and undercooked meat (or cross-contamination
from these food items) was a major route of
transmission, clusters of cases within the same family
should be common. Instead a striking feature of indigenous
campylobacteriosis in Sweden is that the cases
(except for in a few larger outbreaks) are solitary. A survey
of notification data in one Swedish county over several
years showed that it was exceptionally rare that cases
shared the same address [37]. Information on the notification
form indicating symptomatic cases around the
notified patient was also very rare, even though this is specifically
asked for. Solitary cases are instead more compatible
with circumstance where an infected fly defecates on
the plate of one family member, leaving the rest of the
family unexposed.
Testing the hypothesis
The fly hypothesis needs to be backed by further experimental
and epidemiological studies. The best evidence
would be if controlled intervention studies could show an
effect on the incidence of Campylobacter infection by fly
control, as has previously been done for shigellosis and
diarrhoea [13-15]. Such studies could only be done in
high incidence areas, and would require good laboratory
support. In temperate regions such intervention studies
would be less feasible. Instead, questions focusing on the
exposure to flies, and possible nearby environmental
Campylobacter sources, e.g. cattle farms, sewage treatment
or fowls, should be included in forthcoming case-control
studies on campylobacteriosis. This has been a neglected
line of questioning so far. More data on the carriage of
Campylobacter by flies in different settings where people
could be exposed are also needed. An alternative, and
more innovative, approach would be to combine information
on the likely place/s of infection with data on
environmental sources, in analytic studies using geographical
information systems (GIS) tools.
Conclusion
All the evidence in favour of the fly hypothesis is circumstantial
and there may be alternative explanations to each
of the findings supporting the hypothesis. However, in
the absence of alternative explanations that could give
better clues to the evasive epidemiology of Campylobacter
infection, we believe it would be unwise to rule out flies
as important mechanical vectors also of this disease.
