Background
Pancreatic leakage (PL) is a complication associated with
various pathophysiological conditions, such as pancreatitis,
surgery, and trauma, including iatrogenic events from
invasive medical procedures such as endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) [1–5]. If PL
persists, autodigestion of peripancreatic tissues occurs,
which can cause ruptured aneurysms and/or multiple
organ failure [1, 2, 6–8]. One cause of severe PL is disconnected
pancreatic duct syndrome (DPDS). DPDS is
characterized by blockage of the main pancreatic duct
(MPD) with no access to the upstream pancreatic duct,
concurrent with a persistent nonhealing pancreatic fistula
or pancreatic fluid collection [3–5, 9, 10].
In cases of severe DPDS, patients may develop systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) with
nonlocalized PL, and two therapeutic strategies are often
reluctantly attempted. One approach is resection of the
damaged pancreas, which is complicated by the extensive
tissue inflammation. The other approach is a two-stage
surgery, comprising excessive external drainage with peritoneal
lavage to generate a rigid pancreatic fistula and an
additional surgery to convert the fistula into an internal
drainage route, which is complicated by the development
of adhesions [1, 2, 5, 9, 11].
We report the successful treatment of nonlocalized
persistent PL in a patient in whom radical resection
was not possible. Our original approach is termed
the “intentional internal drainage tube method”, which
involves the insertion of a trans-jejunal external drainage
tube. The application of this strategy resulted in the
successful recovery of the patient from severe post-ERCP
pancreatitis.
Case presentation
A 49-year-old asymptomatic woman underwent ERCP
to investigate asymptomatic focal dilatation of the
MPD. During ERCP, a guidewire possibly penetrated
the pancreatic parenchyma. Although a prophylactic
pancreatic duct stent was placed at the end of the procedure,
the patient developed post-ERCP pancreatitis on
postoperative day (POD) 1, as demonstrated by upper
abdominal pain, fever, and a high serum amylase level
(1959 U/L). A contrast-enhanced computed tomography
(CT) scan revealed peripancreatic fluid collection,
and the pancreatic stent tube was dislocated in the peritoneal
cavity at the neck of the pancreas (Fig. 1a). We
speculated that this dislocated tube injured the MPD and
induced massive PL. On POD 2, we attempted to replace
the pancreatic stent tube to bridge the damaged point of
the MPD via an endoscopic approach. Even after successful
bridging of the MPD stent tube, the nonlocalized PL
worsened, and the patient developed SIRS and acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS).
On POD 3, an open laparotomy was performed for
the peritoneal lavage. The MPD penetration point could
not be visualized because the peripancreatic tissue was
severely damaged. We completed the procedure by placement
of 12 external drainage tubes. Although continuous
peritoneal lavage was performed, SIRS worsened and
became life-threatening, and fluid with a high amylase
concentration (> 30,000 U/L) spread to the right side of
the peritoneal space.
We then performed a second operation on POD 9,
which involved central pancreatectomy with necrosectomy
(Fig. 2). The proximal incision margin was closed
using manual sutures. The damaged distal surface was
fragile; therefore, only an external drainage tube was
inserted into the distal MPD instead of performing pancreatojejunostomy.
At the end of the surgery, five external
drainage tubes were placed around the two damaged
parenchymal surfaces. After the second operation, the
patient’s SIRS showed immediate improvement; however,
the PL was still not controlled. On POD 70, the
patient again developed SIRS and complained of severe
abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed pancreatic
fluid spread throughout the retroperitoneal space
(Fig. 1b).
A third surgery was scheduled on POD 80 to remove
the remnant pancreas, which might have caused the PL
due to DPDS. Laparotomy showed that both edges of
the pancreatic remnants were heavily damaged; thus, we
could not determine which edge was the origin of the PL.
We attempted to remove both remnants; however, the
highly inflamed tissue and collateral venous plexus made
the procedure difficult and finally led to massive bleeding
from the superior mesenteric-portal vein confluence.
We terminated pancreatic resection and performed
pancreatojejunostomy. The distal MPD and pancreatic
parenchyma were anastomosed to the Roux-en-Y
(R-Y) jejunal limb with an external pancreatic duct stent
(Fig. 3a). Additionally, we closed the proximal MPD and
the pancreatic surface using manual sutures. We were not
confident in the success of either procedure because both
surfaces were severely damaged and fragile; thus, the
recurrence of persistent leakage was highly suspected.
Consequently, we decided to generate an intentional
internal drainage route during the operation (Fig. 3b).
This “intentional internal drainage tube method” was
designed to collect possible persistent PL from both margins
of the pancreas. A 22-Fr single-lumen silicone drainage
tube (Fuji systems Co., Tokyo, Japan) was placed in a
trans-jejunal orientation. The tip of the tube was located
in the peritoneal cavity to collect the possible PL from
both sides. The middle part of the tube ran along the
inner lumen of the R-Y jejunal limb, and the distal end
protruded toward the outside of the body (Fig. 3c). The
jejunal fistula, through which the tube passed, was tied
with an absorbable tobacco suture to prevent jejunal fluid
from leaking into the peritoneal space.
Immediately after surgery, we connected a thin suction
tube inside this intentional internal drainage tube
to a continuous suction device to collect PL mainly from
this tube. The device was set up for periodic suction with
a pressure of − 30 cm (water column) to avoid tissue
injury. Necrosed deposits were effectively excreted from
this “intentional internal drainage tube”, and we continued
peritoneal lavage around the pancreas with saline
for more than 3 weeks. SIRS gradually resolved in the
patient. Within 2 months after the third surgery, we gradually
removed the peripancreatic external drainage tubes,
and only the intentional internal drainage tube remained.
Repeated contrast radiography of the intentional internal
drainage tube demonstrated that the PL cavity gradually
localized and decreased in size (Fig. 4). On POD 140 after
the initial ERCP, we verified that the PL was localized to
a size of 2 × 1 cm and removed the intentional internal
drainage tube. Thus, an internal drainage route, i.e., communication
between the PL and R-Y jejunal limb, was
established. The patient was discharged on POD 147 after
the initial ERCP. Over the subsequent 5 years to date, the
patient has recovered well without any further hospitalization
and has resumed her healthy social life.
Discussion and conclusions
We present here our original “intentional internal drainage
tube method”, resulting in the successful recovery
from persistent PL due to DPDS. The tube was initially
intended to drain pancreatic deposits to the outside of
the body. After removal of this tube, the fistula in the
jejunal wall served as an internal drainage route to transfer
pancreatic deposits into the intestinal lumen. Once
a mature internal drainage route is generated, relapse or
complications should be rare, as has been reported with
endoscopic and/or surgical approaches for internal drainage
[2, 5, 12]. In fact, our patient has recovered uneventfully
for over 5 years.
In the third surgery in this case, resection of the pancreatic
remnants was found to be difficult. Therefore,
only internal drainage remained as possibility for radical
treatment. As a treatment for DPDS, two-stage surgery
is an established method of internal drainage [4, 5,
10, 13]. In this case, the formation of a localized rigid
drainage route was essential; this formation depends on
the balance among the amount of leakage, the amount
of drainage, and the patient’s wound healing potential.
Previous reports mentioned that longer than 4 weeks is
needed for the establishment of a rigid drainage route
[10]. Thus, this conventional approach necessitates
the long-term placement of an external drainage tube,
which decreases the patient quality of life. In addition,
it was not clear that the fistula and PL cavity would be
localized after such a long period. We had already failed
to localize the pancreatic fistula and were concerned
that the patient’s healing potential might become substantially
reduced during a long hospitalization.
There are few guidelines detailing treatment strategies
for DPDS. The American Gastroenterological
Association recommends distal pancreatectomy in the
first 30–60 days for DPDS, but this approach has high
morbidity [14]. The European Society of Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy guidelines recommend long-term placement
of transluminal plastic stents after transluminal
drainage of walled-off necrosis in DPDS patients [15].
If the endoscopy approach fails, surgery including distal
pancreatectomy or R-Y drainage is recommended. The
Italian and Japanese guidelines do not specifically mention
DPDS, but they state that intervention (including
radiological, endoscopic, or surgical) should be performed
when necrotizing pancreatitis leads to clinical
deterioration or ongoing organ failure [16, 17].
As Yamada et al. reported, endoscopic ultrasonography-
guided drainage is one option for DPDS [18]. It is
less invasive than two-stage surgery. However, the success
rate has been reported as ranging from 38 to 73%
[3, 19]. The difficulty of this procedure depends on the
anatomical condition, which is impossible to predict
in advance. Moreover, this method is not applicable in
all cases. In our method, we were able to anatomically
design the internal drainage route prior to the procedure.
This approach is relatively easy and feasible.
An experienced surgeon may be concerned that the fistula
generated in the jejunum via our “intentional internal
drainage tube method” may worsen PL due to the reverse
overflow of bacteria-rich intestinal juice, thereby activating
the pancreatic juice. This drawback has been overcome
as follows. First, the jejunal fistula was designed at the R-Y
limb, where bile and food do not pass through. Second, the
created fistula only contained the tube held by a tobacco
suture. Third, immediately after surgery, the intentional
internal drainage tube was connected to a continuous suction
device. This suction device mainly served to direct PL
into this intentional internal drainage tube rather than into
the other external drainage tubes. These maneuvers aimed
to prevent the reverse flow of contaminated intestinal juice
into the peritoneal cavity.
We applied this intentional internal drainage tube
method during the third operation on day 80. However,
after reviewing the case history, we noted that it could also
have been performed in the second operation on POD 9 to
shorten the hospital stay. Due to the simplicity and minimally
invasive nature of this method, we believe this new
method may represent an alternative approach for treating
various types of nonlocalized persistent PL and may also be
used prophylactically for central pancreatectomy in which
there are two dangerous causative margins for severe PL.