Background
Since the concept of self-directed learning (SDL) was described
by Malcolm Knowles in 1975, medical educators
have embraced the principles of this student-centered
approach to enable physicians to take responsibility for
and drive their ongoing learning [1, 2]. Medical students
are expected to cultivate the habits of SDL and develop
lifelong learning skills at medical school [3]. As Knowles
defined it, “A self-directed learner takes responsibility
for their own learning and has internal motivation to develop,
implement, and evaluate their approach to learning.”
[4, 5] Knowles described SDL as a learning contract
between a learner and an instructor and a linear process
comprising six major steps: (1) climate setting (creating
an atmosphere of mutual respect and support); (2) diagnosing
learning needs; (3) formulating learning goals; (4)
identifying human and material resources for learning;
(5) choosing and implementing appropriate learning
strategies; and (6) evaluating learning outcomes [4].
Some criticism of this model includes the primary emphasis
placed on individual learners, which, in certain
contexts, may be synonymous with a lack of support,
and a lack of attention to the social and cultural dimensions
of learning [6]. The “Person, Process, Context”
(PPC) model, proposed by Hiemstra and Brockett, addresses
these potential shortcomings by incorporating
necessary social and cultural supports into the SDL
model [7–10]. In the PPC model, “Person” refers to
characteristics of the individual, such as motivation, resilience,
and self-concept, “Process” refers to the
teaching-learning transactions such as planning and organizing,
and “Context” refers to the environmental and
sociopolitical climates, such as learning environment
and group culture [10]. Because Knowles’ model and the
previous research on SDL focus more on the individualand
process-related dimensions of SDL, this PPC model
provides a guiding framework for researchers to address
how the contextual dimensions support or hinder SDL
[10]..
SDL in the classroom setting, such as problem-based
learning in medical schools, has been well-studied in the
last two decades [11–14]. Problem-based learning and,
more recently, case-based collaborative learning have
been developed as tools to help learners apply their
learning to clinical cases [12, 15, 16]. These approaches
emphasize the development of learner autonomy and intrinsic
motivation, with “supported autonomy” or scaffolding
provided by the faculty tutor or facilitator
guidance [17, 18]. However, with a few exceptions [19],
these approaches are systematically implemented primarily
in the classroom setting, and the ways in which
SDL is experienced and manifested in the considerably
less structured clinical environment remain understudied.
The complexity, uncertainty, and power differentials
in the clinical setting present a very different learning
environment compared with the classroom setting,
which may pose unique challenges for medical students’
practice of SDL. Previous research suggests that, for novice
students, a supportive environment that helps them
to navigate these complex clinical learning experiences
can improve their SDL [20]. Although the importance of
external guidance has been demonstrated to be important
for supporting SDL among medical residents [21,
22], similar evidence of how the clinical environment
can support or hinder students’ SDL has not been described.
These findings align with the “Context” dimension
of the PPC model and suggest further studies are
needed on medical students’ SDL in the clinical setting.
To further understand how medical students experience
SDL and employ SDL strategies in the clinical setting,
we carried out a qualitative interview study with
medical students in a single medical school in the
Northeastern U.S. The goals of this study were (1) to describe
student experiences of SDL in their clinical training,
and (2) to identify the role that social contexts play
in shaping their experiences of SDL. Our overall aim
was to determine whether and how students’ descriptions
of experiences and social contexts in clinical training
could inform and extend current models of SDL.
Methods
We used an interpretivist paradigm to study students’
experiences of SDL in the clinical setting [23]. This approach
embraces a perspective of co-construction of
knowledge between researcher and research subjects,
and holds that individuals construct their own interpretations
and sense of meaning of their experience in the
context of their social, temporal, and cultural environments.
Because little is known about students’ SDL experiences
in the clinical setting, we carried out onehour-
long, in-depth qualitative interviews with students
in their clerkship period. We chose interviews for our
data collection approach (rather than focus groups) because
we wanted to provide individual students the opportunity
to describe and explain their experiences in
depth. We drew on the Standards for Reporting Qualitative
Research (SRQR) and the Consolidated Criteria for
Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) to guide our
analysis and reporting of findings [24, 25]..
In the U.S., medical students typically undergo training
that often, but not always, is structured into two years of
coursework followed by two years of clinical or “clerkship”
training by participating in patient care in hospital
and ambulatory settings. At Harvard Medical School
(HMS), following preclerkship training, most students
enter the traditional clerkship rotation blocks (including
medicine, neurology, OB/GYN, pediatrics, primary care,
psychiatry, radiology, and surgery) lasting from 4 to 12
weeks in the core clerkships. A few join the longitudinal
integrated clerkship (LIC), which extends over a 12-
month period and emphasizes continuity with faculty
and patients[26]. Both the traditional rotation and the
LIC at HMS share the self-study time on schedules,
which is intended for reading and SDL. We invited medical
students who recently finished their first year of the
clerkship in four affiliated hospitals through email invitation
to the class. Purposive sampling continued concurrently
with data analysis until no new themes were
identified and the samples represented the range of student
genders, affiliated hospitals, and types of clerkship
training. We developed semi-structured interview questions
from a review of literature, consultation with local
medical education experts, and pre-testing with two
other medical students at HMS. The questions in the
interview guide (See Supplemental Digital Appendix 1)
asked participants to describe their current SDL experiences
and their own definition of SDL. Interviews were
conducted by one researcher (THL) between May to
June 2018 at HMS. All the interviews were audiorecorded
and transcribed verbatim, and the transcripts
were checked for accuracy against the recordings. All
the transcripts were de-identified, and the audio recordings
were deleted after the transcription was complete.
We analyzed transcripts using the Framework method
of content analysis (See Supplemental Digital Appendix
2for further details) [27]. The Framework method allows
for both deductive (pre-defined codes—here, codes
representing the elements of SDL and PPC) and inductive
(emergent codes—here, either elaboration of the specific,
as yet undefined, manifestations of the SDL/PPC
components in the clinical setting, or new constructs
that do not fit into the deductive categories) approaches
[28]. Codes were systematically generated during regular
meetings of the two authors (THL and AMS), who read
transcripts independently and met to discuss generation
and refinement of codes through line-by-line analysis.
We created creating a codebook that defined codes and
identified inclusion and exclusion criteria, and applied
codes to text using Dedoose Software (SocioCultural Research
Consultants, CA, USA). We identified, reviewed,
and refined emergent themes using a constant comparison
approach [29]. Any differences in defining or naming
the themes were reviewed and resolved by
consensus. We also explored code co-occurrences to
identify the relationships between codes. For member
checking, we sent interviewees the analytic results and
received their comments. Other strategies to promote
trustworthiness of the results are shown in the appendix
(See Supplemental Digital Appendix 3).
All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant
guidelines and regulations. The Harvard Faculty of
Medicine Institutional Review Board (IRB18-0891)
approved this study under an exempt status because it
presented no more than minimal risk to participants and
was determined to be education research with no personally
identifiable information. Informed consent was
obtained from all the participants.
Results
We conducted 15 interviews with medical students who
recently finished their core clerkships (Table 1). Eleven
of the participants were female. The participants were
mostly white or Asian. Nearly all participants attended
clerkships with traditional blocks, with one participant
trained in the LIC. Our analysis found the results
aligned with the “Person, Process, Context” model of
SDL proposed by Hiemstra and Brockett, with five of
the six steps of the Knowles model embedded in the
Process dimension. Because the Process element of
the Hiemstra and Brockett model overlaps with
Knowles’ SDL model, we begin with a description of
how our findings align with and elaborate upon these
overlapping elements.
Adapting the SDL model for the clinical setting
When reporting their process of engaging in SDL,
participants reported steps that aligned with steps 2 to 6
in Knowles’ linear model. We renamed each corresponding
step using the participants’ terms; for example, we
restated “defining learning needs” to participants’
language of “identifying gaps in knowledge.” Participants’
descriptions of their SDL process added an additional
step of “building a framework in learning,” and this, in
turn, was described as leading students to start a new
SDL cycle. We thus replaced “climate setting” with
“building a framework,” and reshaped the linear model
into a circular one.
The Six Steps of SDL
Based on Knowles’ six steps and our analysis of the
results, especially from the participants’ own
definition of SDL, we identified six steps of SDL in
the context of clinical clerkships. When being asked
the definition of SDL, the participants referred to a
range of steps, usually only three to four per
individual, but collectively they referred to all six
steps. They described following the steps in this
sequence: identifying gaps in knowledge; generating
learning topics; finding learning resources; implementing
learning strategies; self-assessing learning outcomes;
building a framework in learning. The six
steps make a continuous cycle of learning and have
key components in each step. Among the six steps,
finding learning resources was most often mentioned
by participants, followed by identifying gaps in knowledge,
generating learning topics, and implementing
learning strategies (Table 2).
Step 1: Identifying gaps in knowledge
All student interviewees addressed the importance of
detecting their gaps in knowledge, essentially gaps in
content knowledge, which mainly referred to
knowledge students learned from textbooks or online
resources. In addition, about half of the participants
described a need to learn how to apply their
knowledge to specific clinical cases, and to tolerate
the uncertainty and ambiguity that came with “real
world” patient cases.
Step 2: Generating learning topics
After participants identified their gaps in knowledge,
they described generating the learning topics that they
could focus on and allocate their limited time and resources.
The learning topics were found either by participants
themselves or with the guidance of the team
members. There were two common pathways that participants
went through to generate the learning topics.
One was in patient case preparation, in which participants
actively collected a patient’s data and systematically
presented the case on rounds or teaching sessions.
The other path was through direct patient care, when
participants were directly involved in primary care and
encountered a series of clinical problems.
Step 3: Finding learning resources
All student interviewees mentioned that finding learning
resources was a critical step in SDL. They used a wide
variety of online and printed resources for reading and
test preparation. Overall, there were five major types of
online resources (ranked from high to low coding frequency):
summaries on topics (e.g., UpToDate), question
banks (e.g., UWorld), journal articles (e.g., PubMed), visual
learning (e.g., YouTube), and direct web search (e.g.,
Google Search). The first two were used and trusted the
most by all the participants. The printed resources
named were textbooks, pocket manuals, and questionbased
books.
Participants described interacting with people around
them to find learning resources. Since medical students
were assigned to a team with the intern, resident, and attending
physician in each rotation, they naturally and
frequently sought help from these people who were
more experienced than they. Several participants mentioned
that they learned from nurses and paramedics as
well. Participants described learning self-directedly by
two dominant mechanisms: asking these team members
questions and seeking their feedback.
Peer learning and support also played a vital role in
promoting SDL. There were three common categories
described in peer learning: peer teaching, word of
mouth, and shared resources. Medical students can
teach and learn from peers and benefit from each other’s
experience, knowledge, or ways of approaching a topic.
Step 4: Implementing learning strategies
Beyond reading, participants reported a variety of cognitive
strategies. There were six cognitive strategies: (1)
note-taking; (2) use of question banks; (3) self-quizzing;
(4) visual learning (e.g., videos); (5) use of flashcards/
mnemonics; (6) teaching to learn/writing study guides.
Note-taking, use of question banks, and self-quizzing
were the three most commonly described cognitive
strategies, while very few participants reported that they
learned by teaching others or writing study guides.
The second part of learning strategies in SDL was related
to time management. Participants were concerned
about efficiency in learning and patient care, just-in-time
preparation for rounds or case presentations, and a balance
between work and life. Based on the analysis of
code co-occurrence, we found participants who reported
asking questions and using question banks or questionbased
books also described better efficiency in learning.
For the purpose of just-in-time preparation, participants
preferred using the online summaries on topics (e.g.,
UpToDate).
Step 5: Self-assessing learning outcomes
Medical students in the U.S. have shelf exams (standardized
exams covering material on one of a range of subjects)
and board exams (medical licensure exams).
Participants reported spending a great amount of time
using question banks not only for preparing for the
exams but also for gauging their level of knowledge on
certain topics. Participants also regarded feedback seeking
as a way of self-assessing their clinical performance.
However, only a few participants did this purposefully as
a strategy for SDL.
Step 6: Building a framework in learning
The sixth step in the SDL cycle was to build the framework
in learning. The framework developed throughout
the first five steps helped participants identify their
knowledge gaps when encountering the next patient
case. When participants mentioned the framework in
learning, there were two layers of meanings: learning the
routine practices or standard operating procedures
(SOPs) in the clinical setting, and consolidating their
knowledge about a clinical topic or seeing the “big picture”
(that is, having a holistic view) of the patient’s
diagnosis and management. Participants reported that
team members could be most helpful in SDL by helping
them integrate their overall clinical understanding of
their patients.
The Person Dimension
We found four themes aligned with the Person dimension
of SDL: student motivation, clinical interests,
growth mindset, and social-emotional strategies.
(Table 3)
Motivation
Participants’ primary motivations in learning were to
provide better patient care, followed by anticipating how
they would work in the future as residents or attendings.
Participants who described greater attention to their future
doctoring seemed to be more engaged in SDL.
Clinical Interests
Some participants expressed a desire for more autonomy
to pursue their personal specialty or subspecialty interests,
but clerkship requirements often precluded opportunities
to explore other interests. About one fourth of
the participants said they felt they would more actively
pursue SDL if they had greater autonomy in modifying
the structure for their own learning purposes.
Growth Mindset
About one fourth of the participants reported that a
growth mindset was important in facilitating their SDL.
Participants who demonstrated a growth mindset focused
more on learning itself and expressed fewer concerns
about evaluation.
Social-Emotional Strategies
Social-emotional strategies were as follows: (1) building
relationships with team members; (2) observing team
members’ personalities; (3) being aware of situations
(e.g., workflow) that might require a change in student
behaviors; (4) being sensitive to how they (students) are
perceived. These strategies were discussed in depth by
almost half of all the student interviewees, and the most
commonly used social-emotional strategy was to build
relationships with team members. Participants noticed
that they had to develop these strategies in their early
phase of clinical training so that they could find more
learning resources or seek more help from others. They
observed team members’ personalities to identify potential
resources in terms of asking questions or seeking
feedback. They often described being aware of situations,
especially when there was a busy workflow, so that they
would not ask questions at an inappropriate time. Some
of the participants were sensitive to how they were perceived.
They cared about their evaluation and did not
want to seem low-performing or disengaged.
The Context Dimension
The contextual dimension refers to the learning climate,
culture, and environment that may facilitate or inhibit
SDL. Four major themes emerged through our analysis:
the learning environment, impression management,
group learning culture, and learning activities (Table 4).
Learning Environment
The learning environment had five subthemes: education
orientation, psychological safety, student engagement,
opportunities for ownership of patient care, and a sense
of urgency. The first four appeared to be facilitating factors
of SDL, while the last one was described as an inhibiting
factor.
Impression Management
Many participants described a sense of pressure to
make a good impression on residents and attending physicians.
Participants addressed three topics: looking
good, being constantly evaluated, and not seeming disinterested.
In a performance-oriented environment, the
“fear of not looking smart enough” caused pressure and
anxiety among many medical students. In their descriptions
of impression management, participants’ SDL appeared
inhibited because it took so much attention and
energy to perform well rather than learn well. This
phenomenon was apparent in our interview group,
where every participant talked about the potentially
negative effects of being evaluated.
Group Learning Culture
Participants described group learning cultures as varying
from department to department, but overall, collaborative
learning, such as learning from team members
on the ward, was helpful for medical students to engage
in SDL.
Learning activities
Participants regarded rounds, morning meetings, teaching
sessions (lecture or case presentation), and feedback
sessions as formal learning activities. Informal learning
activities included seminars, workshops, study groups, or
any learning activities that were not arranged by the
course director. Whatever learning activities the student
interviewees participated in, they demonstrated SDL by
asking questions and seeking feedback. Beyond utilizing
formal learning activities, participants sought informal
ones as a way of SDL.
Discussion
Our findings support the need for a deeper understanding
of how, and in what contexts, SDL is experienced
and practiced by medical students in the clinical setting.
In contrast to the classroom, where the process and context
of students’ learning are likely to be both more
structured and predictable, the dynamics and complexity
of the clinical learning environment call for a more
context-specific, nuanced understanding of SDL. Our
study suggests that the combined frameworks of Hiemstra
and Brockett’s “Person, Process, and Context” model
and Knowles’ Self-Directed Learning model provide a
useful lens with which to capture this complexity of
learning in the clinical setting. The results here, in turn,
elaborate upon and extend these models by highlighting
students’ experience of SDL in a clinical context. Students’
collective experience of important barriers to and
facilitators of SDL in the clinical setting provides potential
guidance for both faculty and students in the clinical
setting. We summarized and organized these findings
into the conceptual model shown in Fig. 1.
One important insight from this study is that patients
are both the anchor and the drivers of SDL in the clinical
setting, shown in Fig. 1 as the hub of all elements of
student learning. Participants described two primary
means of identifying their gaps in knowledge and skills:
one was in the process of preparing to present a patient’s
case, and the other was in their efforts to understand
what and how to think about specific patients in their
care (Fig. 1, “Process” category). Further, participants
who espoused goals of being prepared to provide excellent
care for their future patients (that is, when they
were practicing more independently) were also those
who described the most proactive and well-articulated
strategies for advancing their learning (Fig. 1, “Person”
category). Contexts that provided more opportunities for
ownership of patient care were also reported to facilitate
students’ SDL (Fig. 1, “Context” category). Thus,
although current definitions of SDL usually emphasize
the student-centered nature of the construct, students’
experience of SDL in the clinical setting in this study is
primarily patient-centered. This insight can also provide
guidance to students and clerkship leaders in developing
explicit, well-articulated learning goals and strategies by
using patient care as the organizing principle for students’
clinical learning.
The patient-centered focus of students’ learning also
leads to a new proposed phase of SDL in the clinical setting
that we have described as “building a framework”
(Fig. 1, “Process”category, Step 6). Some participants described
this as coming to see the “big picture” of the patient’s
illness and management. This appears to be a
stage in which students consolidate their learning about
a specific patient’s illness or disease processes, incorporate
multiple perspectives and sources of information related
to a patient’s medical and social history, integrate
and prioritize information from the patient’s history,
physical, and lab results, and understand how to apply
content knowledge to direct patient care, often in the
face of considerable clinical uncertainty. The elements
involved in participants’ descriptions of developing a coherent
framework of knowledge and understanding align
with three of the six competency domains that have
been defined for resident education by the Accreditation
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME).
These are the competencies of practice-based learning
(for example, learning to access and evaluate medical information
through UpToDate and other learning resources),
medical knowledge (for example, seeking
specific patient-related content knowledge and working
to apply that knowledge to evaluation and care of the
patient), and patient care (for example, learning to identify
and prioritize patient care needs). Explicitly recognizing
the alignment of this SDL phase with GME
competencies could allow for adapting and translating
existing tools and guidelines for residents to assist students
in identifying and achieving their clinical SDL
learning goals. Further guidance and scaffolding from
faculty and residents, such as that provided by faculty
tutors in problem-based or case-based collaborative
learning in the classroom, could enhance this important
phase and promote student integration and application
of their clinical knowledge.
This study adds to the “Person, Process, Context”
model of SDL by describing specific themes that had
major influences on medical students’ SDL in each of
the three dimensions. Specifically, we found that individual
personal characteristics such as clinical interests,
growth or performance mindset, and situational/interpersonal
awareness were salient in clinical SDL. Providing
students with some autonomy to pursue interests in
specific fields of training, for example, may facilitate
SDL in the clinical setting. A growth mindset, which
Dweck first mentioned in the implicit theories of learning,
also has strong correlations with students’ learning
behaviors [30]. As stated by our interviewees, the growth
mindset can be cultivated, and students with this mindset
appeared to engage in SDL more easily. Finally, we
listed four social-emotional strategies students used in
SDL, including building relationships with team members.
The examples of social-emotional strategies described
by participants also remind us that SDL is about
far more than learning on one’s own; SDL also includes
learning from team members and peers. This broad
array of personal habits, strategies, and mindsets might
be guided and enhanced through existing organizing
tools such as an individualized learning plan (ILP). Although
ILPs have not been used widely in undergraduate
medical education, they are used successfully in other
educational settings and have some evidence for effectiveness
in improving SDL strategies for senior medical
students [31, 32]..
In addition to the phase of “building a framework” described
above, the Process dimension comprised all
other steps of Knowles’ framework except the “setting
the climate” step. This is to be expected from the student
perspective, as they are unlikely to feel they have
the authority to influence the learning climate in their
clerkships. The clerkship-specific elements of the SDL
process, as shown in Fig. 1, were fairly consistently described
by students in this study. These may be useful
guidelines for clerkship leaders to share with students to
aid them in formulating and achieving their own learning
goals.
Finally, the contextual dimension of SDL highlighted
factors such as psychological safety and feeling integrated
into the team, whereas high stress or high workload
environments diminished students’ perceived ability
to learn. Clerkship leaders might consider existing tools
to enhance psychological safety, such as the CENTRE
approach, which provides an explicit process for groups
to discuss how to work together with respect and curiosity
[33]. In performance-oriented learning environments
like medical schools, impression management tactics like
image creation and protection have been noted in both
the residency and clerkship settings [34, 35]. In our
study, the equivalent tactics, looking good and not seeming
disinterested, were being used by medical students
every day in their training hospitals and was described
by some as exhausting.
This study has some limitations. This was a study
based on a single institution in the U.S. These may limit
the transferability of findings to other institutions. It also
includes only the perspectives of students, and future explorations
of this topic should include faculty and other
team members. In addition, our sample did not fully
represent the range of demographic characteristics at
HMS, where students in the category of “underrepresented
in medicine” make up approximately one fifth of
the population; further research should explore whether
and how SDL experiences vary among a wider range of
student backgrounds. SDL may also vary across specialties
and levels of training; however, because we wanted
to gain an overall view of SDL in the clinical setting, we
did not ask specifically about student experiences in different
rotations.
Our study explored medical students’ perception of
SDL in the clinical setting and refined the model with
the six steps and the three dimensions of SDL. Based on
the specific themes of SDL we identified, further studies
should be focused on how interventions pertaining to
these themes are implemented, and we can examine
what benefits in SDL they may bring.
Conclusions
Our findings suggest that current models of SDL in the
classroom setting may be a story only half told. In this
qualitative interview study with 15 medical students, our
findings contribute to both theoretical and practical understandings
of medical students’ SDL in the clinical setting. In
contrast to the more student-centered focus of SDL in the
classroom setting, participants described SDL in the clinical
context as primarily patient-centered. We delineated factors
at the personal, process, and contextual levels that students
experience as facilitators and barriers to SDL in the clinical
setting. These results provide practical guidance to students
and clerkship faculty as well as new directions for clinically
focused research on SDL.