Introduction
Effective doctor-patient communication boosts patient
safety and the patient experience [1, 2]. It also improves
treatment adherence and reduces malpractice suits and
burnout amongst physicians [3, 4]. Whilst the General
Medical Council, CanMEDS and the Accreditation
Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) [5–
8] regard communication skills as a core competency, efforts
to advance communication skills training (CST) in
medical schools and residency programs remain poorly
coordinated [9–14] and, perhaps more concerning, still
tethered to the belief that good communications can be
learnt ‘on the job’ [15].
With there being a wide array of skills to be mastered,
including being able to gather information [15],
consider the patient’s circumstances and needs, adapt
communication styles and content, facilitate open and
respectful discussions and shared decision making, negotiate
a personalised patient-centred treatment plan,
give therapeutic instructions in an empathetic and
understandable manner and establish a caring, responsive
doctor-patient relationship, the need for a
structured CST program for medical students and
physicians is evident [16, 17]. In addition, amidst suggestions
that communications skills degrade over
time, a longitudinal CST program that melds training,
clinical experience, assessments, and reflective practice
supported by role modelling, coaching and mentoring
is critical [18, 19]. Such a longitudinal approach
would be consistent with Hoffman et al. [20]‘s recommendation
aimed at developing adaptive clinical communication
skills that are responsive to the needs of
different patients in different circumstances.
However, facing the recalcitrant notion in some quarters
that good communications skills are a “an easy and
soft science … not worth studying” [21], design and
operationalising longitudinal CST programs face significant
obstacles. We believe an evidence-based review of
prevailing practices and outcomes will be useful in addressing
these misconceptions and will help to facilitate
the reshaping of attitudes and thinking towards CST.
Rationale for this review
Acknowledging growing evidence of the impact of CST
in medical schools and the influence of different healthcare
and education systems, practice settings and practical
considerations [22] on the structure and content of
CST programs, we focus on better understanding
current approaches to CST in the postgraduate setting.
The lessons learnt will inform efforts to advance an
evidence-based framework for a CST curriculum that
may be applied in different countries, and sociocultural
settings.
Methodology
A systematic scoping review (SSR) is proposed to map
prevailing practice and clarify concepts, definitions and
key characteristics of CST practice in the extant literature
so as to guide design of an evidence-based CST
program [23–29]. An SSR is also able to identify gaps in
prevailing knowledge on CSTs [30, 31]. Rooted in Constructivist
ontology and Relativist epistemology, SSRs are
well suited for considering the effects of clinical, academic,
personal, research, professional, ethical, psychosocial,
emotional, legal, and educational settings and
learning environment upon CST processes [32–38].
Here, a Relativist lens captures the impact of the
learner’s various CST training experiences which Positivist
and Post-Positivist approaches fail to consider. However,
whilst these considerations present SSRs as the
preferred approach to scrutinising the width, depth, and
longitudinal effects of CST, SSRs continue to suffer from
a lack of a structured approach that compromises its
trustworthiness and reproducibility.
To overcome these problems facing SSRs, we adopt
Krishna’s Systematic Evidence-Based Approach (SEBA)
(henceforth SSR in SEBA) [31, 39, 40]. SSRs in SEBA are
shown to be well suited to review various aspects of
medical education [23, 24, 41–53]. By employing SEBA’s
Systematic Approach, Split Approach, Jigsaw Perspective,
Funnelling Process, Analysis of Data and Non-Data
Driven Literature, and SSR Synthesis (Fig. 1), this SSR in
SEBA will provide a holistic picture of CST programs
[54–58].
To ensure accountability, transparency and reproducibility,
an expert team involving medical librarians from
the Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine (YLLSoM) at the
National University of Singapore and the National Cancer
Centre Singapore (NCCS) and local educational experts
and clinicians from NCCS, the Palliative Care
Institute Liverpool, YLLSoM and Duke-NUS Medical
School (henceforth the expert team) will be consulted at
each stage of the SEBA methodology [59–62].
Stage 1: systematic approach
A. Determining the title and background of review
Focusing on CSTs in the postgraduate medical setting,
the research and expert teams set out the overall objectives
of the SSR in SEBA and determined the population,
context and concept to be evaluated.
B. Identifying the research question
The primary question was determined to be: “what is
known of prevailing approaches to communication skills
training in the postgraduate medical setting?”
A Population, Intervention, Comparison and Outcome
(PICOS) format, outlined in Table 1, was adopted to
guide the research process [63, 64]. To ensure a sustainable
review and to remain focused upon general communication
skills used in verbal and non-verbal
communications between physicians and patients, we
did not include articles focusing on interprofessional
communication in this review given its distinct role in
training, and in order to accommodate to existing manpower
and time constraints [65]. However, articles with
a minor focus on interprofessional communication were
still included and analysed if their main focus was on
physician-patient communication.
D. Identifying relevant studies
Guided by the expert team and prevailing descriptions
of CST programs, the research team developed
the search strategy for the PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO,
ERIC, Scopus, CINAHL, Google Scholar databases.
The full PubMed search strategy may be found
in Additional file 1: Appendix 1. Independent
searches were carried out through the seven databases.
All research methodologies (quantitative and
qualitative) in articles published or translated into
English were included. To accommodate existing
manpower and time constraints, the search was confined
to articles published between 1st January 2000
and 31st December 2020 [65]. Additional hand
searching of seven leading journals in medical education
(Academic Medicine, Medical Education, Medical
Teacher, Advances Health Sciences Education, BMC
Medical Education, Teaching and Learning in Medicine
and Perspectives on Medical Education) was conducted
to ensure key articles were included. To cover
further ground, the references of the included articles
obtained from the above methods were screened to
further include relevant articles.
E. Selecting studies to be included in the review
Six members of the research team independently
reviewed all identified titles and abstracts, created individual
lists of titles to be included and discussed these
online. Sandelowski and Barroso [66]‘s ‘negotiated consensual
validation’ was used to achieve consensus on the
final list of titles to be reviewed. Here, ‘negotiated consensual
validation’ refers to
“a social process and goal, especially relevant to collaborative,
methodological, and integration research,
whereby research team members articulate, defend,
and persuade others of the “cogency” or “incisiveness”
of their points of view or show their willingness to
abandon views that are no longer tenable. The essence
of negotiated validity is consensus”. (p.229).
Scrutinising the final list of titles to be reviewed, the
research team independently downloaded all the full text
articles on the final list of titles, studied these, created
their own lists of articles to be included and discussed
their findings online at research meetings. ‘Negotiated
consensual validation’ was used to achieve consensus on
the final list of articles to be analysed.
Stage 2: split approach
To enhance the trustworthiness of the review, a Split
Approach was employed [67, 68]. This entailed concurrent
analysis of the included data using Braun and
Clarke [69]‘s approach to thematic analysis and Hsieh
and Shannon [70]‘s approach to directed content analysis
by two independent groups of at least three
reviewers.
A. Thematic Analysis
Three members of the research team employed thematic
analysis to independently identify key aspects of
CST programs across various learning settings, goals,
learner and tutor populations [71–79]. This approach
was adopted as it helped to circumnavigate the wide
range of research methodologies present amongst the included
articles preventing the use of statistical pooling
and analysis [80, 81].
A reiterative step-by-step analysis was carried out
in which codes were constructed from the explicit
surface meaning of the text [82]. In Phase 1, the research
team carried out independent reviews and ‘actively’
reading the included articles to find meaning
and patterns in the data [82–86]. In Phase 2, codes
were collated into a code book to code the rest of
the articles. As new codes emerged, these were associated
with previous codes and concepts to create
subthemes. In Phase 3, the subthemes were organised
into themes that best depicted the data. An inductive
approach allowed themes to be “defined
from the raw data without any predetermined classification”
[86]. In Phase 4, the themes were refined to
best represent the whole data set. In Phase 5, the research
team discussed the results of their independent
analysis online and at reviewer meetings.
Negotiated consensual validation was used to determine
the final list of themes.
Concurrently, three members of the research team
employed directed content analysis to independently
review all the articles on the final list. This involved
“identifying and operationalising a priori coding categories”
by classifying text of similar meaning into
categories drawn from prevailing theories [87–91]. In
keeping with SEBA’s pursuit of an evidence-based approach,
the research team selected and extracted
codes and categories from Roze des Ordons (2017)‘s
article entitled “From Communication Skills to Skillful
Communication: A Longitudinal Integrated Curriculum
for Critical Care Medicine Fellows” [92]. Use of
an evidence-based paradigm article to extract codes
from was also in line with SEBA’s goal of ensuring
that the review is guided by practical, clinically relevant
and applicable data.
In keeping with deductive category application, coding
categories were reviewed and revised as required. The
Quality assessment of studies
To enhance methodological rigour and to provide reviewers
with a chance to evaluate the credibility of the
conclusions and the transferability of the findings, two
research members carried out individual appraisals of
the included quantitative studies using the Medical Education
Research Study Quality Instrument (MERSQI)
[93] and of the included qualitative studies using the
Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Studies
(COREQ) [94]. The summary of the quality assessments
may be found in Additional file 2: Appendix 2 as well.
Stage 3. jigsaw perspective
The themes and categories from the Split Approach are
viewed as pieces of a jigsaw puzzle where areas of overlap
allow complementary pieces to be combined. These
are referred to as themes/categories.
To create themes/categories, the Jigsaw Perspective
referenced Phases 4 to 6 of France et al. (2019) [95]‘s
adaptation of Noblit and Hare (1998) [96]‘s seven phases
of meta-ethnography. As per Phase 4, the themes and
the categories identified are grouped according to their
focus. These groups are contextualised by reviewing the
articles from which the themes and categories were
drawn from. This process is facilitated by comparing the
findings with tabulated summaries of the included articles
that were created in keeping with recommendations
drawn from Wong, Greenhalgh [97]‘s “RAMESES publication
standards: meta-narrative reviews” and Popay,
Roberts [98]‘s “Guidance on the conduct of narrative
synthesis in systematic reviews”.
In keeping with France et al’s adaptation, reciprocal
translation was used to determine if the themes and categories
could be used interchangeably. This allowed the
themes and categories to be combined to form themes/
categories.
Stage 4: funnelling process
The funnelling process saw the themes/categories juxtaposed
with key messages identified in the tabulated summaries
(Additional file 1: Appendix 2), and reciprocal
translation was used to determine if they truly reflected
the data. Once verified, the themes/categories formed
funnelled domains and served as the ‘line of argument’
in the discussion synthesis of the SSR in SEBA (Stage 6).
Results
Twenty-five thousand eight hundred ninety-four abstracts
were identified, 257 full-text articles were
reviewed, and 102 full-text articles were included. ‘Snowballing’
of references from these included articles saw a
further 49 full-text articles added and analysed, bringing
the total number to 151 (Fig. 2). The Split Approach revealed
similar themes and categories allowing the Jigsaw
Perspective to forward six themes/categories and the
Funnelling Process to forward six funnelled domains:
curriculum design, teaching methods, curriculum content,
assessment methods, integration into curriculum,
and the facilitators and barriers to CST.
For ease of review and given that most of the included
articles did not elaborate on many of the domains, the
data will be presented in tabulated form.
Curriculum design
A variety of curricula designs were adopted due to differing
curricular and program objectives, support and
structure; program duration and scheduling in the
learner’s training; learner and tutor availabilities, competencies,
experiences and settings; assessment methods;
education environment; and healthcare and education
systems. The principles and models used to structure
current CST programs are collated in Table 2.
Teaching methods
Methods to teaching communications may be categorised
into didactic and interactive methods. Didactic
methods include lectures [3, 13, 116–123], seminars [5,
37], presentations [35, 92, 103, 105, 114, 124–128] and
are increasingly hosted on video and online platforms
[14, 22, 119, 129, 130]. They are occasionally supplemented
by reading material [3, 119, 120].Interactive methods include role-play with feedback
sessions [3, 11, 13, 14, 17, 92, 103–105, 108, 118, 120,
121, 124, 127, 129–136], facilitated workshops [5, 103,
107, 118, 137–142] and group discussions [6, 13, 37, 92,
111, 121, 127, 130, 137, 143, 144]. Interactive methods
are also used to facilitate self-directed learning such as
facilitator-independent role-play [139, 142, 145–148]
where participants may choose to rotate amongst themselves
through the roles of patient, physician, observer
and critic [149]. They also include independently-held
group discussions [7, 16, 35, 102, 141, 142, 150, 151]
which encourage learners to learn from their peers
through observation [130, 131, 142] and feedback [35,
110, 130, 152, 153], as well as engage in introspective reflection
on the role and importance of good communication
[5, 6, 8, 16, 103, 108, 125, 126, 142, 146, 150, 151,
153–155]. Feedback and reflective practice [156–158]
are increasingly seen as key teaching tools critical to developing
adaptive, patient-centred communication,
shared decision making and negotiated treatment plans
[5, 6, 8, 16, 103, 108, 125, 126, 142, 146, 150, 151, 153–
155].
Content of curriculum
There are a diverse range of topics within current communications
curricula. To remain focused upon communications
training between patient and physician, we
align our findings with the ‘ACGME Core Competencies:
Interpersonal and Communication Skills’ [159] as seen
in Table 3.
Amongst this diverse array of topics, there are a few
that appear more commonly within particular specialities.
These are featured in Table 4.
Assessment methods
There are a variety of assessments methods used to
evaluate communication skills. In most of the included
articles, details as to when and how these tools are
employed were not elaborated upon. Available information
is collated in Table 5.
Acknowledging the premise that communication skills
develop over time and with experience, practice and reflection,
it is increasingly necessary to design assessments
at the appropriate stage of the learner's development
and setting. These assessment methods may be mapped
according to the progressive levels of Kirkpatrick’s Four
Levels of Learning Evaluation (Table 6) [143].
Integration of training
Most programs were part of a formal residency/ fellowship
curriculum which provided ‘protected time’ for
teaching [141]. However, these programs varied in duration
with some offering CST as a single component of
scheduled teachings and grand rounds, whilst others via
a stand-alone communications retreat, workshop or
course [11, 12, 119, 125, 126, 135, 137, 146, 147, 185,208]. These ad-hoc sessions were often more flexible
[114, 149, 173] to accommodate to the busy schedules of
the physicians [143]. They tended to be shorter in duration,
ranging from 1 to 3 hours per session and focused
on the specific needs of the learner population [16, 111,
149, 167].
Others spanned several sessions [3, 6, 13, 14, 35, 37,
99, 116, 123, 124, 131, 139, 140, 199, 202, 212, 218].
These longitudinal sessions were often structured in a
step-wise manner, with the intent of first delivering key
knowledge and developing requisite skills before more
complicated topics are introduced [22, 36, 92, 117, 127],
highlighting vertical integration within the spiralled curriculum.
These multiple sessions often take place during
specific rotations at regular intervals [13, 17, 35, 103,
107, 121, 130, 142, 153, 174, 175] over several months
[7, 33, 100, 104, 118, 128, 133, 134, 150, 151, 160, 165].
For example, Ungar et al. [130] implemented a 14-
session ‘breaking bad news’ training program for
second-year family medicine residents where core skills
in acknowledging patient needs were first taught,
followed by techniques on breaking bad news and confronting
distressing questions. Newcomb et al. [127]
used a similar spiralled curriculum that extended over a
two-year period to teach communication skills to surgical
residents with more advanced topics such as crisis
management coming in at a later stage.
Resources, facilitators and barriers to CST
a. Resources
Resources required to establish and sustain CST programs
are summarised in Table 7.
b. Facilitators
Facilitators are factors that aid effective delivery and
reception of CST. These include faculty support [37, 92,
108, 127], opportunities to attend courses [151], a
platform for feedback [92], faculty training [105, 116,
124, 129, 132, 133, 153, 185, 199, 200, 208] and simulation
sessions [13, 119, 135, 186].
c. Barriers
Barriers impede CST programs. These barriers include
curriculum factors, physician factors and patient factors.
Curriculum factors include the lack of protected time
[35, 37, 117, 119, 125, 127, 146, 147, 149, 153, 170, 173–
175], logistical and manpower constraints [14, 32, 100,
139, 142, 145, 146, 150], inadequate resources [150], inadequate
faculty support [37, 117] and a lack of buy in
from participants and colleagues [92].
Physician factors include overcoming complacency
with regards to CST [16, 99, 175, 202], overemphasis on
technical aspects of clinical practice over soft skills [36,
102, 124, 150, 173] and difficulty measuring
communication-related performance indices [8, 171].
Patient factors encompass both simulated patients and
real patients. Simulated patients have to be recruited,
trained and remunerated [14, 120, 131, 145]. Employ of
former patients acting as simulated patients creates concerns
over their biases and wellbeing [12, 36]. Limitations
of having staff or peers take on the role of
simulated patient lie in their variable acting skills and
their ability to convey the gravity of the situation and
the integrity of the encounter [12]. On the other hand,
real patients may give little to no criticism to their physicians,
hence limiting awareness of areas of improvement
[118, 202]. Elderly patients are especially unwilling to
disclose their emotional distress thus making it difficult
for physicians to pick up social clues [118]. Patients may
also mistakenly perceive politeness as having good communication
skills [202].
Stage 5: analysis of evidence and non-evidence-based
literature
With quality appraisals highlighting that data taken from
grey literature, opinion, perspectives, editorial, letters
and other non-primary data-based articles (henceforth
non-evidence-based data) were shown to be consistently
poor, the expert team determined that the impact of
non-evidence-based data upon the discussions and conclusions
drawn in the SSR in SEBA should be evaluated.
To do so, the research team carried out separate and
independent reviews and thematic analyses of evidencebased
data from bibliographic databases and compared
them to the themes drawn from non-evidence-based
data. The themes from both groups were found to be
similar, thus allowing the expert and research teams to
conclude that the non-evidence-based data included in
this review did not bias the analysis untowardly.
Discussion
Stage 6: synthesis of SSR in SEBA
In answering its primary research question, this SSR in
SEBA reveals growing employ of designated CST programs
within formal curricula. Taking the form of spiralled
curricula to support structured and longitudinal
programs, many CST programs use a combination of didactic
and interactive approaches in tandem with
context-dependent tools aimed at assessing the learner’s
expected abilities so as to facilitate learner-specific feedback
and support. This maturing approach to CST in
postgraduate medical education is scaffolded upon horizontal
and vertical integration of communications training
that sees CST training sessions carried out at a point
where particular topics are especially relevant to the
learner, highlighting greater education theory grounded
approaches in their design [127, 130]. This underlines
the rationale for different contents being inculcated in
different settings.
Efforts at curricula design of CST programs, too, have
taken a more holistic perspective with programs being
framed by clearly delineated design models, frameworks
and/or guiding principles. This may involve use of
situation-specific guidelines such as SPIKES [101, 112,
113]. Yet, this approach also pays due consideration to
the setting and relevance of the content in order to motivate
the learner to actively participate in a CST session
that activates their prevailing knowledge and skills. Use
of Knowles’s Adult Learning Theory and its latter reiterations
such as Taylor and Hamdy [220]‘s Multi-theories
Model that include Kolb’s Cycle [221, 222] scaffolded
around Miller’s Pyramid have also guided the integration
of reflective practice and timely, personalised and appropriate
support in formal curricula. Use of formal curricula
also helps ensure that structured interactions set the
stage for longitudinal development of skills and knowledge, ‘protected time’ for communication teaching,
and better blending of didactic sessions with interactive
sessions at ward rounds and grand rounds and/or online
discussions.
Based upon the findings and current design principles
identified in this SSR in SEBA, we forward a stepwise
approach to designing CST programs. This is outlined in
Table 8.
Based on the principles set out in Table 8, we believe
that this structured framework to the teaching and assessment
of CSTs may be used in a variety of contextual
and sociocultural settings and fine-tuned to the learner’s
knowledge, skills, attitudes and, increasingly, behaviour
over time.
The culmination of these finding also brings to the
fore several considerations, not least the notion that
CST programs should be blended with CST in medical
schools so as to deepen and widen the spiralled curriculum.
Such an approach would necessitate the use of
portfolios to inform learners and tutors of communication
gaps, and facilitate reflections, remediation and
progress towards the achievement of overarching
Entrustable Professional Activities (EPA)s [223, 224].
Changing thinking, attitudes, conduct and practice also
alludes to the role of CST in professional identity formation
which also warrants further study.
Limitations
Whilst we have conducted a three-tiered searching strategy,
through independent searching of selected databases,
repeated sieving of reference lists of the included
articles (snowballing) and searching of prominent medical
education journals, the usage of specific terms and
inclusion of only papers in the English languages may
have led to important papers being missed. Similarly,
whilst use of the Split Approach and tabulated summaries
in SEBA allowed for triangulation and ensured that a
holistic perspective was constructed, inherent biases
amongst the reviewers would still impact the analysis of
the data and construction of themes.
However, we believe that through the employment of
SEBA, this review has the required rigour and transparency
to render this a reproducible and comprehensive
article. We hope that the findings of this systematic
scoping review will be of interest to educators and program
designers in the postgraduate medical setting and
will help to guide the design of successful CST programs
to fortify physicians in this essential domain.
Conclusion
As we look forward to engaging in this exciting and rapidly
evolving aspect of medical education and practice,
we hope to evaluate our proposed framework in practice
in our coming research and focus attention upon the use
of portfolios in CST programs. This is particularly
in considering the possibility that CST may have a hand
in shaping professional identity formation. Further understanding
of theories and approaches underpinning
CST use within medical training is in need of further
study as is the role of online multimedia platforms and
the medical humanities in teaching adaptive, empathetic
and personalised communication skills.