In recent decades, physician advocacy, particularly regarding
social determinants of health and just distribution of
resources, has been embraced as a core component of
professionalism [1–3]. Medical organizations and codes of
conduct frequently emphasize the importance of physician
civic engagement [4, 5]. The American Medical Association
(AMA), for example, urges physicians to “advocate
for social, economic, educational, and political changes
that ameliorate suffering and contribute to human wellbeing.”
[6] Similarly, the Physician’s Charter asserts that
“the medical profession must promote justice in the health
care system, including the fair distribution of health care
resources.” [7] And physicians themselves almost unanimously
agree that community participation, political involvement,
and collective advocacy are important
professional duties [8].
Yet few physicians actually engage in these tasks [1].
In a 2004 survey, only a quarter of U.S. physicians reported
participating politically (apart from voting) on
local health issues [8, 9]. Indeed, physicians take part in
community and political activities less frequently than
the general population and other professionals with
similar levels of education and income [10, 11]. While
reasons for physicians’ low levels of engagement likely
vary, [1] there is clearly more work to do in equipping
physicians to participate in and contribute to civic life.
Educating medical students about their professional
responsibility to advocate for health-related issues is essential
to promoting more robust physician civic engagement in the future. Yet relatively little is known
about students’ awareness of or interest in these vital
topics. We therefore set out to understand medical students’
attitudes around civic engagement -- including
their interests and future plans around health policy,
their sense of responsibilities around healthcare access
and costs, their attitudes toward different forms of public
engagement, as well as specific issues of interest --
and to determine congruence with professional obligations.
We also hypothesized that students would express
stronger interest in advocacy around issues directly related
to health and medical care (e.g. nutrition, addiction,
care access) but lesser support for engagement
around indirect determinants of health (e.g. transportation,
education, economic inequality).
Methods
Survey administration
We conducted a cross-sectional, web-based survey of U.S.
medical students. Participants were recruited from Student
Doctor Network (SDN), a non-profit, online forum
for current and future healthcare students and professionals.
The survey link was posted on SDN’s Facebook
and Twitter pages and on the SDN website’s homepage,
online forums for allopathic and osteopathic medical students,
and blog; the blog post was also distributed to selfidentified
medical students who had previously opted to
receive SDN emails. The survey was anonymous, but participants
could opt to provide their email address to enter
a lottery for 1 of 20 $100 gift cards.
The survey launched on August 13, 2019, and closed
on October 15, 2019. Responses were collected and
managed using Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap),
a secure, web-based software platform hosted at
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSK) [12,
13]. Our findings are reported according to the Checklist
for Reporting Results of Internet E-Surveys [14] (Supplemental
Digital Appendix 1). The study was reviewed by
the MSK Institutional Review Board (IRB) and deemed
exempt.
Survey instrument
We adapted some survey items from prior studies [8, 9,
15–19] and developed additional, novel questions focusing
on study objectives (Supplemental Digital Appendix
2). A response to each question was required in order to
proceed to the next. The survey included demographic
items and several measures assessing participants’ interest
in following or becoming involved in healthcare policy.
Two measures tested their views of physicians’
responsibilities to patients around healthcare access and
costs (providing care regardless of patients’ ability to
pay, being aware of the overall costs of care they provide)
[9, 19]. Additional items gauged participants’
attitudes toward 3 forms of physician civic engagement:
[8, 19, 20] Community participation (providing healthrelated
expertise to local populations), individual political
engagement (being politically involved around health
issues at the local, state, or national level), and collective
advocacy (encouraging medical organizations to advocate
for public health).
The survey also assessed participants’ support for individual
or collective advocacy by physicians around 18 public
priorities, adapted from recent national surveys of the
U.S. population [17, 18]. Seven issues directly related to
health and healthcare: healthcare costs, healthcare coverage
for the uninsured, Medicare/Medicaid/Social Security,
drug addiction and treatment, abortion laws/reproductive
issues, nutrition/obesity/food safety, and disability rights.
Eleven additional issues had connections to or implications
for health: education, [21, 22] housing/homelessness,
[23, 24] transportation, [25, 26] immigration, [27, 28]
LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual, and queer/
questioning) issues, [29, 30] racial issues, [31, 32] economic
issues, [33, 34] environmental issues, [35, 36] human
rights, [37, 38] crime/criminal justice, [39, 40] and
military/national security issues [41, 42].
Response options included Likert scales for agreement
(strongly agree, agree, disagree, strongly disagree) and
importance (very important, somewhat important, not
important). We piloted a preliminary version of the survey
with 15 medical students and internal medicine residents
at Weill Cornell Medical Center and made minor
changes to the survey based on their feedback and
responses.
Analysis
We used descriptive statistics to summarize participants’
demographics and attitudes. We used census zones to
determine geographic region of participants’ schools. We
used the Kruskal-Wallis test to evaluate associations between
demographic characteristics (including gender,
race, year in school, political identification, and anticipated
future field) and attitudes around healthcare policy
and forms of civic engagement. We also created a composite
civic-mindedness score for each participant by
averaging the strength of their responses (using scores of
1 for “not important,” 2 for “somewhat important,” and
3 for “very important”) to all 18 public-priorities questions
(overall score); we similarly generated composite
scores for the 7 issues directly related to health and
healthcare (medical score), as well as for the 11 issues
addressing indirect or social determinants of health (social
score). We used univariate tests and multiple linear
regression to evaluate associations between demographic
characteristics and overall, medical, and social scores.
All analysis was performed in Stata 14.2 [43].
There were 815 visitors to the SDN postings linked to the
survey. Three hundred sixty-one unique individuals
accessed the survey link, and 356 completed the first page
to determine eligibility (based on attendance at an accredited
U.S. medical school). Of 277 eligible participants,
240 completed the survey (view rate 44%; participation
rate 77%; completion rate 87%) [14]. (Supplemental Digital
Appendix 1).
Participant characteristics are shown in Table 1.
Eighty-seven percent of participants were enrolled in
MD programs. Approximately two thirds were 25–34
years old and white, and about half were women. Participant
gender and race were similar to characteristics of
U.S. medical students overall [44]. All geographic regions
and years of medical school were represented, with
slight overrepresentation of first-year students.
Interest and intentions around healthcare policy
Three in four participants in our study were members of
at least one medical organization addressing healthcare
policy issues (e.g. American Medical Association, American
Medical Student Association, American Medical
Women’s Association). Nearly allreported following
healthcare policy in the news (Table 2). Eight-7 % somewhat
or strongly disagreed that healthcare policy will
have little or no effect on their care of patients, with liberals
twice as likely as conservatives to hold these views
(p < 0.001). Most also planned to become involved or
take leadership in healthcare policy issues as physicians;
liberals and those intending to enter primary care were 2
and 6 times likelier, respectively, than others to express
strong interest in policy involvement (p < 0.05).
Responsibilities around healthcare costs and access
The survey probed participants’ beliefs about physicians’
responsibilities around healthcare access and costs
(Table 3). Three quarters agreed it is very important for
physicians to know the overall cost of the care they provide.
A large majority believed that it was very important
for physicians to provide necessary care regardless of the
patient’s ability to pay, although liberals were more
likely than independents and conservatives to hold this
view (p < 0.001).
Public roles: collective, community, and individual
The survey assessed participants’ attitudes toward 3
forms of civic involvement by physicians: collective advocacy,
community participation, and political engagement
(Table 3). Three quarters said that it was very
important for physicians to encourage medical organizations
to advocate for the public’s health. This measure
correlated with political identification, with liberals more
likely than independents and conservatives to hold this
attitude (p < 0.001). More than half reported that it is
very important for physicians to provide health-related
expertise to local community organizations. First- and
second-year students and those intending to enter primary
care were more likely than others to express this
opinion (p < 0.05). Fewer than half agreed that it is very
important for physicians to be politically involved in
health-related matters at the local, state or national
level. Liberals were more likely than independents and
conservatives to hold this view (p < 0.001).
Issues of interest
The survey explored participants’ attitudes toward 18
public priorities (Table 4). Nearly all believed it was very
important for physicians to individually or collectively
advocate around drug addiction and treatment, healthcare
coverage for the uninsured, and nutrition, obesity,
and food safety. Large majorities also strongly favored
professional engagement around healthcare costs, abortion
laws and reproductive issues, human rights, disability
rights, Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security, and
education. Similarly, most rated physician advocacy on
racial issues, housing and homelessness, and LGBTQ issues
as very important. Lesser support was evident for
physician engagement around environmental issues, immigration,
economic issues, crime and criminal justice,
transportation, and military and national security issues .
Overall civic-mindedness scores, averaging the strength
of participants’ responses (using scores of 1 for “not important,”
2 for “somewhat important,” and 3 for “very
important”) to all 18 issues, had a mean of 2.5 and median
of 2.6 (IQR: 2.28–2.83). Medical scores, based on
participants’ assessments of the 7 issues directly related
to health and healthcare (healthcare costs, healthcare
coverage for the uninsured, Medicare/Medicaid/Social
Security, drug addiction and treatment, abortion laws/reproductive
issues, nutrition/ obesity/food safety, and disability
rights), had a mean of 2.7 and a median of 2.9
(IQR: 2.57–3.00). Social scores, based on participants’ responses
to the 11 issues with indirect connections to or
implications for health (education, housing/ homelessness,
transportation, immigration, LGBTQ issues, racial
issues, economic issues, environmental issues, human
rights, crime/criminal justice, and military/national security
issues), had a mean of 2.4 and a median of 2.5
(IQR: 2.00–2.82). (Table 4).
Regression analysis indicated that liberal participants
had higher overall, medical, and social scores than conservatives
(p < 0.01). Nonwhite participants had higher
medical scores than whites (p < 0.05); they also had
higher overall and social scores, although this trend was
not statistically significant. Kruskal-Wallis tests showed
women and those intending to enter primary care to
have higher overall and social scores than other
participants (p < 0.05). However, our regression analysis
did not find gender or intended future field to be a significant
predictor, suggesting that political identification
was driving these differences and capturing the variance
in our model. (Table 5, Supplemental Digital Appendix
3).
Discussion
Our findings can assist medical schools in preparing the
next generation of physicians to more actively engage in
civic life. Nearly all participants in our study expressed
nascent interest in healthcare policy and civic engagement.
Anticipating its relevance to their future practice,
most stayed abreast of healthcare policy news and anticipated
some degree of policy involvement as physicians.
These results suggest that many students would welcome
greater opportunities in medical school to learn
about and participate in health policy issues.
Participant views of specific civic roles were more variable.
Large majorities expressed a strong sense of professional
obligation around the just provision of clinical
care, from being cost-aware to treating patients who are
unable to pay. These attitudes are similar to those of
U.S. physicians. Notably, despite efforts to develop novel
curricula, [45–47] these fundamental public health issues
remain underemphasized in medical school environments.
Our findings should encourage further efforts, as
they suggest that many students might appreciate instruction
around the challenges of caring for patients in
a system where costs are frequently high and nontransparent
and many patients are un- or under-insured.
About half of participants saw civic engagement by individual
physicians, whether through community service
or political involvement, as crucial. While similar to the
views of practicing physicians in the U.S. [8], these attitudes
stand in contrast to broad recognition of the important
role of individual physicians in driving health
system changes that will better meet the health needs of
society [48]. More transparent role modeling of civic engagement
by educators and better student access to
meaningful advocacy opportunities could lead to greater
student awareness of the importance of individual engagement
and greater commitment to future action [49].
Most participants strongly supported public health advocacy
by medical organizations. This finding mirrors
the attitudes of U.S. physicians [8] and indicates that
medical students would likely be interested in learning
about how medical organizations have advocated around
public health issues, as well as the obstacles (internal
and external) to success. This would give students crucial
insight into organized medicine’s mixed record in
challenging or perpetuating the inequalities that pervade
the U.S. healthcare system. It could also give students a
greater appreciation for the enormous value of and need
for civic engagement by individual physicians, who are
often at greater liberty than medical organizations to critique
inequities and participate in community and political
affairs. To this end, schools should also highlight the
numerous training and career opportunities available to
medical professionals interested in advocacy.
Attitudes varied importantly by issue. Participants
showed broad support for individual or collective physician
advocacy around most of the public priorities included
in our survey. Our findings regarding specific
issues were consistent with results from physician surveys,
[8, 9] with the exception of healthcare coverage for
the uninsured, which was rated as very important by
81% of students in our study compared with 58% of
practicing physicians in a 2006 study [8]. The overall
similarity in attitudes is notable, given differences in
generational attitudes, and may reflect a commonality of
concerns among individuals with an interest in healthcare
[50]. The greater emphasis on problems related to
the uninsured in our study may related to increased
public awareness of the issue [51].
As hypothesized, directly medical issues rated higher
than those with indirect connections to or implications
for health. This finding, while intuitive and broadly consistent
with results from physician surveys, [8, 9] suggests
that medical students in our study may not entirely
understand the ways in which social determinants such
as immigration, [27, 28] economic issues, [33, 34] transportation
[25, 26] and crime/criminal justice issues [39,
40] can profoundly shape patients’ health. More, seemingly
disparate issues are inevitably connected in that
government budgets are finite, so choices in one area
frequently have implications for others. For example,
higher military expenditures are consistently associated
with lesser funding for health and welfare programs [41,
42]. Medical schools should ensure that students fully
grasp these and other ways in which non-medical issues
systematically influence health.
Attitudes were generally stable across all years of medical
school, but, as in physician surveys, [8, 9] many correlated
to gender, race, future field, and political
identification. Political identification was the most frequent
and strongest predictor. Notably, conservatives in
our study were more likely than liberal participants to
doubt that healthcare policy would affect their care of
patients, and conservatives had lower overall, medical,
and social scores than liberals. These findings highlight
the importance of ensuring that medical school curricula
related to civic engagement recognize political diversity
and remain attentive to appealing to concerns of students
across the political spectrum. They also raise the
question of whether some opportunities for education
about and participation in civic engagement issues
should be elective, providing opportunities for students
to explore issues that best align with their interests.
Our findings with regard to race are also noteworthy
and corroborate findings from physician surveys [8, 9].
Our sample was approximately one-third non-white;
non-white participants identified predominantly as Asian
(28%), with few (7%) identifying as Black or African
American. Non-white participants had higher medical
scores than whites, with a trend toward higher social
and overall scores, as well -- suggesting consistently
higher levels of civic engagement and perhaps broader
interests compared to white students. The drivers of
these attitudinal differences require further research, but
may reflect the influence of diverse backgrounds and
experiences.
However, as among medical students overall, Black
students were underrepresented among our participants
compared to the U.S. population [52]. Stronger
representation of the views of underrepresented minority
students is important for identifying issues for
physician civic engagement that reflect the priorities
of the broader population. More representative student
populations might also engender greater student
interest in a broader range of civic engagement issues,
and ultimately a more engaged physician workforce.
To optimize physician engagement, medical schools
should redouble their efforts to recruit medical students
who represent the diversity of the overall
population.
This study has several limitations. Our modest sample
size and online recruitment strategy raise the possibility
that our findings may not be representative of
all U.S. medical students. However, our study did
capture attitudes from medical students from diverse
geographical locations and with demographic characteristics
similar to U.S. medical students overall [44].
In addition, we intentionally framed questions about
specific issues in a neutral, apolitical way. However,
some participants may still have perceived political
bias in some items, such as “environmental issues”
and “abortion laws and reproductive issues”; this perception
may have influenced responses, particularly
among conservative students. Finally, our survey was
conducted prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, which
has highlighted health disparities in minority populations,
[53, 54] and the widespread Black Lives Matter
protests following the murder of George Floyd [55].
These events may have influenced medical student attitudes
toward civic engagement, particularly around
issues with indirect links to health. Our findings do
not reflect these potential shifts; future studies should
evaluate the influence of these events on the attitudes
of students and physicians.
Conclusion
Medical students in our study reported keen interest in
civic engagement and advocacy, particularly around issues
directly involving health or healthcare services,
which is generally consistent with professional standards.
Many attitudes and interests are associated with political
affiliation, race, gender, and intended future field. To
optimize future physician advocacy, educators should
provide opportunities for student learning and engagement
in these vital matters.
Practice points
Medical students want to learn about just provision of
care and advocacy by organizations.
Advocacy by individual physicians is underappreciated
by students.
Students may incompletely understand how social determinants
shape health.
Advocacy curricula should appeal to students across
the political spectrum.
To ensure robust future advocacy, schools should recruit
a diverse and representative student population.