Introduction
The selection of candidates to surgical training has been
called a “missing link” in surgical patient safety work [1].
Regardless of how good the education and training system
is, selection of candidates to undergo education and
training is crucial. An important question is thus if the
right candidates are trained to become future surgeons.
Currently, there is a lack of evidence on which instruments
can predict future competence [2]. However,
there is an increased global interest in evidence-based
recruitment and selection processes for specialist surgical
training [3–6].
Assessment tools for selection have mainly been investigated
in Anglo-Saxon countries such as Australia,
Canada, USA, New Zealand, Ireland and the UK concomitant
with profound reforms of the recruitment and
selection processes to improve surgical training [2].
Most of these countries use centralized systems for selection.
This is combined with structured interviews,
psychological and aptitude tests based on national templates
with exact grading according to specific criteria to
predict clinical performance [7–9]. In contrast some
countries such as Sweden apply a traditional, locallybased,
decentralized system for selection to surgical
trainee positions without formal guidelines or firm selection
criteria [10].
The purpose of this report is to delineate current selection
procedures in EU member-states and identify salient
bases for differentiating these. Cognizant of the
heterogeneity that also exists within centralized and
decentralized systems, the advantages and disadvantages
of these two paradigmatic systems are discussed. Avenues
for improving selection processes with evidencebased
tools independent of the underlying structure are
suggested.
Material and methods
Information on bodies in EU countries responsible for
surgical training programs and assessment tools for selection
were obtained through Google searches and PubMed.
A string of keywords was used including name of country,
“surgical”, “trainee”, “selection”, “specialization” or “application.”
Websites and “grey literature” [11] on the application
and selection processes to surgical training were
identified. Subsequently, a letter was sent to 16 Board Delegates
in the Section of Surgery of the Union Européenne
des Médecins Specialists (UEMS) to obtain information
concerning the respective country’s selection process. One
reminder was sent to non-responders. The data for this
article derives from an ongoing multi-disciplinary intervention
project on recruitment and selection processes to
specialist surgical training in Sweden. All data pertaining
to human subjects was obtained in adherence with relevant
guidelines and regulations for the wider project’s
ethical clearance obtained from the Swedish Ethical Review
Authority (case number 2016–1050). The application
and selection processes were sorted into three categories:
centralized selection was defined as having a single national
application, selection, and admission/employment
process; hybrid as having one or two of the three; decentralized
selection process as having none of the above
undertaken at the national level.
Comparative case study of a decentralized (Sweden) and
centralized (Ireland) process for trainee selection
Flyvebjerg argues [12] comparative case studies provide
deeper and more sophisticated insight into complex,
context-dependent phenomena than searching for
context-independent, aggregate-based generalizations
(rules). Sweden was selected as an archetypical case of a
decentralized selection system. Data on selection procedures
in Sweden was obtained via available literature
[10] together with semi-structured interviews with 13
experienced surgeons, as previously described [13] and
knowledge within the research group. Oral informed
consent as per Swedish Ethical Review Authority (case
number 2016–1050) was obtained from all informants,
who were informed of the purpose of the study, that
their contributions would be analysed and can come to
comprise part of published results of the study, and that
they would not be cited by name in any public documents.
Permission to record interviews was obtained at
the opening of all recorded interviews. One interviewee
did not consent to be recorded and notes were taken in
this interview. The theme of selection emerged in the
interview material and served as a starting point for the
current study.
Ireland was selected as a polar opposite case to
Sweden, being the most centralized and formalized system
for selection of surgical trainees in the EU. To obtain
comparable insight, the research team conducted
two study-visits to the Royal College of Surgery Ireland
(RCSI) to observe the current testing and selection procedures.
Visit 1 (2018) consisted of observation of interviews
and selection of candidates to Core Surgical
Training. Visit 2 (2019) consisted of observation of the
interviewing and selection of candidates for the cut to
Higher Surgical Training which was performed after the
2 years of basic training.
During the visits, relevant material describing the selection
process was shared by RCSI faculty and staff,
fieldnotes were taken during observation of the selection
process and combined with spontaneous interviews with
faculty members and involved staff [14]. Fieldnotes were
pooled after each of the two visits to the RCSI and analysed
by a team of two sociologists and four surgeons
[14]. Focus during the study-visits was on the operationalization
of the selection instruments and procedure,
discussions of intended and unintended effects, challenges
and benefits of the selection system in general
and specific instruments, and the preconditions for their
utilization. Data from the site visits and supporting documents
provided the core background for Ireland as
archetypical of the centralized system is based.
Results
Mapping
Selection processes in 27 countries were analysed and
divided into three types of selection on a scale from centralized
to hybrid to decentralized (Fig. 1, Table 1).
Slovakia was excluded due to lack of information in English.
Answers from seven UEMS Board delegates were
obtained (Additional file 1). A wide range of selection
processes using different assessment tools were documented,
from a strict national and centralized process to
a completely decentralized system down to the local
hospital level. Only a few countries conducted transparent,
standardized selection with clear statements of the
weight of each criterion. Some countries have standardized
selection, but with no clear statements on the
weighting of criteria, while other countries, like Sweden,
have no official standardization or guidelines for selection
of trainees.
Interviews were found to be the most frequently
used assessment tool, but type of interview ranged
from ad hoc to structured Multiple Mini Interviews
(MMI). The use of evidence-based assessment tools in
the selection process also varies, from combinations
of a multitude of validated tools to only test results
or an interview (Table 1).
Twelve countries have decentralized selection processes
with recruitment, evaluation and selection
decision-making by local universities and medical
schools or hospitals. Two countries have hybrid systems
and 14 countries have national centralized systems.
None of the processes are identical across countries, and
the elaborateness of the centralized systems vary
considerably.
Associated with the centralization-decentralization
scale which constitutes a significant difference among
countries is whether surgical training is primarily governed
by an employment or educational logic. In some
countries where a college or university is the responsible
organizing entity, the applicant to a trainee position is
considered a “student”, and a centralized admissions or
selection process similar to other higher studies is performed.
This is exemplified by the Irish case. Other systems,
usually decentralized, where hospitals select
candidates to surgical training, and do so as immediate
or future employers, act according to an employment
logic.
Ireland has the most elaborate centralized selection
process, and the only country formally testing technical
skills and aptitude. Spain has a centralized recruitment
process where written exam scores are translated into a
rank and hospital positions are based on this rank only.
In other countries, for example Poland with a national
selection process and guidelines for selection, there are
fewer applicants than positions, meaning that more or
less all applicants are accepted (written communication
UEMS delegate, Oct 24, 2017) (Additional file 1). Some
countries such as Estonia and Malta have de facto centralized
systems due to country size, with only one
teaching hospital.
Denmark is an example of a hybrid centralizeddecentralized
system, consisting of a national application
system whereafter regional healthcare organizations perform
the final selection of candidates. Likewise, in the
Netherlands, after applying through a centralized national
system, candidates choose the regions they wish
to work in and varied regional selection procedures ensue.
Finland changed its system during the study period,
from a locally run and less structured process to a centralized
system with selection through the universities
with structured interviews and clear criteria for
evaluation.
Belgium represents a country with decentralized local
selection but a standardized consensus selection process
across each of the seven university hospitals (Additional
file 1). In Greece, training positions only exist in public
hospitals and are generally advertised on the official
website of respective local authority for Public Health.
There are no specific application deadlines for applying
for a training position and selection process works on a
“first come, first served” basis, i.e. priority is given to an
individual only according to the date of submission of
their applications.
Comparative case study of two representatives of
archetypes: Sweden and Ireland
Comparison of the decentralized Swedish and centralized
Irish selection processes is visualized in Table 2.
Sweden conducts strictly local selection processes at
each hospital without standardized guidelines or consensus
on selection criteria. An informal system exists with
a 6–12 month locum position in the surgical department
for vacant or temporary positions. The head of department
and program director then decides whether or not
a permanent position as a surgical trainee is offered
based on employment needs. The lack of transparency
and the unstructured process of assessment during the
locum was considered problematic by the interviewed
surgeons. However, support for the locum system was
quite strong as it was deemed appropriate to evaluate a
candidate’s fit for the job. A common theme for those
not entirely satisfied with the current system concerned
the need to apply structured and validated assessment
tools as they had experienced unsuitable candidates slipping
through the system [13]. A trainee usually receives
a permanent position in the department when training is
completed. This was stated as the main reason why the
surgeons felt concerned about unsuitable surgical
trainees in order to avoid a dysfunctional, ill-suited
colleague.
In Ireland, the selection process is well-described on
the RCSI website for potential candidates [15]. Ireland’s
surgical training takes place in two steps with a selection
process for each. Selection for Core Surgical Training is
included in Table 2. After 2 years a second selection is
made to Higher Surgical Training. During the first selection,
around 100 candidates compete for 60 positions,
and candidates are tested for technical and nontechnical
skills. After technical testing, a session of four
consecutive eight-minutes Multiple Mini Interviews
(MMIs) with two assessors from different surgical specialties
are conducted. The four stations focus on different
professional areas and the assessors independently
electronically rate the candidates on a Likert scale. The
members of the faculty were aligned through a common
information meeting in the morning before the interview
and testing process started. Instructions and rules for
how to conduct and document the MMI assessment
were provided. Furthermore, the Department for Quality
Assurance at RCSI monitors the process in real time to
assure alignment in judgement of the assessors during
the MMI sessions. Personal knowledge of a candidate
was not an exclusion criterion for being an assessor.
The RCSI has developed a metricized system for observations
during the MMI and assessments of academic
records and aptitude tests to rank the candidates. The
highest ranked candidate chooses hospital and training
position first. The metrics from the first selection
process are adjusted to a maximum of 100 points. A majority
of the assessors were satisfied with the process,
and support for the system is strong, though a few faculty
members mentioned concerns about the lack of
possibility of identifying unsuitable candidates per se
during the short interviews with standardized questions.
After 2 years of training, with a variety of compulsory
academic, pedagogical and practical activities, a selection
takes place to Higher Surgical Training. For this round
of selection, a maximum of 1000 points could be collected
through the above-described activities and another
round of MMIs, where the interviews comprised
400 points of the total score. Some candidates missed
the final selection by less than 10 out of 1000 points
[16].
After scores are compiled, the assessors were able to
discuss the candidates and scores but are not allowed to
make adjustments to the final result, even in cases where
they were frustrated over exclusion of a candidate they
found very promising by a slim margin. The lack of possibility
to directly impact the choice of a future colleague
was clear and some faculty members stated that the only
way to have any impact was to participate in the process.
This, along with a collegial sense of duty ensures a
sufficient number of quality assessors to maintain the
very personnel-intensive system. A further systemic
benefit according to the RCSI program director is that
the attrition rate has been reduced substantially after
this rigorous process for selection has been applied in
tandem with follow-up on skills during the first two
trainee years.
Discussion
This study shows great variations in how surgical
trainees are selected and in the application of validated
assessment tools.
A comparison of centralized and decentralized systems,
especially the specific cases of Sweden and Ireland,
shows particular advantages and disadvantages associated
with each selection system. The Irish centralized
system benefits from running an annual and open competitive
national recruitment process that increases the
number of candidates to choose from. The selection
process is systematic, transparent and concentrated, and
all candidates are compared in line with the BEME (best
evidence medical education) guide no 45 [2]. A centralized
process with a high degree of standardization mitigates
the risk of decisive individual bias and secures a
transparent and equal process for all applicants [17].
A further advantage of the current centralized standardized
system in Ireland is that it reportedly lowered
the attrition rate in the training programs (Prof. O.Traynor,
Dean Of Postgraduate Surgical Education &Training,
personal communication, March 20, 2019). A low
attrition indicates efficacy of the instruments used for
assessment, i.e., how well they test for capabilities
needed for completing the educational program. Declining
attrition rates also have clear economic benefits.
However, it is difficult to compare attrition rates across
centralized and decentralized selection systems, due to
the lack of data in decentralized systems. The case in
point: in Sweden the total number of surgical trainees at
any given time is not recorded. Keeping track of the
trainees over the course of their training allows for
evaluation of cost, attrition, and effectiveness of the
training program in each hospital. This is more feasible
and practiced in centralized systems. However, it is not
impossible to implement in a decentralized context if
drop-outs are reported to a central entity charged with
collecting and analysing such data.
Centralized systems for selection with systematic assessment
tools are also the ones producing knowledge
on the subject of selection with sufficient volumes of observations
in controlled contexts, as shown by the
Anglo-Saxon countries [5, 6, 18–20]. Extensive selection
systems receive more attention, resources and scrutiny
devoted to their operation, maintenance and improvement.
Likewise, the more centralized the system, the
more transparency and accountability is required for legitimacy.
On the other hand, more sporadically used systems
implemented on fewer numbers of candidates and
involving fewer individuals in the recruitment evaluation
and selection process, garner less attention, critical assessment
and produce less documentation. Thus, centralized
systems more frequently produce evidencebased
data on instruments and procedures, data that can
also be utilized by decentralized systems. This is
reflected in that almost all studies on assessment tools
for selection were conducted in the centralized Anglo-
Saxon contexts [2, 21].
A central virtue of local or decentralized systems is
flexibility, responsiveness and adaptation to local needs
[22]. Depending on how processes are implemented the
flexibility of decentralized systems can be advantageous
or disadvantageous.
Recruitment from the locum system was deemed by
the experienced Swedish surgeons to be positive as it
allowed decisions to be made after observing the candidates
´ work in situ [23]. Previous job performance in the
department is considered a valid way to assess a candidate
if done in a structured way by peer ratings [24–26].
Such a system allows for a holistic assessment over time
compared with a “collection of indicators” rendered
through a series of discrete assessments produced by
multi-instrument centralized systems. This decentralized
selection process benefits from being flexible and allows
for locum positions whenever need arise, e. g. parental
leave, turn-over or health issues. It also increases the
control over the process for the local head of department
and allows young doctors to try several different
specialties. On the other hand, a disadvantage is, as the
case for Sweden, that there is currently no national consensus
on assessment methods for selection of candidates
to surgical training programs.
The decentralized and unstandardized processes can
lead to happenstance playing a significant role in the selection
process with locals or “insiders” having undue
advantage especially if the trainee positions are not announced
externally. Also, having more than one candidate
to choose from affords comparative evaluative
opportunities and reduces happenstance playing a role.
Most selection systems are oriented towards finding
the top candidates, but an important consideration when
selecting to training positions is also to identify unsuitable
candidates to mitigate the multiple detrimental effects
of enrolling a potentially problematic trainee and
future colleague [13, 27]. Trainees that need remediation
will inevitably affect patient safety, work climate, and are
costly for the department [28–31]. On the one hand,
local selection processes are particularly susceptible in
that they de facto narrow the candidate field with an increased
risk for selecting a person with a slow or
dysfunctional learning curve or hazardous traits [13, 27].
On the other hand, prolonged exposure of a candidate
to multiple senior colleagues and members of other professions
in a variety of settings would result in deeper familiarity
and offer greater opportunities to detect both
unsuitability and fitness for the job [13, 32]. Hazardous
traits may be detected through validated tools or clinical
job performance if appropriate attention is paid, albeit
currently not performed to the best of the authors
knowledge [13, 27, 33, 34].
As shown in Table 1, a majority of the countries rely
on academic examination (six) or non-MMI job interviews
(ten) in their selection process. These methods
have relatively low predictivity for work performance according
to literatures in industrial organizational psychology
and current evidence in post-graduate medical
education [2, 6, 25]. As pointed out in BEME guide no
45, test scores and grades are insufficient in selecting applicants
for a complex and multidimensional role like
specialty training. Likewise, traditional CVs and letter of
recommendations are inconsistent in predicting performance
[2, 6].
Regardless of having a centralized, decentralized or hybrid
selection system, the interview is the key assessment
tool. The current study indicates that structured interviews
are not often used, although they are considered
to be one of the most reliable tools for assessment with
twice to three times the predictive value compared with
unstructured interviews [25, 35, 36]. Even with only a
handful of applicants for each position, MMIs have also
been shown to be reliable and well suited to evaluate
non-cognitive skills [19, 37, 38]. However, conducting
MMIs may be too resource-demanding in decentralized
systems with few applicants [39], whereas the cost of
implementing a structured interview would be reasonable
and advantageous. Structured interviews allow
probing for non-technical skills, warning signs for unsuitability
and simultaneously finding top achievers [40].
With the current pandemic of Covid-19 there are
new challenges arising when interviewing candidates.
The transition to video-mediated communication
(VMC – Skype / Zoom) recruitment interviewing instead
of face-to-face (FTF) interviews can save time
and decrease cost for the applicant, but concerns have
been expressed if there are disadvantages [41]. Research
has been conducted for over a decade on
VMC versus FTF interviewing and early studies of
those actively engaged in interactive interviewing tend
to show little difference between FTF and VMC on
the impressions of assessors of job candidates [42–
44]. However, a recent study found significant differences
in assessments of passive assessors, i.e. those
not actively participating in the conversation, but
watching it, indicating that there are varying impacts
on assessors depending on their roles in interviewing
[45].
Although alluring to surgeons, evidence on selection
using assessment instruments and procedures specific
for surgical training, for instance assessing technical aptitude
and visuospatial ability, has yet to be proven. In
Ireland aptitude testing is conducted only for the first
round of selection, i.e., for core surgical training [4, 46–
48]. Aptitude testing is costly and resource demanding.
Its importance and optimal weighting between different
assessment instruments is unknown, as is correlation to
later surgical performance.
Situational judgment tests (SJTs) have been found to
reflect job performance and tend to discriminate accurately
between average and low performing participants
[49, 50]. Situational judgment tests could be used as an
initial screening method before conducting more costly
and time-consuming assessments, especially in situations
with a low applicant to vacancy ratio [19, 20, 51]. Other
assessment tools that have been investigated as suggested
screening tools for successful residents are personality
testing, emotional intelligence (EI) and grit, but
without proving a clear benefit like the SJTs in distinguishing
between candidates at the level of selection [52,
53]. Grit is interesting since it has been found to be
higher amongst consultants than trainees, and proposed
to be associated with attrition amongst residents, but
only few and underpowered studies exist and there is a
lack of large and longitudinal studies [54–56].
Surgery is a high-stakes occupation. Insufficient critical
attention to selection, conserved traditional practices,
and reluctance to use decision aids and systematic
procedures is not unique to this field [35]. However, the
consequences are uniquely inappropriate due to high
risks to patient safety and work environment. Current
practice in most countries is sub-optimal with room for
improvement in both centralized and decentralized
systems.
Many centralized systems would benefit from utilizing
more validated instruments, especially combinations
thereof, and have volumes of applicants to
feasibly do so. Decentralized systems can benefit
from the collective and cumulative learning of developing
and deploying more standardized systems
across local units. Standardization is not the same
as centralization. In countries where a hospital is
the organizing entity for recruitment and selection
of surgical trainees, there is often an employment
logic, i.e., the applicant considered a part of the
workforce, and thus selection for the job is conducted
like any other apprentice position. In contexts
where surgical training is associated with more
or less permanent employment at the unit where
training takes place, transition to a centralized
system is unlikely. Even in such contexts, a standardized
selection procedure preferably composed of
validated or evidence-based components, and sharing
data across like units, is possible to develop and
would be beneficial [57].
Limitations
There are several limitations in our study. The countries
selected were limited by language and responding UEMS
surgical board members, leading to a possible selection
bias. Despite these differences, the material was considered
valuable in describing the overall features for selection
of trainees to surgical programs across the EU in a
comparative manner. A limitation is that researchers
were only able to study two prototypical examples of a
centralized and decentralized system in depth.
A strength of the conducted study is that the research
group consisted of social scientists and surgeons, which
allowed for researcher triangulation and contributions
on qualitative research competence, human resource
management competence and the experience of heads of
department with personnel and hiring responsibilities in
Sweden. Another strength is that data was collected over
an extended period of time, which gave the opportunity
for iterative data collection and discussion within the
group.
Conclusion
A wide variety of selection processes to surgical training
programs and limited use of evidence-based assessment
tools were found across the EU. Comparing systems reveals
advantages and disadvantages of different selection
systems with modern evidence-based processes found in
reformed centralized rather than traditional systems.
Based on these findings and current evidence, recruitment
and selection to surgical training in many European
countries has great room for improvement.
A standardized procedure composed of validated
evidence-based components could be developed and distributed
across decentralized units as well as a fixture of
centralized systems, independent of employment or educational
logics without increasing cost significantly.
A selection framework adopting current evidencebased
instruments would include 1) ensuring multiple
candidates to select from per position through wide advertisement
and recruitment efforts; 2) conducting multiple
mini interviews (MMI) or structured interviews by
at least two assessors; 3) applying situational judgment
testing (SJT); 4) conduct structured validated assessments
during job trial periods with SJTs (if trial work
periods are employed). An unresolved issue is that the
optimal weighting between these different instruments.
Likewise, even though surgery is a technical craft, the
evidence is still equivocal concerning technical skill and
aptitude assessment at the point of selection.