Background
Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (ACPO), also known
as Ogilvie’s syndrome, is a rare condition observed in
patients with some underlying diseases [1]. Although
ACPO is observed in some patients who undergo invasive
surgical procedures, few reports of ACPO development
after minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery exist
[2, 3]. We present the first report (to the best of our
knowledge) of a case of ACPO with rapid septic progression
after laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair.
Case presentation
A 78-year-old man with a diagnosis of right inguinal
hernia classified as II-3 according to the Japan Hernia
Society classification underwent transabdominal preperitoneal
hernia repair (TAPP) at our hospital. He had a
history of chronic subdural hematoma evacuation at age
77 years, appendectomy during childhood, and hypertension.
He had been continuously using telmisartan for
hypertension; he used no other medications. During the
preoperative evaluation, although premature ventricular
contraction was observed on the electrical cardiogram,
no evidence of asynergy or low function of the left ventricle
was detected on the echocardiogram. The pulmonary
function test results were within normal limits;
therefore, we assessed that his cardiopulmonary function
was maintained. Surgery was performed under general
anesthesia using propofol, sevoflurane, rocuronium bromide,
remifentanyl, fentanyl, and sugammadex sodium.
We also used cefazolin sodium hydrate as a prophylactic
antibiotic and acetaminophen for postoperative pain.
His postoperative progress was good except for moderate
subcutaneous emphysema. He was discharged on
the first postoperative day. However, he returned to the
emergency department with difficulty defecating and
abdominal distension on the third postoperative day.
The patient presented with marked distension and
mild tenderness of the entire abdomen without peritoneal
signs; no tumor was palpable during rectal examination.
His vital signs were as follows: temperature,
36.0 °C; heart rate, 80 beats per minute; and blood pressure,
160/93 mmHg. Blood test results showed a mildly
elevated total white blood cell count (8600 cells/μL; neutrophils,
94.5%) and slightly increased level of C-reactive
protein (0.90 mg/dL). Liver injury, renal dysfunction,
and electrolyte imbalance were not detected. Enhanced
computed tomography (CT) revealed significant enlargement
from the cecum to the rectum (Fig. 1). The mesenteric
arteries and veins were patent. The enlarged colon
and rectum were well-enhanced with radiopaque dye
and considered non-ischemic. There was no evidence of
small intestinal dilatation, mechanical obstruction, or
bowel perforation. Postoperative constipation was the
first diagnosis and he was admitted for hospitalization.
He received some conservative management as follows.
We performed digital disimpaction, glycerin enema for
colorectal decompression, and intravenous administration
of panthenol to promote bowel movement; however,
his nausea and vomiting did not improve. Further, we
inserted a nasogastric tube for intestinal decompression
and performed an X-ray examination to evaluate the tube
location and bowel dilatation. Residual radiopaque dye of
the CT remained in the significantly dilated bladder 20 h
after admission (Fig. 2). He had also experienced dysuria
after the previous discharge. We inserted a urethral
catheter based on the belief that dysuria and constipation
affected each other. He gradually started to release small
volumes of stool, and these treatments seemed relatively
successful.
He later exhibited nocturnal delirium and suddenly
experienced cardiopulmonary arrest 30 h after
admission; he could not be resuscitated. At the time
of tracheal intubation, there was no vomitus causing
asphyxiation; however, there was massive foamy sputum
intratracheally. Laboratory test results showed a
decreased total white blood cell count (4400 cells/μL;
neutrophils, 62.2%) and significantly increased level of
C-reactive protein (19.27 mg/dL). The serum blood urea
nitrogen (58.9 mg/dL) and creatinine (2.48 mg/dL) were
also increased, indicating acute renal dysfunction. His
serum troponin level was negative but D-dimer (10.9 μg/
mL) was increased. CT imaging during autopsy (Fig. 3)
did not show any significant change, such as bowel perforation
in abdomen, from the time of admission. Cardiomegaly
was not significant; however, a large quantity
of intratracheal fluid and upper and dorsal infiltration of
the lungs were detected. Based on the clinical course and
these examination results, apart from postoperative constipation,
ACPO was considered the fundamental disease
and developed fulminant obstructive colitis leading to
critical sepsis rapidly.
Discussion and conclusion
ACPO, considered synonymous with Ogilvie’s syndrome,
is a rare clinical state characterized by acute colonic dilatation
in the absence of any mechanical obstruction [4].
This peculiar condition is primarily observed in hospitalized
patients with severe illnesses such as cardiac or
neurologic events, trauma, and infection, and in some
who have recently undergone surgery [1]. Common
symptoms are acute massive abdominal distention and
pain; however, nausea, vomiting, and constipation are
not consistently present [5]. Ironically, the signs of systemic
toxicity do not appear until catastrophic complications
have occurred. If left untreated, progressive dilation
of the colon can result in colonic mural ischemia or
perforation in up to 15% of cases, and the mortality rate
is estimated to be 40% [1].
It is believed that functional disturbance of colonic
motility leads to the development of ACPO, but the
pathophysiology is not entirely clear. The most common
theory used to explain this condition is an autonomic
imbalance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic
innervation of the colon, resulting in a relative
excess of sympathetic over parasympathetic tone and
leading to dilation of the colon [1]. For patients with
severe underlying conditions or those who have undergone
recent surgery, the sympathetic reaction might
be relatively increased. Numerous medications such
as anticholinergics, opiates, calcium channel blockers,
and psychotropic drugs have also been associated with
ACPO [1]. Patients with basic chronic illnesses might
be using multiple medications that affect bowel movement;
therefore, they are likely to develop ACPO. Our
patient did not have a history of constipation, mental
illness, or the use of any medications that could influence
bowel movement during the preoperative period;
therefore, his background likely did not cause ACPO.
Remifentanil and fentanyl are the only perioperative
medications that could be considered potential causes
of ACPO; however, their effects would have already
worn off at the time of re-admission. Although intraoperative
injuries of the intestine or autonomic nerves
during surgery were not identified retrospectively, some
perioperative complications must be excluded. According
to a review of 15,176 TAPP cases, the incidence
rate of postoperative bowel obstruction was reported
to be 0.06% [6]. There are also reports of postoperative
ileus after TAPP caused by tacks [7], barbed suture
devices [8], mesh erosion, and adhesions [9]. However,
these complicated cases usually do not exhibit dilatation
of the large intestine. Our patient also developed
dilatation of bladder; therefore, it seemed that a wide
range of organ hypomyotonia had occurred in the pelvis.
The functions of the pelvic organs are innervated by
the autonomic plexus, including the superior hypogastric
plexus comprising sympathetic nerves, the inferior
hypogastric plexus comprising mixed sympathetic
and parasympathetic nerves, and the pelvic splanchnic
nerves as parasympathetic nerves [10]. These nerves or
plexus are outside the reach of operative procedures
during TAPP and rarely could be injured directly. It
was concluded that operative invasion itself caused the
autonomic imbalance leading to colic and cystic paresis.
More than approximately 20% of ACPO cases are
associated with postoperative conditions such as coronary
bypass, organ transplantation, cesarean delivery,
and major orthopedic and supine surgery [1, 5, 11],
although there are few reports of ACPO associated
with laparoscopic [2, 3] and robotic-assisted [12] surgery.
TAPP is considered a minimally invasive procedure;
however, the incidence of this rare disease might
not depend on the degree of surgical invasiveness.
Usually, the majority of patients diagnosed with ACPO
are successfully managed with conservative measures
such as nil per os, a nasogastric tube, erythromycin,
and metoclopramide; emergent colonoscopy and surgery
are rarely required [13]. Recently, the effectiveness
of neostigmine as an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor
to promote bowel movement has been reported [14]. If
obstructive colitis is suspected as a complication, then
appropriate antibiotics are also needed. These conservative
measures are usually performed for several days, and
more invasive procedures should be considered if the
conditions worsen [5, 11].
In our patient, it was hard to determine the exact cause
of sudden death. Pulmonary embolism could be raised as
one of the diagnosis to be differentiated because of the
increased level of D-dimer, but equivocal. Deep venous
thrombosis was neither be detected in enhanced CT on
admission, nor attenuation at the pulmonary trunk or
main pulmonary artery in autopsy CT. A large quantity of
intratracheal fluid and wide range of infiltration in lungs
suggested congestion or acute pulmonary edema, however,
the disease progression was too rapid to consider
usual pneumonia, acute cardiac failure or even acute
respiratory distress syndrome. We also assessed that his
cardiopulmonary function was well-maintained according
to the preoperative exams, as occurrence of a cardiovascular
event was not suspicious. Based on his clinical
course and all examination results, fulminant obstructive
colitis and critical septic state seemed adequate for the
reason of fatal cardiopulmonary injury.
Our case presented an exceptionally rapid clinical
course; therefore, we missed the chance to consider surgical
procedures. We could not immediately suspect ACPO
because paralytic ileus seemed to be a more obvious diagnosis
after surgery. However, the limited involvement of
the small intestine and massive colonic dilatation, which
are not typical in paralytic bowel obstruction, suggested
the correct diagnosis. The interventions we performed,
which comprised nasogastric tube use, digital disimpaction,
and administration of a glycerin enema, were not
enough to improve his condition given the distribution
and pathogenesis of the disease. Monitoring his condition
more carefully and using more aggressive therapy
earlier, such as neostigmine or prophylactic antibiotics
from the time of admission, subsequent colonoscopy for
decompression, or even surgery, might have resulted in a
better outcome. Furthermore, in hindsight, it could have
been beneficial if we had confirmed his bacteremia by
performing a blood culture test; however, his nocturnal
delirium indicated critical sepsis caused by obstructive
colitis.
In conclusion, our patient was a rare but highly suggestive
case of ACPO after TAPP. In certain patients, such as
the elderly, sepsis caused by ischemic colitis can progress
rapidly. Careful observation of clinical features is indispensable
to avoid a poor prognosis.