“The honour of belonging to the Royal Society is
much sought after by medical men, as contributing
to the success of their professional efforts, and two
consequences result from it. In the first place the
pages of the Transactions of the Royal Society occasionally
contain medical papers of very moderate
merit; and, in the second, the preponderance of the
medical interest introduces into the Society some of
the jealousies of that profession. On the other hand,
medicine is intimately connected with many sciences,
and its professors are usually too much occupied
in their practice to exert themselves, except
upon great occasions.”
Charles Babbage, Reflections on the Decline of Science
in England, and on Some of its Causes – Of the
influence of the Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons
(1830)
Introduction
This excerpt from Babbage’s famously cantankerous
treatise continues to ring true almost 200 years later.
Though a great deal of newspaper print, conference discussion
and journal space has been dedicated to addressing
the urgent concerns of scientific irreproducibility
and outright fraud amongst full-time scientists [1–5] the
reasons for research misconduct of medical doctors
(hereon referred to simply as doctors) has attracted far
less attention here in the UK.
After behaving dishonestly in the operation of clinical
trials involving patients at his Lancashire GP practice, the
erasure of Jerome Kerrane from the UK medical register
in 2019 serves as another reminder, almost 10 years after
Andrew Wakefield’s erasure from the medical register, of
how the public image of doctors can be tarnished [6].
However, reflection on whether the perpetrators are cynical
wildcards or our professional culture or institutional
policies may be contributory remains to be seen. Conflicts
of interest between researchers and drug and device companies
have been discussed at length [7–10] but examination
of the professional culture of medicine in the UK is
uncommon, critical analysis of the training and regulatory
institutions even less so. Richard Smith and Peter Wilmshurst
are amongst the small number of critics of a professional
culture that finds it difficult to accept the presence
of dishonesty amongst its ranks and sometimes actively
refuses to investigate it [11–13]. In 1993 Stephen Lock and
Frank Wells published the first edition of the only book in
print dedicated to medical research misconduct and have
also made recommendations as to how the profession can
be policed to prevent abuses of power [14]. The transfer of
European Union clinical trials legislation into UK law in
2004 made significant deviations from the GMC’s Good
Medical Practice illegal within the context of clinical trials.
Notwithstanding this, there has been little to no advancement
in regulating doctors’ forays into research.
Historical context
The association between medicine and scientific theory is
probably as old as medicine itself, given the need for a philosophy
of health and disease in which to couch the pragmatic
business of diagnosis and cure. For most of British history, the
practice of healthcare was delivered by an admixture of practitioners
trained via informal apprenticeships and university educated
physicians. The Enlightenment for the medical
profession was predominant, if not incipient in the
early decades of the eighteenth century and the workings
of a middle ground between empiricism and rationalism
were soon underway. Though some scientific
and technical advances were made in the eighteenth
century, the proliferation of doctors seemed to make
little difference to the onslaught of disease that
afflicted the British people. Overall, doctors developed
a public image that would be an outright embarrassment
today.
“Satirists, cartoonists and commentators widely portrayed
medicos as pompous asses, seeking to hide
their ignorance behind a veil of hard names in dead
tongues, rapaciously exploiting the helplessness of
the sick … In short, everybody could see that medicine
was hardly making much real progress towards
the goal of rendering life safe and healthy, and there
was a widespread perception that a malaise infected
the medical profession itself. Indeed, medicine
lacked any professional presence. The London colleges
dwindled into insignificance and offered no
leadership … [15]”
Unsurprisingly, university trained doctors looked for
ways to further their name amongst the wealthy, redounding
to the disrepute of the profession inchoate. The historical
record demonstrates that a desire for wealth, prestige
and celebrity was a motivation for many Enlightenment
physicians to publish books and magazine articles, with
features familiar to the medical profession of today:
‘The choice of the medical topic does not seem to
have been important. Fresh graduates asked patrons,
professors, and even friends for advice on subjects
likely to forward their names in the world. And yet
the content had to be creditable and avoid the pitfalls
of precipitated self-promotion. The obvious difficulty
was that would-be authors had little practical
knowledge and no research infrastructure on which
to fall back.’ [16]
Modern day research misconduct
Circumstances for doctors have changed greatly since the
nineteenth century, when competition with quacks, apothecaries
and the fraternity made their income uncertain.
Given that today’s doctors are comfortable both in their
remuneration, social standing and job security, transgressions
of public trust are indefensible. Though the Wakefield
case engendered condemnation from the biomedical
community worldwide, it shouldn’t be forgotten that his
1998 Lancet paper passed elite peer review standards, his
career was unblemished until the late 1990s and similar
breaches of trust are not rare in the medical community.
One of the most egregious cases of research misconduct
in the UK was exposed earlier in the 1990s when the distinguished
gynaecologist Malcolm Pearce of St. George’s
Hospital in London fabricated a report describing the
transplantation of an ectopic pregnancy into a patient’s
uterus to result in a live birth, as well as falsifying a clinical
trial on 191 women with polycystic ovarian syndrome suffering
from recurrent miscarriage [17]. Despite the high
profile nature of Pearce’s case at the time and a formal
statement from the respective journal declaring that both
publications should be withdrawn, the clinical trial report’s
abstract remained intact on the journal’s website for
several years and the paper was subsequently cited in several
papers as an example of fertility treatment [18–25].
Unfortunately the problem of faulty journal articles
remaining within the research corpus is not rare and has
been discussed, along with myriad other factors undermining
the reliability of the scientific enterprise, in Richard
Harris’ compelling book Rigor Mortis. Since the
early 2000s major concerns have been raised over the
difficulty in reproducing many published scientific findings
[26]. In 2015 a London symposium on the issue
crystallised in a useful report published by the Academy
of Medical Sciences [3], while the Royal Society’s more
recent series of debates on scientific culture further
emphasised the importance of scientific irreproducibility:
‘Narrow approaches to assessment based on publication
metrics risk promoting an environment in
which systemic pressures may incentivise individuals
to compromise on the rigour and integrity of
their research.’ [4]
Suggestions abound as to how to improve this culture to
ensure that reliable, honest science is incentivised and for
dishonest miscreants and incompetence to be discouraged
[4, 27]. Criticisms have occasionally been scathing, such as
Barbara Redman stating in 2013 - ‘there is a disconnect between
ethical norms and the real world of science’, along
with helpful suggestions for how the problems can be addressed
[28]. It is through reflecting on the reproducibility
crisis along with the pressure of publishing in top ranking
journals that the unfortunate side effect of research misconduct
within the scientific community has become better
recognised [7].
The reasons for research misconduct amongst
doctors
Doctors involved in research misconduct are generally
characterized as dishonest anomalies within a profession
that is otherwise careful of its scruples, the so-called
‘bad-apple metaphor’ [28]. A corollary of this is a lack of
the same reflective criticism that the scientific community
is employing to examine dishonesty amongst its
own ranks. The oft cited meta-analysis by Daniele
Fanelli of the University of Edinburgh shows that around
2% of researchers (including doctors) admit to having
falsified, fabricated or modified data for publication before,
with 14% being aware of colleagues having done so
[29]. Looking specifically at the UK, it is remarkable that
only a single published study has specifically questioned
doctors with respect to research misconduct. David Geggie,
now a Consultant in Emergency Medicine, conducted
a survey in 2000 asking hospital consultants
whether they had ever performed or witnessed research
misconduct. Including ‘softer’ forms of research misconduct,
such as guest authorship, 5.7% of respondents admitted
to having carried it out, while 4.1% of
respondents expressed a willingness to selectively report
data if it would enhance a grant application [30].
Importantly, 59.8% of respondents in Geggie’s study
reported a sense of necessity in publishing papers in
order to further their career. As Babbage identified,
though post-Enlightenment medicine has an intimate
connection with the sciences it is difficult for practicing
doctors to find the time to get involved with medical research,
let alone act as lead investigators on such projects.
This is even truer today, with the cumbersome
bureaucratic nature of existing medical practice and
postgraduate medical training. Irrespective of these pressures,
it is remarkable as to how rarely the assumption
that doctors ought to be doing, rather than informing
medical research has been questioned. In the words of
the renowned medical statistician Doug Altman:
‘The length of a list of publications is a dubious indicator
of ability to do good research; its relevance
to the ability to be a good doctor is even more obscure.’
[31]
This then begs the question as to why this tendency exists.
Given the lack of any clear relationship between conducting
a research project and the day-to-day grind of diagnosing
disease and treating patients, why is there such a pressure on
doctors to author original research publications?
Fortunately a major contributor to this incentive is easier
to identify and change than much of the cultural afflictions
of the scientific establishment. As evidenced by the person
specification documents on the NHS specialty training website,
the Royal Medical Colleges (with the exception of the
Royal College of General Practitioners) encourage applicants
to conduct scientific research [32]. Most of the Royal Colleges
do not make their exact application scoring criteria
public but the Royal College of Physicians is exceptional in
this regard. Top marks are awarded for those candidates
who can claim: ‘I am first author, or joint-first author, of two
or more PubMed-cited original research publications (or in
press)’, with no importance placed on whether or not the
subject of this research is relevant to the job in question [33].
Given the emphasis placed on the ‘publish or perish’ culture
that encourages scientific misconduct and irreproducible research
amongst scientists, it stands to reason that the incentive
scheme employed by the Royal College of Physicians
would have a similar effect.
It is, of course, not necessarily due to wilful misconduct
that a doctor’s research be found to be irreproducible.
The ‘hoaxing, forging, trimming and cooking’ that
Babbage referred to comprises, one hopes, of only a minority
of low quality publications, but the lack of access
to adequate preparatory training that scientists have reported
is of even greater relevance to the doctor who
wishes to foray into research [3, 27]. The reflections of
the scientific community in this regard make a salutary,
though no doubt unintended, inference to a further
contradiction in the doctor’s desire to front research projects.
If full-time scientists feel underprepared to conduct
research, it seems counterintuitive for a doctor to lead the
charge [34]. Indeed the Royal College of Physicians’ 2016
study on doctors’ involvement with research showed that,
when averaged across all grades of experience, insufficient
knowledge in statistical skills was the most common impediment
to performing research. Other important barriers
included not knowing who could act as a research
mentor and, particularly at more junior levels, insufficient
expertise in the area in which research might be considered
[35]. This echoes the findings of the independent
inquiry commissioned by The Royal College of Obstetricians
and Gynaecologists following the Malcolm Pearce
case, as he was able to convince a doctor he was supervising
for a PhD to unwittingly help him with his fraud:
‘The evidence presented to us highlighted the need
for appropriate research training in obstetrics and
gynaecology … Such training should include a basic
understanding of research ethics, study design and
analysis and an understanding of the processes involved
in publication and the responsibilities of authors.
Trainees should also be aware of what
constitutes appropriate training and supervision in
research.’ [36]
Regrettably, almost 25 years later, mandatory preparatory
training is yet to be established in the UK. Another important
finding of the Royal College of Physicians’ 2016 study
was that doctors frequently considered performing research
as a means to boost their résumé. However, the College’s interpretation
of this appears to be in the positive.
“ … for [junior doctors] extrinsic motivators were
reported to be much more important. The most
clear example of this is for the statement ‘it enhances
my CV or publications record’ … This seems
to indicate that being involved in research is seen as
a good boost to the employability for those still in
training.” [22]
This is unsurprising given the incentive structure in
place, and as described later, the North American experience
demonstrates that this can, perhaps predictably,
encourage bad behaviour.
The legal and professional frameworks
surrounding research misconduct
Since they are bound by GMC codes of practice, are
doctors held to a different professional standard to scientists?
In essence, yes. The GMC documents Good
medical practice and Good practice in research clearly
describe honesty as ethically binding to all aspects of
medical and research practice, so evidence of breach of
these guidelines could be punished with GMC sanctions
[37, 38]. However although investigators involved in
clinical trials, such as Jerome Kerrane, are legally bound
by the UK Clinical Trials Regulations, there is no legislative
framework criminalising research misconduct outside
of a clinical trial. Hence a doctor who fabricates a
research article or case report could be sanctioned by
the GMC but would not have broken any UK law. Even
in this regard, GMC sanctions where research misconduct
was a salient factor are very rare, with only 15 cases
in the past 13 years and a lacklustre record on issues of
research misconduct in general [39, 40].
The relationship between research misconduct
and medical specialisation
While attempts to study dishonesty and misconduct
amongst UK doctors total just 1 survey published in
2000, 3 more recent surveys of US specialty training applications
have elicited sobering discussions amongst the
American medical community. The authors checked the
published journal articles and abstracts stated on candidate’s
urology, ophthalmology and neurosurgery training
programme applications. The results were startling, revealing
misrepresentation and sometimes complete fabrication
of articles, with rates ranging from 5 to 45%
[41–43]. It is of no surprise that commentary on these
findings mentioned the competitiveness of these specialties
as partial explanations for the transgressions, with
similar findings from a Canadian study published in
2015 [44]. It is long overdue for UK specialty training
applications to be analysed in a similar manner. Furthermore
embarking on an MD or PhD programme, often
funded with public or charitable funds, has become extremely
common for highly competitive specialties such
as surgery or cardiology. Given the lack of preparatory
training and questionable incentives of many doctors
carrying out such research, the reproducibility of their
results compared with work done by full-time scientists
would be especially worthy of examination.
Preventing research misconduct
Calls for research misconduct to be legally prohibited have
been made for years [45] and such legislation should perhaps
be designed with special attention to doctors, given
the extraordinary access they have to patients’ bodies and
intimate information. An independent regulatory body
dealing with all issues of scientific integrity could help to
protect researchers who raise good faith confidential concerns
from retaliatory lawsuits launched by powerful
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies [46]. However
the medical profession first needs to acknowledge its
substantial contribution to the volume of biomedical research
publications and the possibility of dishonesty or incompetence
in this research having a significant effect.
Despite numerous scientific conferences and reports dedicated
to the issue of misconduct, no such selfexamination
has been demonstrated by the Royal Medical
Colleges or the GMC. It is noteworthy that the most recent
World Conference on Research Integrity had no
practising doctors as speakers, while a research study from
a Malaysian group suggests that academics in healthcare
departments were more likely to be involved with research
misconduct than other academics [47]. Liang, Mackey and
Lovett at the UCSD School of Medicine incisively argue
that the negative effects of research fraud are incalculable
due to the reliance of low-income countries on our research
to guide the development of their own efforts. Describing
the damaging effects of a dishonest culture on the
mind of the developing clinician:
‘ … students and trainees do not push back against
this system because of the reasonable fear of recrimination
within the culture, and then over time and
long hours simply become acculturated to it as a
matter of survival. Yet a culture where senior academic
physicians are unchallenged, unethical, and
reward dishonest medical trainee applications supports
a never-ending cycle of inculcation of corrupting
influences in each generation of academic
medicine.’ [48]
Discussions of medical education’s role in preventing
research misconduct are frequently misplaced since the
reasons for refraining from research misconduct barely
extend beyond any normative conception of ethical behaviour
and distracts from the doctor’s agency to behave
ethically [49]. Fenton and Jones in their otherwise helpful
2002 paper state that:
‘The preponderance of misconduct occurs because
many authors are not informed on ethics, as these
issues have generally not been addressed in medical
undergraduate or postgraduate education.’ [50]
The truth of this statement is undermined by the absence
of any advanced ethical framework required to
understand that dishonest research activity is unethical,
let alone its incommensurability with the role of a doctor.
In the words of the influential British medical ethicist
Thomas Percival:
‘Let both the Physician and Surgeon never forget
that their professions are public trusts, properly rendered
lucrative whilst they fulfil them, but which
they are bound by honour and probity to relinquish
as soon as they find themselves unequal to their adequate
and faithful execution.’ [51]
Whether medical education academes are best placed to
instruct on these virtues remains unclear, particularly in
light of the striking research findings of Anthony Artino
Jr. and colleagues, revealing that over 90% of the healthcare
education researchers in their international survey
admitted to having partaken in some form of questionable
research practice, including 49.5% of respondents confessing
to have cited papers that they had not read [52].
Though fora to allow researchers to discuss research ethics
are likely to be helpful, it is unknown as to who would
be best placed to model the attributes espoused by Percival,
or whether the virtues can be inculcated via professional
or academic programs at all [53].
Conclusion
The code of silence that protects senior doctors from
scrutiny is rarely discussed in the UK and the GMC
could help break this by issuing more sanctions on doctors
who have acted in a wilfully dishonest fashion [54].
There is a compelling need for the Royal Medical Colleges
to assess the degree of misrepresentation in doctors’
job applications and should reformulate how
medical trainees are incentivised. Demonstrating involvement
with patient safety improvement or already
existing research projects would be a much more constructive
incentive than that which not only allows research
misconduct, but appears to encourage it [31].
Though the medical profession still secures the trust of
the majority of the British people, there is some suggestion
that this has been declining [55]. A meaningful discourse
on how our training and reward systems should
be improved would help prevent future generations of
doctors from pursuing dishonest opportunities to advance
their careers and would have a positive effect on
public trust in the medical profession, a relationship that
we still rely on to serve our patients effectively.