Background
Disasters are defined as phenomena caused by environmental
events or armed conflicts that lead to fatalities,
injuries, stress, physical damage and economic breakdown
of great significance [1, 2]. They occur on a scale
that overwhelms local resources, usually requiring external
assistance. Improving the effectiveness and efficiency
of interventions, and the fairness of their distribution, is
crucial in the field of disaster response. For that reason,
increasing and improving the scientific evidence for disaster
relief is essential. Research is also vital to accurately
describe phenomena in disasters, also called humanitarian
emergencies or crises [3–5]. Conducting research
during or in the aftermath of disasters poses many specific
practical and ethical challenges. This is particularly
the case with research involving human subjects where
data collection must be balanced with the appropriate
protection of research subjects. Researchers play a central
part in this analysis, as does the system of research
ethics review. Such a system, involving research ethics
committees (RECs) or institutional review boards (IRBs),
is crucial to ensure compliance with existing international
and national standards and more general principles
of research ethics. The extraordinary circumstances
of research conducted in disaster settings require appropriate
regulations to ensure the protection of human
participants. We decided to perform a systematic qualitative
review of existing disaster research ethics guidelines
to collect and compare existing regulations. The
goal of this study is to systematically and qualitatively review
the existing ethical guidelines for disaster research
using the constant comparative method (CCM).
Methods
Search strategy
We identified guidelines for research ethics in disaster situations
by a three-tiered search strategy: 1) searching two
databases (PubMed and Google Scholar), 2) an Internet
search (Google), and 3) a search of the references in the
documents included from the first two searches. We used
the following search terms: (guidelines AND “research
ethics” AND (disaster OR emergency OR crisis)). Assessment
of eligibility was limited to the first 200 hits retrieved
in Google and to the first 250 hits in Google Scholar ordered
by relevance in accordance with the methods used
in numerous similar systematic reviews. Limits were not
placed on the PubMed search.
The screening process is summarized in Fig. 1. At the
first screening stage, one researcher reviewed the document
titles. Only documents written in English or translated
into English by the guideline developers were
included. Titles clearly not related to the topic, as well
as scientific and popular articles, books, presentations,
and opinion pieces which were clearly not guidelines
were excluded. This gave 110 documents which were
further screened. The second eligibility screening was
performed independently by two researchers. Each researcher
evaluated the documents against the inclusion
criteria and screened the document’s reference list for
additional disaster research ethics guidelines. Independent
results were compared between the two researchers.
When discrepancies existed, a third researcher was involved
to resolve any eligibility disagreements.
Inclusion/exclusion criteria
Documents were included if they fulfilled all the following
criteria:
A. satisfied our definition of research ethics guidelines:
systematically developed statements to assist with
the responsible conduct of researchers and other
stakeholders in the process of planning, conducting,
and reporting research;
B. was issued by an international or national
organization/institution/meeting or developed by a
group of researchers or an individual researcher;
C. research ethics in disaster settings was addressed in
the whole document or at least in its own part or
section;
D. addressed at least one of the following types of
research: clinical drug research; biomedical research
involving physical interventions; public health
research; research on health data or biological
material; psychological or social sciences research.
Qualitative analysis
We used the constant comparative method (CCM) for
analysis of included guidelines [6, 7]. This method of
qualitative analysis combines inductive category coding
with a simultaneous comparison of all obtained units of
meaning. A unit of meaning is defined as a part of the
text (e.g., phrase, sentence, several sentences) that “must
be understandable without additional information, except
for knowledge of the researcher’s focus of inquiry”
[7]. Open coding was applied as a first step in the coding
process to identify units of meaning and to allow categories
to emerge from the data. According to CCM,
each new unit of meaning is “compared to all other units
and subsequently grouped (categorized and coded) with
similar units of meaning” [7]. In the process of open
coding and comparison, initial categories were changed,
merged and omitted when necessary. The second step
involved axial coding to explore connections between
categories and subcategories. Selective coding as a third
step involved selecting the core themes. As a result of
selective coding, we identified two core themes emerging
from our analysis: research ethics review process and
vulnerability.
Results
The research team reached consensus on including 14
full text guidelines for analysis (see Additional file 1:
Table S1 for the complete list). The included guidelines
were published during the period 2000-2014, with a peak
in the number of documents being issued between 2008
and 2010 (8 out of 14 guidelines were published during
this period).
Issuing organizations
The guidelines identified during the search showed a diversity
in geography and types of issuing organizations.
Seven out of 14 guidelines are applicable internationally,
five are national level guidelines (two each from Canada
and the US, and one from India), and two apply to a particular
organization (Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) or
Doctors Without Borders) or institution (US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention). However, it should be
taken into account that only guidelines written in English
were included, which is a limitation of this study.
International organizations issuing guidelines included
the World Health Organization (WHO) [8], MSF [9]
and the International NGO Training and Research
Centre [10]. Several national organizations issued guidelines,
including the Indian Council of Medical Research
[11] and the Canadian Medical Association [12]. Three
guidelines arose from particular meetings or specific
working groups including: a meeting entitled “Ethical Issues
Pertaining to Research in the Aftermath of Disaster,”
organized by the New York Academy of Medicine
and the National Institute of Mental Health [13]; the
Harvard Humanitarian Action Summit [14]; and the
Working Group on Disaster Research and Ethics [15].
Content of the guidelines
Qualitative analysis of the 14 included guidelines revealed
two core themes: vulnerability and REC review
process. Much of the material addressed in the guidelines
could be grouped under one of these themes. At
the same time, the themes overlap and a clear distinction
between the two is not possible. Within each of the
two core themes, various categories were identified, and
within each of these, further subcategories were identified.
These are summarized in Additional file 2: Table S2
and Additional file 3: Table S3, and described in detail in
the sections below.
Vulnerability
We discovered four main categories applying to vulnerability
of participants: vulnerability as a concept; risks
and burdens; risk management; decisional capacity of research
subjects. For each category, we identified a set of
subcategories. The full list of categories and subcategories
is presented in Additional file 2: Table S2 and referenced
to the specific guidelines.
Vulnerability as a concept
We identified three subcategories within this category:
definitions of vulnerability (in four guidelines), reasons
for vulnerability (in six guidelines), and gaps in the existing
guidelines (in two guidelines).
Four out of 14 guidelines included a definition of vulnerability
or analysed the concept of vulnerability. For
example, Collogan et al. discussed different approaches
to the definition of vulnerability and contrasted vulnerability
as “a characteristic of the group” with “certain
individual characteristics” [13]. The authors of this
guideline criticized very broad definitions of vulnerability
because these can be applied “to cover almost any
person, group, or situation” and often serve to stereotype
and disempower research participants [13].
Six guidelines mentioned and analysed the reasons for
vulnerability in disaster settings. These arose from specific
disaster situations and included, for example, political status
and human rights abuses in refugee populations [16];
young and old age of research subjects, social vulnerability,
physical injuries, and experience of violent and traumatic
events leading to mental health problems in the
aftermath of disaster [13]; psychological and physical consequences
of a disaster, as well as poverty in pre-disaster
settings and disempowerment in post-disaster settings
[17], increased public risks and devastation [18] and substantial
psychological stress in humanitarian settings [19].
Two guidelines issued in the early 2000s pointed to
gaps in other general research ethics guidelines (such as
the Declaration of Helsinki, Council for International
Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) guidelines,
etc.) and noted that these existing guidelines look at
vulnerability very generally and do not address the special
circumstances of disaster settings1 [17] or do not
provide an applicable definition of vulnerability [13, 16].
Risks and burdens
This category covered different types of risks and burdens
that research subjects might face during disaster
research. The category included six subcategories: physical
harm (in seven guidelines), re-traumatization (in five
guidelines), manipulation (in two guidelines), exploitation
(in eight guidelines), unrealistic expectations (in
eight guidelines) and stigmatization (in two guidelines).
Various guidelines mentioned different sources of possible
direct physical harm to research subjects, depending
of the type of research study and the authors’
experience. Goodhand mentioned a possibility that research
interventions might “affect the incentives system
and structures driving violent conflict or impact upon
the coping strategies and safety of communities” [10].
Leaning referred to situations where “sampling techniques
may confer unintended negative attention or
focus on particularly vulnerable subpopulations […] and
make conditions worse” [16]. Allden et al. mentioned
several examples of physical risks, e.g., the fact that “the
presence of western researchers in itself, could present a
danger in targeting of local civilians” [14]. The authors
gave an example where “researchers gave great attention
to ethics and staff behaviour only to learn subsequently
that the research group’s driver, who stayed with the research
staff in the village where research was being conducted,
engaged in transactional sex with girls <18 years
of age” [14]. Tansey et al. paid attention to physical risks
posed by research involving novel interventions and suggested
that, “Early detection of toxicities or other harmful
effects of a research intervention could help to
reduce research-related harms by leading to adjustments
in protocol or, if necessary, termination of the intervention”
[12]. Collogan et al. and Curry et al. provided the
general term “physical risks” and did not elaborate on
particular types of risks or reasons for them [13, 19].
Guidelines were more detailed in their analysis of different
types of non-physical risks. The most often mentioned
risks were exploitation of research subjects and
unrealistic expectations, as well as manipulation. While
some guidelines just mentioned exploitation in general,
others gave more detailed examples, e.g., Schopper et al.
mentioned the collection, export, and analysis of tissues
as a potential source of “exploitation of communities
from which tissues have been taken” [20]. Allden et al.
paid attention to children as a vulnerable group “who
could be targeted for recruitment by groups that could
exploit them as a result of research and program activities”
[14]. Sumathipala et al. expressed deep concerns
regarding possible exploitation and referred specifically
to “exploitation through undue inducement and compensation,
and through an understandable confusion regarding
the researchers’ objectives” [15]. This type of
exploitation leads into the next subcategory: unrealistic
expectations. This was analysed broadly, with the general
advice that researchers should be “particularly vigilant in
ensuring that prospective study participants do not confuse
research procedures with clinical care and evaluation
and thus fall prey to the so-called therapeutic
misconception” [13] and to “take great care to inform
potential research participants […] that some interventions
to which they are subjected might be undertaken
primarily for the benefit of the research” [21].
The risk of stigmatization was mentioned less often,
being named in two guidelines. Allden et al. emphasized
that vulnerable groups might be stigmatized after participation
in research, but individual research participants
might be stigmatized by researchers who lack
cultural competencies and knowledge of specific sociocultural
contexts [14]. Sumathipala et al. paid attention
to researchers’ duty to prevent stigmatization [15].
Another risk, mentioned in five guidelines, was retraumatization
of research participants. Goodhand explained
that by involving subjects in a research study
and by asking sensitive questions “researchers may inadvertently
re-open wounds by probing into areas respondents
may not wish to talk about” [10]. Therefore, RECs
should assess the risk of re-traumatization [20]. Specific
ways of addressing re-traumatisation were mentioned in
some guidelines, such as Sumathipala et al. describing
the campaign “Prevent Re-traumatisation of the Traumatised”
as an example of good practice [15]. Some guidelines
noted the importance of recognising that disaster
settings offer “limited opportunities for therapeutic interventions
to handle adverse psychological reactions”
[17]. At the same time, some authors argued that “an individual
noted to be upset during participation in research
might not necessarily regret participation” [13].
Risk management
Taking into account the vulnerability of research participants
leads to a need to manage risks. The risk management
category included six subcategories: accountability
and monitoring of research (in nine guidelines); avoiding
over- or underestimation of risks (in three guidelines);
the need for empirical evidence on risk (in three guidelines);
providing psychological support to research subjects
(in four guidelines); quality of informed consent (in
six guidelines); and evaluation of power relationships between
researchers and subjects (in two guidelines).
Accountability and monitoring of research was covered
by eight guidelines. Authors of these guidelines, especially
after 2008, emphasized that risks in disaster
research can be diminished by monitoring and control
[13] and mentioned corresponding values, e.g., accountability
and transparency [8]. The most detailed description
of monitoring was developed by Curry et al. [19].
However, most guidelines did not clearly describe what
monitoring and control should include and what institutions
should oversee the research studies. Direct oversight
of the whole process of research implementation
was mentioned in some guidelines, but seen as practically
impossible [20]; however, close monitoring of particular
parts of the process, e.g., informed consent
procedures [12], was viewed as necessary. Some guidelines
mentioned that new information arising during the
research should be carefully monitored, e.g., protocol
amendments, side effects, adverse effects and early stopping
of a study. A different approach was to increase
monitoring of specific types of research “where risk is
high or uncertain” [12]. Various monitoring bodies were
proposed, with some guidelines suggesting that monitoring
could be done “by the central IRB or a separate data
and safety monitoring board” [17].
Some guidelines noted that preliminary risk assessment
should avoid both over- and underestimation of risks, e.g.,
overestimation by labelling all research participants as
‘vulnerable’ [21] or misusing the concept of ‘retraumatization’
[13], and underestimation of risks by
denying that research might add additional risks to those
posed by the disaster [17]. The same guidelines dealing
with estimation of risks mentioned the need for empirical
evidence to evaluate risks posed by research [13, 17, 21].
One possible additional approach to risk management
mentioned in four guidelines was ensuring psychological
support to research subjects, including training of researchers
and development of procedures to provide
psychological support [21], as well as “explicit mechanisms
available for timely referral of subjects in need of
mental health consultation” [13]. These support mechanisms
should be culturally and politically acceptable
[14]. Other guidelines emphasized the need to identify
available local services and to help research participants
access these services when needed [17].
Another subcategory of risk management was the
quality of informed consent, evaluated by some authors
as one of the major ethical challenges in disaster research
[20]. Examples of shortcomings in informed consent
included “incomplete information given to the
participants about objectives, risks, adverse effects, and
planned house visits; information too detailed and complicated;
formulation of the text biased to induce a positive
answer; overestimation of the benefit for
participants and community; and lack of procedures to
ensure that the information provided is understood”
[20]. To ensure higher quality informed consent, the
guidelines included criteria usually mentioned by general
research ethics guidelines, as well as criteria specific to
disaster settings. These specific criteria emphasized the
impact of vulnerability on research subjects and the
safety of the setting where informed consent procedures
take place [13]. Allden et al. suggested that researchers
should “take consent at multiple times during the research
process, including at the end of data collection”
and “take consent from multiple agencies including
community, parents, and partners as appropriate” [14].
An additional subcategory of risk management was
mentioned in two guidelines: the evaluation of power relationships
between researchers and subjects [10, 14].
Allden et al. stated that in disaster settings researchers
hold more power than participants and therefore researchers
should “be aware of power differentials between
the researcher and respondent that may increase
their likelihood of participation” [14].
Decisional capacity of research subjects
We identified three subcategories for this category: factors
diminishing decisional capacity (in four guidelines);
underestimation of decisional capacity (in two guidelines);
and the need for a specific procedure for informed
consent (in five guidelines). Two guidelines
mentioned the traumatic experiences of research participants
[13, 21] and one guideline referred to “inherent
tensions and pressures” in situations of public emergencies
[18] as a possible reason for impaired decisionmaking
capacity. To take account of this, a specific procedure
for informed consent was proposed that would
address diminished decisional capacity of research participants
in disaster settings. This specific procedure
should involve “a time lag between an initial contact and
eventual interview” [21], “language specific to the unique
situation of protection of victims of disasters as well as
their communities” [17], and use of oral instead of written
consent in cases when participants decline to sign
anything [20]. At the same time, authors of several
guidelines warned about possible underestimation of decisional
capacity of participants by stating that it would
“be inaccurate and potentially stigmatizing to assume
that all persons who have experienced terror or other disasters
are decisionally impaired and unable to make
choices for themselves” [13].
Research ethics committee (REC) review process
The second core theme identified by our qualitative analysis
was REC review procedures and processes. Research
in disaster settings raises specific ethical concerns
around review, with frequent calls for a different approach
to review than typically conducted with other
types of research. During our qualitative analysis we
identified five categories within this theme: experience
and awareness of researchers; interests and rights of research
subjects; social value of research; organization of
review; and problems in the review process. For each
category we identified a set of subcategories as summarized
in Additional file 3: Table S3 and referenced to the
specific guidelines.
Experience and awareness of researchers was mentioned
in many research ethics guidelines for disaster
settings, and our analysis showed five subcategories for
this category: cultural sensitivity of researchers (in five
guidelines); awareness of impact of research (in three
guidelines); conflicts of interest (in four guidelines);
training in research ethics (in four guidelines); and professional
competence of researchers (in three guidelines).
Cultural sensitivity of researchers includes the way authors
discussed that research agendas and interventions
proposed by researchers in disaster settings often are
based on a Western perspective which may impact negatively
on local populations [14, 15]. Additionally, specific
methods and instruments may have limited validity when
used in oral cultures [14]. As a result, guidelines pointed
out that research protocols should discuss how cultural
factors have “informed the research design and its implementation,
and how these factors will be evaluated and by
whom during the project” [19]. Researchers also should be
aware of implicit messages given as a result of selection of
specific research areas [10]. This issue included statements
about the necessity for researchers to be aware of the possible
indirect and direct impact of their research [10, 13],
and the “ability to anticipate adverse reactions and facilitate
appropriate interventions” [15].
Within the ethics review process, evaluation of conflicts
of interest was included, but no specific aspects
were linked to disaster settings. Training in research ethics
was mentioned as an important aspect by many
guidelines, including that RECs be required to ensure
that researchers complete an ethics module on doing research
in disaster situations. Some guidelines also mentioned
that research support staff should be provided
ethics training [14, 19].
Interests and rights of research subjects was one of the
central and most frequently addressed aspects of the
guidelines included in our review. This category included
seven subcategories: balancing the need for scientific
evidence with possible harm from the research (in
ten guidelines); minimal risk requirement (in four guidelines);
justice in selection of participants (in eight guidelines);
potential for overburdening research subjects (in
six guidelines); provisions for confidentiality and privacy
protection (in nine guidelines); regulation of transfer of
biological material (in five guidelines); and application of
standard of care (in three guidelines).
Almost all guidelines emphasized that research in disaster
settings must carefully balance the need for scientific
evidence and the need to protect research subjects
from possible harm from the research itself. Some
guidelines emphasized the strong ethical mandate to do
research in disaster settings “to prevent further death
and illness in present or future disasters” [21], with some
suggesting it might be unethical not to do such research
[11]. At the same time, guidelines do not provide specific
methods for evaluating risks and benefits. One possible
approach was applying the minimal risk
requirement suggested in three guidelines: for research
in refugee populations [16], with biomedical research
[11], and in clinical research [15]. One guideline proposed
the minimal risk requirement as a precondition
for expedited review [20].
Justice in selection of participants means “making political
and ethical choices about which voices are heard
and whose knowledge counts” [10]. The main requirement
was that research participants should be chosen
based on scientific reasons and not on any other reason,
like accessibility, cost, gender or malleability [15]. Allden
et al. mentioned examples where local governments suggest
not interviewing marginalized groups or certain religious
communities [14]. Jennings and Arras pointed
out two other concerns regarding justice in selection of
research subjects: where the participants and their community
should benefit from the results of a successfully
conducted trial (a negative example would be a trial of
an expensive drug conducted in a poor country where
the drug would never be affordable) and where the participants
are from a vulnerable population that might
make them more easily abused or exploited [21].
Another subcategory within the interests and rights of
research subjects was the potential for overburdening research
subjects with multiple or repetitive studies or by
adding research burdens to their traumatic experiences.
As a possible solution for this problem, some guidelines
pointed to the importance of dissemination of research
results among researchers to share information and
avoid duplication of effort [14, 15].
As for REC review with other types of research, guidelines
emphasized that disaster research protocols should
develop and apply explicit provisions for confidentiality
and privacy protection. In disaster research, this applies
not only at the level of individual participants, but also
at the community level. Another specific issue in disaster
settings was extensive media attention that can lead
to breaches of confidentiality [13, 14].
Regulation of transfer of biological material was addressed
in five guidelines. The Médecins Sans Frontières
(MSF) guideline included the most detailed discussion of
this topic and stated that it should be based on a commitment
“to serve the beneficiaries of a humanitarian
medical intervention, not the interests of third parties
such as the developers of commercial tests” [20]. Transfer
of biological material should not only follow existing
legal requirements, but also apply ethically acceptable
consent procedures, clearly explaining the purposes of
collecting and storing samples, ownership of data, intellectual
property, and other issues [15].
Another subcategory included in the guidelines was
the application of standard of care in disaster settings
and the justification of possible alterations [8, 9, 21]. The
general standard of care debate in research ethics addresses
questions about the kind of medical care researchers
owe to research participants for treating their
condition or disease under study or other medical needs
arising during participation in research. However, the
guidelines found in this review mentioned this topic very
generally and did not discuss it in ways specific to disaster
settings.
Social value of research was another category that frequently
arose and contained six subcategories to be addressed
in REC review: potential application to future
disaster situations (in five guidelines); research that cannot
be pursued in a non-disaster context (in six guidelines);
direct or indirect benefit to individuals or
community (in eleven guidelines); not draining resources
for relief (in two guidelines); involvement of local researchers
and/or community (in nine guidelines); and
post-research obligations (in four guidelines).
The first subcategory was the potential application of
the research results to future disaster situations. Guidelines
stated that it would be ethically questionable to
perform research during disasters that target crisis
events of extremely low probability [21]. To ensure that
results will have future application, researchers need “to
systematically map existing and relevant evidence pertaining
to disasters” [15].
Six guidelines stated that ethically acceptable research
in disaster settings should be research that cannot be
pursued in a non-disaster context. Curry et al. mentioned
as an example that “the implementation of a clinical
drug or vaccine trial in a refugee camp for reasons
of convenience – subjects easy to find, no loss-tofollow-
up, etc. – is clearly unacceptable because the
same research could be done in situations where participants
have much greater agency” [19].
Direct or indirect benefit to individuals and/or communities
was another criterion included in evaluating research
proposals for disaster settings. Some guidelines
referred to “important direct benefit” [16], while others
stated that the benefit might be indirect if an agreement
is reached between the community and the researcher
[11]. Likewise, the MSF guidelines stated that sometimes
it is acceptable to test “an intervention that is too expensive
at the outset of the research to be made immediately
available to everyone who needs it […] if there are
good reasons to expect a considerable price drop and if
MSF initiates advocacy and lobbying efforts at the same
time” [20].
Two guidelines included a provision that RECs should
also evaluate whether the proposed research will drain
funds, resources or necessary personnel devoted to immediate
disaster relief. If research risks draining resources
for relief “such research should either not be
conducted in the present circumstance or additional
funds or personnel should be devoted to the research in
a way that would not threaten or undermine the primary
goals of crisis response” [21]. Sumathipala et al. added
that the main reason for this problem is that research
activities are often “uncoordinated and poorly integrated
with humanitarian relief operations” [15].
According to many guidelines, the involvement of
local researchers and/or communities was a very important
criterion for ethical disaster research. Representatives
of the community (ideally, representatives of
research participants) should take part in the planning
and implementation of research projects. Some guidelines
mentioned particular forms of participation, e.g.,
community-based participatory research [14, 21] or involving
representatives of local unaffected communities
[17]. At the same time, other guidelines indicated that
involvement of the community “may seem impossible in
the chaos and confusion post-disaster” [17]. Equally important
is the involvement of local researchers as equal
research partners, as well as involvement of local experts
and lay persons as members of RECs and advisory
boards.
Post-research obligations included feedback of research
results to research participants [10, 13] and the
general public [19], as well as “sharing downstream benefits
from the research”, e.g., “invention of new medical
procedures or intervention strategies” or “intellectual
property (IP), to new or improved commercial products
or processes” [19].
Organization of ethics review in disaster settings is
challenging and complicated. The included guidelines
offered several possible ways to address this problem
that have been organized into the following subcategories:
centralization of review (in seven guidelines); conditions
for full and expedited review (in seven guidelines);
alternative review mechanisms (in four guidelines); “justin-
case protocols” (in four guidelines); and proportionality
of review (in one guideline).
Centralization of ethics review by establishing a new
disaster-focused REC (national, regional, etc.) or by delegating
reviews of disaster research to an existing REC
was suggested as having certain advantages, e.g.,
“maximize the knowledge obtained from the research,
coordinate the numerous studies, minimize the burden
on research subjects, and attend to simultaneous needs
for acquiring new knowledge and clinical treatment”
[13]. Another form of centralized review was MSF’s ethics
review board set up in 1999 specifically for MSF
research [9]. However, empirical analysis of the effects of
centralization of review has not been conducted.
Clear rules for full and expedited review might be
helpful for the organization of such reviews. In most
guidelines, expedited review was deemed sufficient if the
research study carried minimal risks to participants and
did not include any worrisome or novel ethical issues.
Guidelines also mentioned alternative review mechanisms
not limited to traditional standard review procedures,
e.g., development of preparedness plans for
researchers, institutions and RECs to “proactively address
basic operational questions” [18], “rolling” or contemporaneous
review for protocols or parts of protocols
[8], individual review by the chair of the board or the
chair’s delegate, and prioritization of protocols by a specific
triage committee [12]. At the same time, guidelines
included a warning that “any exemptions to normal
practices in research ethics review should be rare and
should require a high level of justification” [12]. Another
form of alternative review suggested in guidelines was
“just-in-case protocols” which includes planning and
reviewing at least a general outline of a research study
or a “generic” protocol in advance of a disaster. This
proposal also included creating a pre-disaster repository
of these protocols or protocol parts. One guideline also
mentioned proportionate review, defined as a form of review
“intended to reserve the most intense scrutiny, and
correspondingly more protection, for the most ethically
challenging research” [12].
Problems in the review process included three subcategories:
risk of bureaucracy in the review process (in
three guidelines); lack of guidelines for research in disaster
settings (in two guidelines); and distinction between
research and non-research (in one guideline). Overly
burdensome bureaucracy and undue delays in the review
process were mentioned in three guidelines and appeared
as a problem often faced by researchers. Another
problem was a lack of specific guidelines for research in
disaster settings in existing general research ethics
guidelines like the Helsinki Declaration and CIOMS
guidelines.1 The third problem raised was the lack of a
clear distinction between research and non-research,
particularly as it relates to the boundary between public
health-oriented research and practice [8].
Discussion
To increase the quality of disaster response activities
and interventions, additional research in disaster settings
is needed. Many research papers and other documents
note that such research often raises specific ethical challenges
that should be addressed and adequate guidance
should be developed. Our paper is a descriptive study
that reviews the existing ethical guidelines on the ethics
of research in disasters. Our aim was to identify,
describe and compare disaster research ethics guidelines.
A thorough critical analysis of these guidelines is warranted,
but would require its own article. However, a limited
critical analysis will be presented here, along with
some proposals for the development of further ethical
guidance for disaster research. Our systematic search identified
14 guidelines (in English) that met our inclusion criteria
and are applicable to diverse research activities in
different settings. Disaster research covers a wide variety of
research types and has several ethically relevant characteristics
in common with research in public health emergencies,
research in conflict zones, clinical research in
emergency settings, research in low- and middle-income
countries, or research conducted in resource poor settings.
The scope of the guidelines we found was rather narrow.
Most of the analyzed documents did not attempt to
give researchers and other stakeholders a comprehensive
overview of how to proceed ethically in all types of research
and in all types of disasters, but rather focused
on particular research activities in specific settings and
with distinct populations, such as conflict zones, refugee
populations, and humanitarian settings. A tension exists
here because disaster research is unavoidably context
and time sensitive, making generalized guidance less applicable.
While taking this into account, a need remains
to develop a more comprehensive set of guidelines based
on the ethical issues identified here as commonly relevant
to many forms of disaster research. Other issues
may need to be included also.
One of the two core themes that emerged was vulnerability
of research subjects. CIOMS guidelines refer to
vulnerability as “a substantial incapacity to protect one’s
own interests”, and accordingly state that “special
provision must be made for the protection of the rights
and welfare of vulnerable persons” [22]. In a paper by
O’Mathúna, it is noted that vulnerability in a disaster research
setting presents additional duties for researchers
[5]. Chung et al. proposed that “the individuals and communities
affected by declarations of a state of emergency
or disaster should be considered ‘vulnerable subjects’ for
the purposes of human subjects research”, which would
enable the use of current research guidelines in disaster
settings [17]. This approach to vulnerability is not based
on a lack of decision making capacity, but rather on the
effects of the disaster situation on an individual (participant)
or a group (of participants).
One of the guidelines included in this review questioned
the applicability of the broad approach to vulnerability to
disaster settings because it might stereotype and disempower
research subjects due to the specificity and complexity
of a disaster situation [13]. Although the concept
of vulnerability is raised in research to ensure special protection
for vulnerable participants, further clarification of
the concept would help to guide RECs and ensure
appropriate protections are put in place [23, 24]. Empirical
assessment is needed to determine if this approach is sufficient
to ensure such protection in a disaster setting.
Beyond vulnerability as a core theme in disaster settings,
the analyzed guidelines discussed and attempted to raise
awareness about specific risks that disaster research might
pose for participants. According to the guidelines, issues
that require careful consideration in the design of research
protocols and during REC review are the higher risk of
therapeutic misconception, the potential for exploitation,
manipulation, or re-traumatization of research participants,
and also the issue of compromising care or relief
for research. In some specific disaster situations, for example
in armed conflict zones, even the simple presence
of foreign researchers could pose an additional risk to the
local community. The need to take such risks into account,
especially unintended ones, was one of the most
frequently raised ethical issues. The actual risks will vary
by research study, but further guidance is need on how to
identify disaster-specific risks, especially unintended ones.
This highlights the importance of involving experienced
researchers and local representatives (of participants and
their communities, as well as local researchers) in the design,
review and implementation of disaster research. Applying
specific study designs that ensure community
participation in disaster research (e.g., community based
participatory research) should be considered, where appropriate,
to ensure effective collaboration.
Most guidelines discussed the need for specific procedures
for adequate informed consent. Generally, informed
consent was seen as a necessary but also
challenging requirement in situations where language
and cultural barriers could be determining factors, as
well as where the decision-making capacities of participants
could have been impacted by disasters. A repository
of innovative and evidence-based approaches to
informed consent would be very valuable.
Nearly all guidelines described the independent and
prior assessment of disaster research by an ethics committee
as an important ethical requirement. However, we
found great heterogeneity in the specific recommendations
for organization of the review, for the assessment
process, and also for the specificities of the risk/benefit assessments.
Some guidelines viewed protocols as ethically
acceptable only if they had a direct benefit for participants,
and if the research could not be performed in nondisaster
settings. In contrast, other guidelines would not
prohibit such research if it posed minimal harm and had a
considerable benefit to society. Most guidelines considered
the usual REC review procedures as unsuitable in
disaster settings. Thus, various innovations were suggested
regarding the organization of independent ethics review
for disaster research. Empirical research is needed to determine
the effectiveness of these approaches in improving
the ethical dimensions of disaster research so that its ethical
review can become more evidence-based. International
and national stakeholders responsible for
research ethics approval and review should evaluate the
appropriateness of their current ethics approval procedures
and their suitability for disaster research.
Although mentioned by only one guideline, the proper
coordination of research activities with humanitarian relief
operations is another important point to consider. In
a disaster setting, a proper coordination center might
provide a way to involve local researchers and the local
community. Such a center could reduce significantly the
duplication of research activities, and adequately assess
the potential conflict between research and treatment or
aid. It could also give proper consideration to ethical
perspectives on benefit sharing with the local community
and research participants. Many guidelines focus on
the ethical issues commonly addressed in research ethics,
but the ethical issues distinct to research in resource
poor countries or public health practice need to be incorporated
more fully.
Some of the guidelines, like those developed by the
Working Group on Disaster Research and Ethics, were explicitly
based on a retrospective assessment of a concrete
disaster research experience [15], while others remained
obscure regarding the evidence base and motivations for
their development. This highlights the need for more empirical
research and evidence regarding the ethics of research
in disaster settings. Such an example is the Post-
Research Ethics Analysis [25] project that attempts to collect
and assess concrete, real world research experiences
and ethical challenges faced by researchers and other
stakeholders that could further support the development
and evaluation of such guidance documents.
Conclusions
Our study found 14 guidelines that might be applied in
disaster research settings. Most guidelines referred to
vulnerability of research subjects as a central issue, but
defined the concept in different ways. The role of RECs
was widely acknowledged as challenging in such circumstances.
It seems especially important for RECs to consider
the potential need for non-standard ethics review
procedures for disaster research settings. It is also essential
to ensure appropriate dissemination of disaster
research results among researchers to share information,
and avoid duplication of effort and overburdening of research
subjects.
We also found some gaps in the studied guidelines,
where further work is certainly needed. Emerging guidelines
should include practical suggestions regarding how
to weigh conflicting principles, or references to such
sources, which could support researchers in their work.
Given the tension noted above between generalized and
specific approaches to guidance, such practical decisionmaking
tools will be essential. The evidence base of the
studied guidelines is rather weak and diverse. Most
guidelines were based on some personal experiences,
unique situations, or NGO practices. Empirical evidence
is urgently needed to support the statements and requirements
included in research ethics guidelines. These
include the prevalence of ethically significant scenarios,
and a typology of ethical issues, including, for example,
vulnerability, re-traumatization, or lack of local REC approval.
Disaster researchers and the RECs who review
their protocols should include projects to evaluate how
well the ethical issues are addressed in the research and
by following REC recommendations. Particular attention
should be given to assessing participants’ perceptions of
how ethics is addressed in specific projects.
National RECs and international networks of RECs, or
their professional associations, should reconsider their
standard recommendations and procedures in light of the
challenges posed by disaster situations. A comprehensive
guideline for disaster research ethics that takes account of
the different types of research methods, contexts and populations
would be very helpful. Models for proper coordination
centres in disaster settings that could be responsive to
the identified research ethics challenges could be advantageous.
Beyond the clear need for further work on disaster
research ethics guidelines, we also see that it is important
that specific educational resources for disaster research ethics
training be developed and disseminated.