There is extensive evidence that employees in health
care services, both in hospitals, nursing homes, and
home care services, frequently struggle with ethical challenges
[1-8]. Although ethics support in hospitals is relatively
well developed, both nationally and internationally
[9-15], the development of ethics support seems to be
sparser in community health services [1,5,16]. However,
there is a need for ethics support in community health
also [8]. Previous research indicates that ethics support
in community health services should be closely tailored
to the workplace, facilitated by a colleague [1] and concerned
with the everyday ethical challenges employees
experience [1,17]. However, there are few evaluation
studies about the impact of ethics support in community
health [18]. Recent research indicates that systematic
ethics reflection is seen as a positive learning process
among those participating [19]. Learning to reflect on
the ethical challenges the employees face in their everyday
work, and experiencing the benefits of it, such as relief
of moral distress, are described as key reasons and
motivations for implementing ethics reflection in clinical
practice [20,21].
This paper presents the results from an evaluation
study where ethics reflection in groups was implemented
in community health services in a municipality in the
central eastern part of Norway.
Norwegian municipalities differ with regard to size,
population and organisation, but health services offered are generally public. Norwegians have a legal right to preventive health services, home-based nursing and institutional
care services, e.g. nursing homes for the elderly
and residential care homes for persons with learning
disabilities, financed and provided by the state.
The community health services participating in this
study are located in a municipality with approximately
120,000 inhabitants, where the publicly funded homebased
nursing care is divided into six districts. The municipality’s
16 nursing homes and 8 residential care homes
are also publicly funded. While staff in home-based nursing
care and nursing homes, mainly are nurses, auxiliary
nurses and nurse’s aides, staff in the residential care homes
are mainly social educators and care workers.
Aims and context of the study
The aim of this research was to explore how ethics reflection
in colleague groups was experienced and evaluated
by the employees, facilitators, and service
managers. The study was part of a larger research and
development project carried out as collaboration between
five health care services in the community (two
nursing homes, two home-based nursing care service
districts and one residential care home for persons with
learning disabilities), the community health management,
and the Centre for Medical Ethics (CME) at the
University of Oslo. CME was responsible for the research
and evaluation part of the project, and participated also as
expert consultants and teachers in other parts of the project.
The project’s action-oriented approach meant that
the services had a major influence on the design of the
project phases. The authors - researchers in clinical ethics
at CME - along with eight resource persons from the five
community health services played key roles throughout
the project. Five of the resource persons from the community
health care services - four nurses and one social educator
- had their daily work in the community health care
services. In addition, they were all trained as facilitators of
ethics reflection in their departments. The other three resource
persons from the community health services were
responsible for quality improvement work in the health
care services, and one of them served as the leader of the
larger research and development project.
The project was carried out in the period 2008 – 2011,
and consisted of three phases. Phase one; a survey and
group interviews focusing on: a) The ethical challenges
employees struggle with, and the extent of these challenges.
b) Employees’ need for ethics support. Findings
from the survey have already been published [1]. Phase
two; implementation of ethics support based on the survey
and interviews. Several measures were identified as
needed, and implemented. Among these were: a four
hour ethics course for all employees, and establishing
meeting places on wards where the staff collectively
(in interdisciplinary groups) could reflect on ethical
challenges in their everyday work. A brief description
of the ethics reflection groups is given in the text
below. This phase also included education and training
of staff members to facilitate the ethical reflection
on wards. In order to make course correction the project
was evaluated every six months. Phase three; two
years of systematic ethics reflection groups that included
all employees. Despite being invited, the doctors
did not participate. The evaluation study focused
on phase two and three. A more thorough description
of the entire project’s schedule and content have previously
been published [22]. The research questions
we wanted to answer in the evaluation study were:
1. What ethical challenges have been discussed?
2. What is the significance of ethics reflection groups
on health care professionals’ practice?
3. What have been the success factors and barriers to
participation in reflection groups?
Ethics reflection groups
The organisation of ethics reflection groups relied on
close collaboration between the ward leader and the facilitator.
Ethics reflection groups took place at scheduled
times, 1 to 1 ½ hour weekly, or every second week. The
groups were open without fixed members; and those
who were at work had the opportunity to participate.
The health care professionals sat down together and collectively
reflected on ethical challenges from their daily
practice. Those participating brought cases to reflect
upon, and the group chose which case to discuss. At one
location they used constructed cases, based on current
challenges on the ward. The reflection was carried out
systematically, led by the facilitator and structured by
the CME Method:
1. What is the ethical problem?
2. What are the facts of the case?
3. Who is involved, and what are their views?
4. Which values, laws and guidelines are relevant?
5. What are the alternative courses of action?
6. Overall assessment.
In addition to the CME Method, the groups developed
rules for the activity, such as:
 We will listen to each other.
 We will not judge each other.
 We will strive to understand each other.
 We help each other to respect confidentiality.
Methods
We conducted three focus group interviews at the end
of phase three. The participants were managers or other
employees (facilitators and participants in ethics reflection
groups on wards) of health care services in this ethics
project. The project leader, employee of the
municipality, was responsible for the recruitment, and
gave potential participants oral and written information
about the evaluation project.
The first interview took place in a group with seven
employees - nurses and auxiliary- and nurse’s aides -
who had participated in ethics reflection groups at their
workplace. With the exception of one of the two participating
nursing homes, all workplaces participating in the
project were represented in the interview. The second
interview had five ethics facilitators, all members of the
resource team, and representing all workplaces participating
in the project. The final interview was conducted
with five service managers representing the five participating
health care departments. Different levels of expertise
or power may hinder the participants in focus
groups from expressing what they think or feel [23]. The
reason for dividing the participants into three distinct
groups for different kinds of stakeholders was that we
wanted to create an environment where the participants
felt comfortable to share their experiences and insights,
even negative, experiences that they could be more reluctant
to report if e.g. managers were present. We prepared
three different interview guides, and the questions
posed to each group differed slightly, to elicit answers to
the research questions from the participants various perspectives,
experiences and responsibilities. For example,
when staff and facilitators where mainly asked about
their experience of possible changes in practice related
to the ethics reflection groups, managers where mainly
asked about the signals they had received, what they had
been told and possibly observed of changes in practice.
Each interview took about two hours and was audiotaped
and transcribed verbatim. We were two interviewers
(the authors); one primarily responsible for
interviewing, the other responsible for the technical
equipment and follow-up questions. The reason for
using focus group interviews was that it can facilitate an
exchange of experiences and views among participants
(when group members hear the ideas of others, they are
more able to identify other things that could potentially
help or not); we can include several participants in each
interview, and thus generate richer data. We acknowledged
the risk of participants agreeing with others in the
group as a potential problem, and encouraged the participants
to express their opinion, especially if it differed
from what others in the group expressed.
For the interviews we used a thematically organised
interview guide with three main topics: 1) The implementation
of ethics reflection in colleague groups
(frequency, use of time, participation, success factors
and barriers for participation). 2) The ethics reflection
(challenges discussed in the groups, methods, discussions
among group members). 3) Results or significance
(e.g. for the challenges discussed, attention to ethics in
their everyday work, for the ability to deal with ethical
challenges, for the quality of health care services, for the
patients and their families, for the work environment).
In addition to the interviews, we also had written
documentation from the facilitators, notes from the reflection
groups and bi-annual evaluation. The notes contained
descriptions of how ethics reflection groups were
implemented in the department, ethically challenging
situations discussed, and the number of staff that had
participated in the ethics reflection groups. We also
asked the facilitators to document the significance they
considered the reflection to have, for example what it
meant for the staff ’s awareness of ethics, and their ability
to deal with ethical challenges. The notes also contained
reflections upon the impact this initiative had on quality
of health care. Furthermore, we took field notes during
observation (e.g. as co-facilitators), training sessions,
supervision, project meetings, and other experiences we
as researchers have gained through working with the larger
project, and with the facilitators and the reflection
groups in particular.
Data analysis
The tape-recorded data was transcribed and then analysed.
We conducted a qualitative content analysis of the
transcriptions and written notes, searching for answers
to our three research questions (see above). Both researchers
read the written material, and analysed the
various parts of the texts together. Then the first author
had the primary responsibility for more detailed analysis
and condensation. A basic issue when performing qualitative
content analysis is to decide whether the analysis
should focus on manifest or latent content [24]. The
text’s manifest content is the most visible or salient components,
while the text’s latent content involves an interpretation
of the underlying meaning of the text [25,26].
The focus of our analysis has been the manifest content
and the categorisation has been purposive in the way
that it has focused on the participants’ expressions answering
our three research questions mentioned above.
After agreeing on the main themes and subthemes, we
categorised and condensed the relevant content of the text.
Ethical considerations
When designing the evaluation, we were guided by ethical
standard principles [27]. All participants (staff members,
facilitators and managers) were informed verbally
and in writing about the evaluation and that it was voluntary
to participate. They gave their written consent to
participate before the interviews started. When referring
to situations in the interviews that had been discussed in
the reflection groups, we reminded the participants to
remove person-identifying information.
According to the Norwegian Act on medical and health
research (ACT 2008-06-20 no. 44, § 2, § 4 and § 9) ethical
review by the Regional Committee for Medical and Health
Research Ethics (REC) is only required when the study is
defined as medical or health research [28]. REC, which
was consulted in the planning of our study, defined this
study to be outside the legal definition of medical and
health research in Norway. Thus, necessary ethical approval
was instead given by the Norwegian Social
Science Data Service (NSD) after reviewing our study.
NSD is the Data Protection Official for all Norwegian
universities [29].
Results
Starting out with our three questions, we identified
seven themes. In the following we will focus our presentation
on the analysed and thematised findings which
answer the research questions. Findings answering the
research question that asks what ethical challenges that
have been discussed are analysed and thematised as:
“Patient autonomy” and “Family participation”. These
themes will briefly be summarised in the beginning.
Findings answering the question of the significance of
ethics reflection groups are analysed and thematised as:
“Improved quality”; “Collegial support, team cooperation,
and mutual learning” and “Professional and personal
development”. Findings that answer the question of
success factors and barriers are analysed and thematised
as: “Plan, structure and anchoring” and “Cases from the
staff’s workday”. The opinions that emerged in the three
interviews often coincided. Where differences appeared,
we have made it explicit in our presentation below.
Ethical challenges that have been discussed
The most frequent discussions in the ethics reflection
groups have been ethically challenging patient cases
from the participant’s workday. “We have had cases
about our patients throughout, about problems in our
workday – simply like that - ethical issues” (F3). The
focus of these discussions has often been on patient autonomy
and the staff ’s struggle to identify alternative
courses of action. This has been particularly prominent
in situations where employees have been responsible for
the care of patients over many years and old habit plays
a significant role in the nursing care. In Table 1 some
specific examples of ethically challenging situations are
presented. These examples concern mostly patient autonomy,
a common repetitive problem.
Another main group of ethical challenges discussed in
the reflection groups focus on family participation. Family
members’ dissatisfaction with the care patients receive,
or with unacceptable or improper behaviour by
employees. These discussions were often about how employees
ought to, or could have handled the ethically
challenging situations. Should the staff act as the family
demands, in accordance with the patient’s wishes, or according
to their own professional judgments? Another
aspect of the situations that often were discussed was
whether the family’s complaints were reasonable, as well
as how to improve the conditions.
The significance of ethics reflection groups
All three interview groups emphasise the positive significance
ethics reflection groups have had on the climate
of cooperation, not simply among the staff, but also with
patients and their families. Ethics reflection groups are
perceived as having a positive significance on employees’
attention to ethics, and to their ability to deal with ethical
challenges they face in their everyday work. Now
they do not struggle alone with the challenges, but bring
them to the reflection session to discuss them with their
colleagues.
Some of the managers and facilitators in the group interviews
expressed confidence that the systematic ethics
reflection would lead to reduced absenteeism, and increased
interest among nurses to work in community
health facilities, such as nursing homes. In the group
interview with the staff, the participants were more
doubtful whether this would happen.
Improved quality
Prior to participating in ethics reflection groups, the employees’
actions and considerations were often characterised
by old habits. Two years of ethics reflection
groups have changed their attitude. Today they critically
question practices and conditions they previously took
for granted. They see things in a new way and find new
solutions. This has led to important changes in practice.
An indicator of improved quality, are the staff ’s and
the facilitators’ descriptions of the positive consequences
of the ethics reflection for the patients; “We have residents
who have lived here for so many years that we no
longer questioned our choices. Because of the discussion
in the reflection group there have been changes. Some
might consider them small, but for the resident it means
a lot” (F5). See an example below: “Reflections on a cup
of morning coffee”.
Reflections on a cup of morning coffee
In one of our ethics reflection groups, one of the staff
members questions the practice we have followed for
years for one of our residents. What is the reason for refusing
the resident her desired cup of coffee in the
morning before she does anything else? This is something
she repeatedly asks for, often rather loudly. There
are quite a few of us who need a cup of coffee to wake
up in the morning.
In the ethics reflection group we discover that the resident
has fixed procedures as part of an effort to develop
ADL skills, and this is part of her routine; no coffee before
morning grooming and tooth brushing is complete.
Through the discussion we realise that this is a practice
that can be traced 20 – 30 years back in time, to the
time she lived in a central institution. Reflecting on the
situation, the staff member questions why this is still
practiced. Hasn’t she learned these skills well enough
through all these years? How can we justify refusing her
the coffee she so strongly wants?
The result of the ethics reflection group this day was a
satisfied resident. Today we offer her a cup of coffee
when she wakes up, and sitting on the sofa watching
morning-TV she enjoys the coffee before she completes
her morning routines.
The management is also convinced that ethics reflection
benefits the patients and their families, and they
have seen that the initiative have led to increased knowledge
about ethics among the employees. Now the managers
find that they are challenged by the employees.
Referring to professionalism and ethics, the staff challenges
the managers to give them alternative courses of
action; “The staff now set higher standards for themselves
and their own service, so that’s good,” (M5) one of the
managers says, indicating that it is more challenging in a
positive way, for the managers to face critical questions.
Both the staff and facilitators agree that having ethics
reflection in the workplace has contributed to a better
relationship with patients and their families; “I think it
does something to our attitudes towards patients and
their families. They notice it. It leads to better quality
and attentive service. It raises awareness” (M3). One
positive outcome is that patients’ and relatives’ participation
has been strengthened, and the change is attributed
to the staff now being more conscious of it; “The residents
are more seen and heard now. There is more user
participation” (S3). The staff talk more about the importance
of being aware of the patients’ facial expressions
so that they do not act against the patients’ will,
and they find that they use coercion less frequently; “We
have many residents without the ability to speak and
therefore it is important to hear, see, and interpret them.
There is more focus on this now; we talk about it –
There’s more user participation” (F3).
Staff awareness of their own practice has resulted in
improved practice and more confidence in the performance
of the service, a change that is solely positive;
“When you’re more confident, then you will be more motivated.
Increased professionalism and increased focus on
the resident,” (M2) as one of the managers expresses
herself. The participating managers consider the choice
they made, focusing on ethics reflection, to be
worthwhile.
Collegial support, team cooperation, and mutual learning
Ethics reflection is perceived as having had a positive
impact on the relationship between colleagues. Learning
together, for instance about laws and regulations, which
they prior to the project had little knowledge of,
strengthens their relationship. The staff comes from
many different countries and cultures. This was previously
perceived as a problem. Now it is described as an
opportunity for learning. Time and space to sit down
and talk together in a busy workday makes it possible to
discover new aspects of each other. They became aware
that some colleagues know things they don’t know, and
they learn together and from each other; “I think we
grow in our professional environment, that we become familiar
with laws and regulations. It’s not every day we
can sit down and read, but sometimes we have colleagues
who are good with laws and that is very useful” (F3).
In addition, the collegial support they have developed
in the reflection groups is a good contribution to
strengthening the relationship between staff members.
They discuss challenging situations together, and the cooperation
and support they give each other reduces the
level of conflict; “Now there is less gossiping in the halls”
(F1). The cooperation between employees has led to increased
motivation to do a good job; “I think everyone
feels that talking together about the dilemmas makes the
workday easier. You can share your struggles with colleagues.
These groups make it less ‘scary’ to talk about
the challenging situations” (S2).
Both facilitators and managers emphasise fellowship as
a positive result of ethics reflection. Auxiliary- and unskilled
staff also find that their opinions matter more;
“What I think doesn’t matter, so I say nothing. ´I think I
heard such things more often before” (F1). The formal
and specified arena for ethics reflection, has in turn
resulted in ethics reflection elsewhere, in formal and informal
meeting places; “For example in staff meetings, -
and now we discuss ethics not only on the established
arena” (M3).
The managers, as well as employees and facilitators,
confirm that ethical reflection is positive for collegial
solidarity and cooperation. Dialogue is strengthened,
there is more openness for sharing experiences of ethical
challenges, and there is more tolerance between employees.
One of the managers points out that it has been
a turnaround to work systematically with ethical challenges
in the unit. Prior to this the staff struggled alone
with the dilemmas. Now they work with their colleagues
to find out how to deal with ethically challenging situations;
“We often work alone and have no one to discuss
with, and then we have the duty of confidentiality.
Having the ethics group is very good; we can discuss how
to deal with things [in the groups]. Most of us have
moments of discovery – gosh – why haven’t I thought of
that?” (S2).
Lack of time, which was a frequently used apology for
not prioritising the reflection groups, is not used as
much anymore. One of the managers talks about a
drawing she has shared with the staff to make them prioritise
participating in the groups; “It is a drawing that
shows a person pulling a cart with a square wheel.
Another person runs to help, bringing a round wheel.
Then the person pulling the cart with the square wheel
says, - no I do not have time” (M5).
Professional and personal development
The staff describes the consequences of ethics reflection
as a process of change, a professional and personal development.
When talking about the learning process,
some conditions are particularly highlighted by the staff.
They feel more confident about themselves and the work
they do; “You grow personally when you are involved in
this, and you become more confident” (S3). The fact that
they can discuss issues with colleagues, get confirmation
that these are difficult questions, and sometimes get input
about how the situation can be handled, has reduced
the feeling of being alone with the responsibility; “You
mention things in order to hear what other people think
about it, if they think the same way or differently” (S1).
Ethics reflection has led to changes in their everyday
work. When they face ethically challenging situations
now, they are more confident that they can manage to
solve the problems they face. Staff, as well as facilitators,
points to the CME reflection model as important for the
learning process. They find the model to be a help to reflect
on, and weigh different arguments in favour of and
against the alternative actions available. These results
are confirmed in some of the field notes from participant
observations in ethics reflection groups.
The staff, facilitators, and management all highlight increased
ethical and critical awareness as a consequence
of the reflection; “I notice in myself that I have been
ethically conscious in my daily work. Day and night, I
have ethics in my head and it was not like that before”
(S3). When asked how they understand the concept of
ethics, the employees reply that ethics, for them, is reflection
on practice. The facilitators explain the necessity
of scheduled ethics reflection since there is too little
time and space for reflection during a hectic work day;
“You do not reflect on everything you do because you do
it every day, and you do not think about what’s in it for
the patients. You are on autopilot; do not think about
what is actually going on” (S3).
Success factors and barriers
The interviews uncovered differences between the various
departments when it comes to organisation and the
staff ’s attendance in the ethics reflection groups. Four
out of five departments describe ethics reflection groups
as a well-established practice, and there is great participation
from the staff. In one department they consider
ethics reflection groups to still be in an initial phase, a
fragile established practice. During the project period,
this department has been characterised by high turnover
and management changes. Yet, even here, where they
are struggling with implementation, they find great commitment
among the staff when a reflection session actually
takes place.
Plan, structure, and anchoring
All participants in the interviews, employees, facilitators
and managers, point out how important it is that ethics
reflection is part of the ward’s action plan. If ethics reflection
is a part of the action plan, this in turn leads to
an assessment of whether or not the reflection is carried
out as planned, i.e. a formal commitment and some sort
of evaluation (often informal).
Based on feedback from the staff, the managers’ main
conclusion is that the project’s specific focus on ethics
and reflection has been important. All participants
consider scheduled times for ethics reflection groups to
be essential. That ethics reflection groups were given
priority by the managers, and resources were allocated
to it, were considered to be necessary success factors.
Facilitators, as well as participants in ethics reflection,
find the reflection method (the CME method) to be an
important success factor. This reflection method helps
them structure the discussion, and stick to the case;
“That is why the method is so useful; it helps you to keep
some structure. It’s not just chatter; that nothing comes
out of…” (F3).
The facilitator’s have taken anonymised notes from the
discussions, using the CME method to structure also the
notes. The notes are put in a binder available to the staff.
The notes enable employees who have not been able to
participate in the reflection, to read what has been discussed.
“We call it the ward’s ethics folder, every ward
should have one” (F1). Thus, all employees at the ward
can see what was discussed and the main content of the
discussion.
The facilitators emphasise the importance of anchoring
ethics reflection throughout in the health care services,
not only by the top management. They consider it
to be even more important that ethics reflection is anchored
by the ward manager. Both implementation and
employee participation in ethics reflection needs to be
explicitly requested by the manager. Anchoring among
employees is also described as an important factor for
success. In particular, the staff ’s experience of ethics reflection
groups as a meaningful use of time is a necessity
in a busy workday. I.e. they must experience the measure
as important and useful in order to prioritise it.
Cases from the staff’s workday
The majority of the facilitators invite the employees to
bring ethically challenging situations from their own
workday into the reflection group. One of the facilitators
constructs cases which resemble what the staff face in
their workday; “We often have ethically challenging situations
in our unit. When it happens, I make a case of it.
Often the result is that we chuckle and laugh because we
see ourselves: ‘Oh My God this is so stupid. That’s the
way it is, and it should not be that way’” (F1). Whether
using constructed or experienced challenges, they all
found it successful to have specific cases that are relevant
to their everyday practice to reflect upon. One advantage
of using constructed cases is that possible issues
of confidentiality are more easily are avoided.
However, that ethics reflection is focused on the concrete
and the practice-oriented, and the employees’
needs and challenges, makes the group discussion particularly
valuable; “They [the employees] reflect over the
things happening on the wards. It is not general cases
that do not mean very much, but they are going into
specific situations that they are involved in. They find
that they benefit from it, for example in relation to
particularly challenging patients that we have on the
ward” (M2). If the discussion of real cases generates new
and better solutions, the solutions are likely to be used
afterwards. Thus, the usefulness of the reflection groups
becomes more obvious.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to examine how managers, facilitators
and participants in ethics reflection groups, experienced
and evaluated these groups. First of all, it is
obvious that some of the ethically challenging situations
that have been discussed in the reflection groups will
probably not always, and perhaps especially not by ethicists,
be perceived as ethical problems, but more as
problem of professional, technical, organisational, and
collegial character. Nevertheless, these are situations that
staff members, facilitators and managers, experience and
present as ethical problems in their everyday practice.
Like other recent studies from community health care,
our study shows that ethics reflection in groups, above
all, is experienced as a very positive and important measure
[19-21]. The participants describe ethics reflection
as a process that makes them more aware of what patients
and relatives express, of the patient’s needs, but
above all, more concerned with the patient’s right to participate
in decision-making processes.
The participants, nurses and auxiliary nurses, understand
ethics as a critical reflection on their own clinical
practice, and find that this process leads to an increased
ethical awareness. Ethical awareness is an important part
of health care workers’ clinical competence, and the
measure must therefore be considered to be professionally
stimulating and developing. The way the participants
describe their new practices; e.g. strengthened ability to
communicate with patients and relatives, sharpened
awareness of patients’ wishes, feelings and well-being,
finding new and better solutions, team cooperation and
mutual learning, are important aspects of professionalism
and good practice. Ethics support in the form of systematic
ethics reflection in groups also seems to affect
the employees’ practice performance, and their ability to
reflect on and criticise their own practice in a constructive
way. This is strongly related to what the participants describe
as a success factor: that ethics reflection is based on
the employees’ practice experiences. It is the employee’s
actual and perceived challenges they investigate; reflect on
and discuss. Not theoretical or potential situations or general
values, but real, challenging situations that the professionals
need help looking at, and trying to find new ways
to cope with in respectful dialogue.
This study indicates that the systematic and respectful
dialogue between employees, and the reflection on
ethical problems in their own workday, can be one important
way to new and better solutions and thus improved
practice. Using a simple and systematic method
of reflection, facilitating adequate training, and organisational
backing seem to be key success factors. These
findings also resemble findings from evaluation studies
of clinical ethics support services in hospitals [30,31].
Assuming that our very positive findings are valid,
how can we understand or explain this? First, it is obvious
to us that ethics reflection groups appear to meet a
need for professional development that otherwise may
not have good growing conditions. Increasing demands
for efficiency, target management and evidence seems
prominent, while dialogue, reflection, professionalism
and relationships have poorer conditions in modern health
care. Second, it seems that being invited to reflect on clinical
practice leads to a good learning process. According
to Argyris and Schön, learning occur both as single- and
double loop [32,33]. Which learning it is that has taken
place depends on the outcome and process. Doing more
of the same, perhaps using new techniques, greater certainty
and quicker performance, charactarises single loop
learning. While double loop learning requires a qualitative
change, a new stage characterised by qualitatively new
content, and the result is professional development [34].
The participants’ description of the significance of ethics
reflection indicates double loop learning and professional
development. How can this be explained? The
working day without ethics reflection provides little opportunity
for so-called double loop learning; this may
partially explain why ethics reflection is considered
“profitable” and significant. Another interesting fact is
that the employees seem to define ethics in accordance
with double loop learning when they explain ethics as
reflection on practice. Unlike the automated actions that
characterised the participants’ previous practice, they
have discovered new aspects of their own practice, they
ask questions they did not ask before, and they have become
aware of new ways to deal with ethical challenges.
Participation in ethics reflection groups seems to have
had a positive impact on the staff ’s professional development.
Community health care is often characterised by
time constraints and the inability to meet all the patients’
needs, with little time for reflection on clinical
practice. The possibility for nursing staff to sit down and
reflect together can be one explanation for the overwhelmingly
positive response.
Instead of thinking that this takes time, the managers
consider ethics reflection to be a valuable investment, a
win-win situation. Not only has the measure led to increased
knowledge and competence in ethics among the
staff, and thus improved quality of service, the managers
also consider the measure to be an important recruitment
initiative.
The employees describe ethics reflection and competence
to be a necessary part of their work. Although the
majority has received some ethics training in their education,
the employees consider ethics reflection in the
workplace to be further training of great importance. A
measure like ethics reflection compensates, to some extent,
for the wide variation there is in the employees’
ethics education. Furthermore, it seems to improve the
interdisciplinary learning environment. The differences
between the employees, both in cultural background and
education, no longer appear to be a threat, but a source
of learning.
Some lessons learned
One important lesson learned is to base the ethics reflection
on cases from the participants´ own practice
right from the start. To discuss general terms, concepts,
ethical values and principles are perceived as less important
and fruitful.
An interest in ethics, as well as seeing ethics reflection
as important, is not sufficient selection criteria for ethics
facilitators. Participating in and observing the facilitators
in the training program, as well as their reflections and
discussions in network meetings, revealed how demanding
some of the facilitators found their role. We learned
that knowledge and skills are important criteria, criteria
it is important not to under-communicate when facilitators
are selected. Implementing ethics reflection led by
colleagues as facilitators therefore requires an education
program that includes exercises to develop necessary
skills. The exercises should be integrated throughout the
education program, from the very beginning. One of the
challenges, two years after project start, is to maintain
the ethics reflection groups, particularly if the facilitators
quit their job. A plan for training new facilitators is thus
important.
Another barrier is lack of time and thus problems
with prioritising participation. While some might consider
it an expense, the participants evaluate ethics reflection
groups to be an investment. Taking the time to
stop and think, are considered to be a good investment.
This is a way of thinking that we have learned requires
a manager who supports the measure fully. Managers’,
especially ward managers’ support and commitment are
essential for success. Therefore, we recommend postponing
the initiation if it is not possible to involve the
managers.
Initially, we wanted the reflection groups to be multidisciplinary,
something that we only partially succeeded
in. For example, it was very rare that doctors or physiotherapists
participated. Despite the limited data, we have
positive experiences that suggest that multidisciplinary
groups have a positive impact on the reflection process.
Methodological limitations
Our research has limitations. More research on this
topic (including other services, more and other types of
participants, e.g. patients/proxies and more rigorous
study design) is needed to assess whether our positive
findings are representative. The strength of our study is
that we have different groups of informants (employees,
facilitators, managers) in addition to observations and
written notes. Other strengths are that we as researchers
have been closely involved in the project and therefore
have detailed and firsthand knowledge about the intervention
and the implementation process. But our closeness
and involvement in the project could conceivably
have influenced the findings, and is thus also a weakness
of the study.
The participants in these interviews are all professionals,
either responsible for managing or providing
health care. To the extent we know anything about what
patients, residents and their families think about these
questions, we know it just indirectly, through the managers’
and health care professionals’ assumptions and
views. Those who have received the service may consider
it differently.
Conclusions
The managers, facilitators and staff participating in this
study experienced ethics reflection groups as very valuable.
The time and resources needed were considered to
be highly rewarding investments by all the participants.
Another major finding was the importance of management
support and anchoring ethics sessions in the routine
of daily work. Ethics reflection groups, as implemented in
this study, may lead to collegial support and cooperation,
improved practice, better involvement of patients and
their families, personal and professional development and
mutual learning among employees.
Several aspects seem to be important for the positive
experience: The reflection process focusing on the participants’
own ethical challenges from their daily work;
and the reflection process taking place in the employee’s
workplace and being led by a colleague trained in
facilitation.