Background
Anterior cervical spine surgery (ACSS) is a well-established
surgical intervention that has demonstrated longterm
clinical benefits in a number of spine conditions
such as in the management of degenerative cervical spine
disease. However, despite its wide application, ACSS is
associated with complicated and difficult surgical processes
which are often accompanied by high risk and
cost. Some of the potential risks that can be disastrous
include esophageal injury, epidural hematoma, airway
obstruction and vascular injury [1–5]. The surgical difficulty
is a pressing concern among surgeons and patients
since it highly correlates with the safety and effectiveness
of the surgical process. Previously, the evaluation of surgical
difficulty has been based on subjective perception
rather than objective indexes. In addition, there is a lack
of systematic research with regard to the evaluation of
surgical difficulty in ACSS. The scientific multi-criteria
system is important in decision-making for a surgical
process, physician–patient communication, and surgical
skills training. This study aimed to evaluate the risk factors
for surgical difficulty of anterior cervical spine surgery
(ACSS).
Methods
Study population
A retrospectively maintained surgical database of 356
consecutive patients who underwent anterior cervical
surgery in our center from March 2012 to August 2017
was reviewed. All the patients received written informed
consent prior to the surgery. The study was approved by
our local institutional ethics committee. The indications
for anterior surgery were cervical myelopathy, radiculopathy
and ossified posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL).
The exclusion criteria were trauma, tumor, infection,
previous cervical surgery and lack of clear preoperative
imaging data. Therefore, we analyzed clinical data of 291
patients who underwent anterior cervical spine surgery.
Surgical procedure
All patients were performed by an experienced spine
surgeon (C.W.). The choice of operation was primarily
dependent on spinal cord compression. Corpectomy has
been effectively used to treat various pathologies including
osteophytes, OPLL and nucleus pulposus extending
posteriorly to the vertebral body. In this study, discectomy
was used if the compression was limited to the disk
level. Anterior cervical discectomy and corpectomy were
performed with the Smith–Robinson technique. In corpectomy,
the optimal titanium mesh cage (DePuy Spine,
New Brunswick, New Jersey) was filled with morselized
autologous bone and positioned into the defect. In discectomy,
PEEK interbody cage (DePuy Spine, New Brunswick,
New Jersey) was inserted into the disk space.
Anterior cervical locking plates with variable angle
screws (DePuy Spine, New Brunswick, New Jersey) were
employed in all the patients. Patients were instructed to
wear a cervical collar for 6 weeks postoperatively.
Definitions
The mean time of surgery in this study was 120.3 min
which was chosen as the cut-off. Operation time longer
than 120 min or intraoperative blood loss equal to or
greater than 200 ml was considered as a high-difficult
surgery. Otherwise, it was defined as low-difficulty surgery.
Examined radiological parameters included high
signal intensity of spinal cord on T2-weighted images,
OPLL, sagittal cervical circumference, coronal cervical
circumference, cervical length, anteroposterior diameter
of the spinal canal, the shortest diameter of the spinal
canal, and spinal canal occupational ratio. Sagittal
and coronal cervical circumferences were defined as the
distance between the intersection of the line parallel to
the endplate through the midpoint of C5 and soft tissue
shadow (Fig. 1). Cervical length was measured as the distance
between the sternum and gnathion on the lateral
radiograph (Fig. 1a). The anteroposterior and shortest
diameter of the spinal canal were measured at the most
compressed level using standard picture archiving and
communication system (PACS). Anteroposterior diameter
was the distance between the posterior edge of the
vertebral body and spinal canal while the shortest diameter
was defined as the distance between the posterior
edge of the compression and spinal canal. The following
formula was used to calculate the spinal canal occupational
ratio: spinal canal occupational ratio = (anteroposterior
diameter-shortest diameter)/anteroposterior
diameter (Fig. 2).
Statistical analysis
SPSS, version 23.0 and R, version 3.6.1 were used to perform
all the data analysis. Continuous variables were
expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Comparisons
between the high-difficulty group and low-difficulty
group were performed using Student’s t-test, Mann–
Whitney U test, χ2 test. Potential risk factors were identified
by multivariate logistic regression analysis (p
values < 0.05). The predictive value of the multivariate
logistic regression was visualized by the receiver operating
characteristics (ROC) curves. A nomogram was
established using the rms package of R, version 3.6.1.
The concordance index (C index) and a calibration curve
were used to determine predictive accuracy. A P value of
less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Patient demographics and clinical characteristics
Detailed participants’ demographics and clinical characteristics
in our study are given in Table1. All patients
were divided into high-difficulty group (n = 140, 48.1%)
and low-difficulty group (n = 151, 51.9%). Among the
291 patients, 180 (61.8%) were male while 111 (38.2%)
were female, with a mean age of 52.3 (range 18–76). The
mean surgical time was 120.3 min (60–250 min) and
mean blood loss was 33.1 ml (5–400 ml). In the low-difficulty
group, one patient had cerebrospinal fluid leakage
and two patients had dysphagia. Whereas in the highdifficulty
group, the main complications reported were
cerebrospinal fluid leakage in three patients, epidural
hematoma in one patient and dysphagia in four patients.
Establishment of a nomogram for predicting surgical
difficulty
Comparisons between the low-difficulty and high
difficulty groups showed that age (p = 0.017), sex
(p = 0.006), number of operation levels (p < 0.001), high
signal intensity (p < 0.001), OPLL (p < 0.001) and spinal
canal occupational ratio (p < 0.001) significantly correlated
with surgical difficulty. The ROC curves further
showed that the best thresholds for age and spinal
canal occupational ratio were 55 (sensitivity: 53.2%;
specificity: 68.9%) and 0.45 (sensitivity: 74.2%; specificity:
70.5%). Multivariate logistic regression analysis
revealed that number of operation levels (OR = 5.224,
95%CI = 2.125–12.843, p < 0.001), high signal intensity
(OR = 4.994, 95%CI = 1.636–15.245, p = 0.005), OPLL
(OR = 6.358, 95%CI = 1.932–20.931, p = 0.002) and
the spinal canal occupational ratio > 0.45 (OR = 3.988,
95%CI = 1.343–11.840, p = 0.013) were independent
risk factors for surgical difficulty of anterior cervical
surgery (Table 2). Based on these results, number of
operation levels, high signal intensity of spinal cord,
OPLL and spinal canal occupational ratio can be used
to establish a nomogram for use in predicting surgical
difficulty (Fig. 3).
Evaluation of prediction nomogram
The ROC curve for the nomogram model showed that
the C-index was 0.906, which was an indication of a
robust discriminative ability (Fig. 4a). The calibration
curve demonstrated that the probability of high-difficulty
predicted by the nomogram model agreed well
with actual practice (Fig. 4b).
Discussion
As the population ages, the incidence of degenerative
cervical disease is continuously increasing, which is the
foremost cause of neurological deficit among adults
worldwide [6, 7]. There is a paradigm shift in the treatment
of degenerative cervical disease from posterior
to anterior decompression, due to the direct removal
of spinal cord compressions, such as disc herniation,
osteophytes, and OPLL [8–10]. However, the anterior
approach is associated with potential risks that can cause
life-threatening complications in vulnerable organs anterior
to the vertebral body, such as trachea, esophagus
and blood vessels [3]. Therefore, cervical spine surgery
is associated with higher surgical difficulty than lumbar
surgery hence the need to evaluate surgical difficulty and
the associated risk factors for optimal performance in
ACSS. From the perspective of developing surgical protocols,
assessment of surgical procedure and surgical skill
training, a classification system determining the difficulty
level is extremely important. Moreover, adequate physician–
patient communication is necessary for patients
with high surgical difficulty.
Researchers have established several scoring systems
for assessing the surgical difficulty. Natkaniec et al. [11]
demonstrated that gender, tumor size, and localization
are some of the parameters associated with the
level of the surgical difficulty of the laparoscopic lateral
transperitoneal adrenalectomy. Hasegawa et al. [12]
established a novel model for the prediction of surgical
difficulty in laparoscopic liver resection and included factors
such as the extension of resection, location of tumor,
obesity and platelet count. However, a preoperative scoring
system evaluating the surgical difficulty of ACSS has
not been reported. Therefore, due to lack of a gold standard
to estimate for surgical difficulty, surrogate indicators
are often used to indirectly reflect the difficulty and these
include operative time, intraoperative blood loss and
incidence of complication [11–14]. High-difficulty ACSS
has been correlated with longer operative time and more
intraoperative bleeding.
In this study, a number of parameters such as age, sex,
BMI, number of operation levels, high signal intensity
of spinal cord on T2-weighted images, OPLL, sagittal
cervical circumference, coronal cervical circumference,
cervical length, spinal canal occupational ratio, and coagulation
function index were evaluated to identify risk factors
for high-difficulty ACSS. Previous studies confirm
that the elderly, obese patients and male gender are associated
with longer operative time [11, 12, 15]. However,
this study reported that there is no significant difference
in terms of age, sex, and BMI between low-difficulty and
high-difficulty groups of ACSS. Coagulation function
index and platelet count are associated with intraoperative
hemorrhage, however, no statistical significance in
these factors was reported in our study. To our knowledge,
thickness of neck might influence the operative
time due to the difficulty of surgical exposure. Although
surgical time tend to be longer in patients with thick
neck, this trend did not reach statistical significance in
our study.
Operational level was a vital factor affecting the difficulty
of ACSS. In our study, as operational segments
increased, prolonged operative time and more intraoperative
blood loss were reported and these findings
were consistent with previous research [16]. Moreover,
the incidence of complications associated with the surgical
procedure increased when more segments were
decompressed and fused. Kou et al. [17] reported that
multilevel procedures had a significantly higher risk for
epidural hematoma. Sagi et al. [1] also reported that the
number of vertebral bodies exposed more than three levels
and operative time longer than 5 h were statistically
associated with increased risk for airway complications
with potentially catastrophic consequences. The selection
of operational levels is mainly based on detailed
clinical evaluation including extent of compression, chief
complaint and the patient’s general condition. Adequate
neurological decompression is essential for optimal clinical
outcomes but caution should be made to reduce the
affected segments to minimize surgical trauma and risk
of potential complications.
The study demonstrated that OPLL was another predictive
factor for high-difficulty surgery. The technical
challenges faced when treating OPLL depend on the
decompression procedure including less injury to the
spinal cord and better protection of the venous plexus
especially when combining dural ossification [18]. Furthermore,
OPLL is associated with high risks of perioperative
complications, such as cerebrospinal fluid leakage,
dysphonia, dysphagia and neurological impairment [19].
Spinal canal occupational ratio was used to represent the
degree of compression and high signal intensity of spinal
cord on T2-weighted images closely correlated with
severe spinal cord compression [20]. This study confirmed
that the spinal canal occupational ratio and high
signal intensity were risk factors for surgical difficulty.
Therefore, surgeons should be cautious when severe
compression and high signal intensity are observed on
MR images.
For the clinical use of the established nomogram, a
0.906 C-index was reported for the model in addition to a
good calibration curve for use in predicting the probability
of high-difficulty surgery.
There are several limitations of this study that need to
be addressed. First, this is a retrospective study. Second,
this study was conducted in a single institution and the
limited number of cases might restrict the value of its
clinical use. Due to these limitations, prospective multicenter
studies with a large sample size are needed to validate
our results.
Conclusions
This study indicated that the number of operational levels,
OPLL, high signal intensity of spinal cord, and spinal
canal occupational ratio were independently associated
with surgical difficulty and a predictive nomogram can be
established using the identified risk factors. Optimal performance
was achieved for predicting surgical difficulty
of ACSS based on preoperative factors.