Introduction
Rationale
Over the past two decades cannabis use and dependence
are estimated to have increased, with cannabis
use disorder (CUD) reported as one of the most common
drug use disorders globally [1]. In Canada, it has
been reported that nearly 17 percent of Canadians aged
15 years and older reported using cannabis between
October and December of 2019, an increase from 14
percent between January to March of 2018. Additionally,
cannabis consumption rates are higher among males
than females [2]. Concerningly, cannabis has been associated
with substantial adverse effects. Like other drugs,
cannabis can result in cravings, dependence, and drugseeking
behaviour [3, 4]. During intoxication, cannabis
can interfere with memory, motor coordination, altered
judgement, and at higher doses, paranoia or psychosis
[3]. Further, repeated use of cannabis can have long lasting
effects, including altered brain development, poor
education outcome, cognitive impairment, diminished
life satisfaction and achievement, poor professional and
social achievements, symptoms of chronic bronchitis and
increased risk of chronic psychotic disorders [3, 5].
Heritability estimates for cannabis use initiation varied
from 30 to 48%, and from 51 to 59% for problematic
cannabis use, suggesting a genetic component exists [6].
Genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analyses
have identified possible regions of association on chromosome
3 for lifetime cannabis use (CADM2), chromosome
10 for CUD (rs77300175), and chromosome 16
for age of first cannabis use (ATP2C2) [7–9]. Moreover,
candidate gene studies have detected some significant
associations with cannabis use on the CNR1, GABRA2,
FAAH, and ABCB1 genes, but as with genome-wide association
studies (GWASs), replication of these associations
has been inconsistent [10].
GWASs provide a ‘hypothesis-free’ method of identifying
novel variant-trait associations, leading to the discovery
of novel biological mechanisms and diverse clinical
applications [11]. As such, in this systematic review, we
will summarize GWAS findings relevant to cannabis use
or CUD outcomes and discuss future directions.
Objectives:
The main goal of this systematic review is to identify
genetic variants from GWASs associated with cannabis
use.
Primary objectives of this systematic review include the
following:
1. Identify genetic variants associated with current cannabis
use. Current cannabis use is defined by either
self-report or positive urine drug screens within
1 month of the study being conducted.
2. Identify genetic variants associated with lifetime cannabis
use. Lifetime cannabis use is defined by any
self-reported or positive urine drug screens of cannabis
use within one’s lifetime.
3. Identify genetic variants associated with CUD. CUD
is defined by any diagnostic and classification systems
used to diagnose CUD or questionnaires validated to
assess CUD.
Secondary objectives of this systematic review include
the following:
1. Identify genetic variants associated with the adverse
outcomes of cannabis use, including psychiatric
(cognitive impairment, psychotic symptoms, depression,
anxiety, suicidal behavior) and non-psychiatric
(chronic bronchitis, lung infections, chronic cough,
increased risk of motor vehicle accidents) [12–14].
2. When feasible, perform subgroup summaries by sex
or ethnic differences.
Methods
This systematic review is reported in accordance with the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement [15] (see PRISMA
checklist in Additional file 1). The Human Genome Epidemiology
Network (HuGENet) guideline was used to
supplement the PRISMA guideline. While this review
does not conform with the HuGENet guideline expectations
of reporting on candidate gene study findings, the
HuGENet is used to uphold the standard of reporting
research specific to genetic association studies [16].
Protocol and registration
The protocol for this systematic review has been registered
within the International Prospective Register of
Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) (registration number:
CRD42020176016) [17]. The full protocol has been published
in the journal of Systematic Reviews [18].
Eligibility criteria
This review investigates GWASs presenting original data
on associations between cannabis use and genetic polymorphisms
using any study design (i.e. case–control,
cohort, etc.). We include studies investigating CUD as
well as any studies measuring any use of cannabis. Studies
that investigated CUD as defined by any version of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) or other
diagnostic and classification systems such as the International
Statical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems-10 (ICD-10) were included. We define
cannabis use based on the included studies’ definitions
and accept the following definitions: current cannabis
use is defined as either self-report or positive urine
drug screens within one month of the study being conducted,
and lifetime cannabis use is defined as any selfreported
or positive urine drug screens of cannabis use
within one’s lifetime [19]. All other studies that did not
perform a GWAS and investigate cannabis use or CUD
were excluded. No restrictions were placed on the study
setting or participant’s age, sex, ethnic background or
language. Further details on the inclusion criteria can be
found in the study protocol [18].
Information sources and search strategy
A Health Science Librarian was consulted to develop
a comprehensive search strategy. OVID MEDLINE
1946-Present, Web of Science 1976-Present, OVID
EMBASE 1974-Present, EBSCOHost CINHAL 1981-Present,
GWAS Catalog, GWAS Central, and NIH Database
of Genotype and Phenotype databases were searched
using the established strategy, modified for each database.
All databases were searched from inception to February
2nd,
2021. The search strategy included all terms
relevant to genome-wide association studies and cannabis.
The search strategies for each electronic database are
provided in Table 1.
Study selection and data collection process
Calibration was completed prior to the formal screening
process. Title and abstract screening, full-text screening
and data extraction phases were completed in duplicate
through Covidence [20]. Conflict resolution at the title
and abstract and full-text stages was performed by a senior
reviewer (AH or CC), blind to the reviewer’s vote.
Disagreements at the data extraction stage was resolved
by the consensuses of the two reviewers. The reason for
study exclusion was recorded at the full-text stage.
Data items
Data extracted included baseline participant characteristics,
the measure of cannabis used, relevant and significant
measured outcomes, statistical measures, and
reported study limitations and conflicts. For this review,
the threshold of significance of genetic variants reaching
p ≤ 10–
7 was set, as some GWAS results with this significance
level have been shown to be replicable within the
literature [21].
Risk of bias within studies and data analysis
Quality assessment was completed in duplicate for each
included study using the Quality of Genetic Association
Studies (Q-Genie) tool [Version 1.1] [22]. Disagreements
of quality assessment was resolved through discussion
between the two reviewers, and the first author reviewed
and confirmed all quality assessments.
Summary measures and synthesis of results
A random-effects meta-analysis through pooled odds
ratios was planned to quantitatively assess the data.
However, these measures were not appropriate as
data extracted from each study were unique and could
not be combined. For the aforementioned reasons, a
heterogeneity test, and a subgroup meta-analyses could
not be completed.
Risk of bias across studies
The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) was used to assess the
strength of evidence, with specific consideration of prognostic
factors [23, 24]. GRADE scores assess outcomes
according to the risk of bias, publication bias, consistency,
directness, and precision [23].
Results
Study selection
The search strategy, along with hand-searching, yielded
5984 studies. After removing duplicates through the
Zotero reference manger and Covidence, 4344 studies
were unique and screened for eligibility at the title and
abstract phase [20, 25]. Of the 69 studies eligible for fulltext
screening, 6 studies were included in this review and
underwent data extraction and quality assessment.
Studies frequently failed to meet the eligibility criteria
for inclusion for the following reasons (i) conducted
a GWAS meta-analysis, (ii) conducted a candidate gene
study or (iii) were investigating a factor associated with
cannabis use (i.e. aggression) rather than cannabis use
itself.
Please see the PRISMA flow diagram in Fig. 1.
Study characteristics
Individual study characteristics are reported in Table 2.
Two studies were case–control, two were cohort, one
was case-cohort, and another was case-cohort and
cohort. Interestingly, the first GWAS in the field of cannabis
use was published in 2011 and the most recent
conducted in 2019 [26, 27]. All studies used data from
large study datasets. Three studies utilized the Study
of Addiction: Genetics and Environment (SAGE) [4,
26, 28]. The International Cannabis Consortium (ICC),
UKBiobank, and 23andMe were utilized in one study
which performed three independent GWAS on the
aforementioned datasets [9]. Another study combined
the Yale-Penn and the International Consortium on the
Genetics of Heroin Dependence (ICGHD) to perform
a single GWAS [4]. Finally, one study utilized the Integrative
Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH) [27] and another
the Netherlands twin registry [29]. Studies varied in
size from 3053 to 51,372 participants. Of the studies
which reported participants’ sex and age, three studies
had a population comprised of mostly female participants
[9, 26, 28, 29], while only one reported majority
male [4]. The mean age of study participants varied
from mid-thirties to mid-fifties. Three studies reported
on participants of European or African American
ethnicities [4, 26, 28] and three studies reported a European
only ethnicity [9, 27, 29]. Reported outcomes of
interest included lifetime cannabis use [8, 9], CUD
as defined by either the DSM-IV [26] or ICD-10 [27],
CUD criteria count [4, 28] or age of onset of cannabis
use [29].
Risk of bias within studies
The Q-Genie tool [version 1.1] was completed in duplicate
and used to assess study quality. Studies were
assessed on a scale of 1 to 7 for 11 items. An overall
score greater than or equal to 45 for studies with a control
group and studies with an overall score greater than
40 without a control group were considered good quality
according to the Q-Genie tool [22]. All studies were considered
to be good quality except for one study, Minica
et al., which was deemed moderate quality. It should be
noted that Minica et al. did not discuss any potential
sources of bias or limitations within their study. Additionally,
the study was conducted using the Netherlands
twin registry and while individuals with a genetic relatedness
larger than 0.025 were excluded for some analyses,
heritability was not accounted for in all analyses and
may therefore introduce bias [29]. Three studies reported
potential conflicts of interest due to involvement with
industry funding [4, 26, 28], two studies report conflict
in a patent involved in identifying SNPs associated with
addiction [26, 28] and one study reports authors are
employees of deCODE genetics [27]. Please see Table 3
for the studies Q-genie scores of the included studies.
Results of individual studies
All six studies included in this systematic review reported
outcomes that reached the significance threshold set a
priori (Table 4).
Agrawal et al. [26] identified two SNPs associated with
DSM-IV cannabis dependence within the ANKFN1 gene
(chromosome 17). European and African American participants
were selected from the SAGE study which was
aimed to primarily study DSM-IV alcohol dependence.
Case status was defined as a lifetime history of DSM-IV
cannabis dependence, with controls defined as using cannabis
at least once in their lifetime but not meeting criteria
for DSM-IV cannabis dependence.
Agrawal et al. [28] identified a SNP reaching borderline
significance threshold on chromosome 3 associated with
CUD factor scores in African Americans, however, no
associated gene was identified. Participants were European
and African Americans selected from the SAGE
study. DSM factor scores were developed from 12 DSMIV
and DSM-5 criteria for CUD.
Demontis et al. identified 26 SNPs associated with
CUD on chromosome 8, with no associated gene identified.
However, only 5 SNPs were discussed and identified
in the paper, and thus only 5 SNPs are reported in
this review. Participants were selected from the iPSYCH
cohort and were of European ancestry. The iPSYCH
cohort was established to study six major psychiatric disorders,
however, identified participants meeting ICD-10
CUD [27].
Minica et al. reported 3 SNPs associated with cannabis
initiation and 24 SNPs associated with the age of
onset of cannabis use. Identified SNPs were found on
chromosomes 5, 9, 18 and 19, with one SNP associated
with cannabis initiation was found on the Zinc finger
protein, ZNF181. All participants were of European
descent and were selected from the Netherlands Twin
Registry. Cannabis initiation was defined as ever/never
having used cannabis while age of onset was determined
by asking participants an open-ended question
[29].
Pasman et al. conducted three independent GWASs
in three separate cohorts, all of which included European
participants: ICC, UKBiobank, and 23andMe.
While results from 23andMe were unable to be shared
due to privacy policies, the lead author kindly provided
SNPs reaching borderline significance threshold with
lifetime cannabis use for GWAS conducted in the ICC
and UKBiobank cohort. One SNP in the ICC cohort
and 18 SNPs in the UKBiobank were associated with
lifetime cannabis use, with no genes specified in either.
Lifetime cannabis use was defined as any cannabis use
during lifetime [9].
Sherva et al. identified 42 SNPs associated with DSMIV
cannabis dependence criteria count across 27 different
genes/regions including INTS7, SNORA26,
RPS20P10, PI4K2B, CSMD1, PSMB7, HABP2, MEFV,
CST7, APMAP, ACSS1, snoU13, TPST2, SCN9A, CTA-
445C9.15, CTA-445C9.14-CTA-4, SCN9A-SCN7A,
ARL2BPP5-RP11-541P9.3, RP11-755E23.3-CCDC67,
SNORD11-RNU6-1014P, RP5-860P4.2-CST7, RNU6-
1257P, APMAP-ACSS1, C9.15, RPS20P10-CYP26B1,
PI4K2B-ZCCHC4, and CST7-APMAP. European and
African American participants were selected from
the Yale-Penn Study, the SAGE study and the ICGHD
cohorts [4].While no SNPs were reported within the same region
not allowing further quantitative analysis, several phenotypic
similarities exist across studies. Interestingly, two
studies found that educational attainment was negatively
associated with CUD [26, 27] and a third found positive
genetic correlations with educational attainment [9]. Two
studies found that cannabis dependence was significantly
related to alcohol, nicotine, and cocaine dependence [4,
26] with a third reporting a positive genetic correlation
between lifetime cannabis use and smoking and alcohol
use and dependence [9].
Risk of bias across studies
Outcomes assessed for GRADE include lifetime cannabis
use, diagnosis of CUD, criterion count for CUD and
age of onset of cannabis use. All outcomes included two
studies except for age of onset of cannabis use which only
included one study. The full GRADE table can be found
in Table 5. All outcomes were rates as important, and no
outcome was rated as having a “very serious” concern
pertaining to any certainty criteria. Only the outcomes
of diagnosis of CUD and criterion count for CUD had a
serious rating, both of which were in the category of indirectness.
Both of these outcomes were downgraded due
to the use of different diagnostic criteria. More specifically,
for the outcome of diagnosis of CUD Agrawal et al.
[26] utilized the DSM-IV and Demontis et al. (2019) utilized
the ICD-10 and for the outcome of criterion count
of CUD Sherva et al. [4] utilized the DSM-IV criteria and
Agrawal et al. [28] utilized a combination of DSM-IV and
DSM-5 criteria.
Discussion
Summary of evidence
In this review we identified 96 genetic variants to be
associated with different measures of cannabis. Of these
genetic variants, 18 reached the genome-wide significance
threshold of p ≤ 5 × 10–
8, all of which are available
in Table 4. As no genetic variants included in this review
were reported in more than one study, meta-analyses
were not possible. However, of the genetic variants identified
in this review, several are located on genes in which
previous studies have reported associations with mental
health, namely ANKFN1, INTS7, PI4K2B, CSMD1, CST7,
ACSS1, and SCN9A.
With cannabis being a legal substance, research on
the benefits and harms of cannabis has been on the rise.
However, a limited number of GWASs have been conducted
on cannabis use to determine any genetic associations.
This systematic review was able to qualitatively
summarize findings from GWASs reporting borderline
genome-wide significance to aid in identifying SNPs that
may be replicable in future studies. We have identified six
eligible studies that reported independent GWAS results,
one of which primarily focused on a GWAS meta-analysis.
Of the included studies, only participants from European
or African American ethnicities were included,
suggesting a need for genetic studies being conducted in
more diverse ethnic populations. All six studies reported
at least one borderline significant SNP; however, no two
studies identified the same SNP. SNPs were found to be
associated with CUD, cannabis initiation, age of onset
of cannabis use, DSM-IV cannabis dependence criteria
count, or lifetime cannabis use on various gene regions.
According to assessment using the Q-genie tool and
GRADE tool, no study or outcome was deemed to be of
poor quality. Additionally, with GWAS requiring a sample
size of thousands of participants for adequate power,
all studies met this threshold [30].
While the majority of genes identified in the included
studies had either no known function or biological plausibility,
and none had any additional associations with
cannabis use, as mentioned above, several did have associations
with mental health conditions and are discussed
briefly, namely ANKFN1, INTS7, PI4K2B, CSMD1,
CST7, ACSS1, and SCN9A. ANKFN1 is a protein coding
gene which has been associated with smoking cessation
and nicotine dependence [31]. INTS7 is a component of
the integrator complex, which is involved in the small
nuclear RNA U1 and U2 transcriptions [32] and has been
associated with bipolar temperament [31, 33]. PI4K2B
contributes to the overall PI4-kinase activity of the cell
[32] and is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), logical memory and abnormality
of neuronal migration [33]. CSMD1 has been associated
with behavioural disinhibition, schizophrenia, cognitive
tests, chronic bronchitis, and bipolar disorder [31, 33].
CST7 is associated with alcohol consumption and myocardial
infarction [31, 33]. ACSS1 catalyzes the synthesis
of acetyl-CoA and has been associated with performance
on standardized cognitive tests and bitter alcoholic
beverage consumption [31–33]. SCN9A medicates the
voltage-dependent sodium ion permeability of excitable
membranes and plays a role in pain mechanisms, especially
in the development of inflammatory pain [31]. As
it is known that cannabis can have a negative impact on
learning, memory and chronic bronchitis, known relation
to mental illness and suggested role in pain management,
these regions may have implications in cannabis
use despite having no clear known biological relevance
[3, 19].
Additionally, it is also important to highlight that
genes identified in this review associated with cannabis
use or CUD have also been associated with other neuropsychiatric
disorders namely nicotine dependence,
ADHD, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and alcohol
consumption suggesting that the genetic risk for the
development of these disorders may not be independent.
Previously genetic associations have been found amongst
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, ADHD, depression, and
autism spectrum disorder, with a high genetic correlation
between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and a moderate
correlation between ADHD and depression, ADHD
and autism spectrum disorder, and ADHD and depression
[34]. A recent GWAS meta-analysis added to the
evidence on shared genetic associations amongst neuropsychiatric
disorders by identifying that an increased
risk of cannabis use disorder is genetically correlated with
increased liability for smoking initiation, alcohol use, nicotine
dependence, and psychiatric disorders (e.g. ADHD,
schizophrenia, major depression) [35]. These genetic correlations
among neuropsychiatric disorders, including
cannabis, could reflect genuine pleiotropy or could indicate
these psychiatric disorders, including CUD, are not
completely independent [34, 35]. As such, it is important
to discuss the biological and individual factors that influence
the development of neuropsychiatric disorders.
Neuropsychiatric disorders are influenced by a range
of factors, including genetics, personality/mood characteristics,
psychological status, behaviour, neurocognitive
functioning, and demographic characteristics [36, 37]. To
begin, non-specific to CUD, the prenatal environment,
including prenatal nutrition, maternal stress, and maternal
substance abuse, can impact brain development and
therefore the behavioural outcome of children. Potential
mechanisms through which the prenatal environment
can impact brain development occurs on multiple levels
including genetic selection, epigenetic modification,
mediation of brain-immune communications, abnormal
metabolism pathways, synthetic mediation of hormones
and the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, and mediation
of the microbiota-gut brain axis [37]. Furthermore,
nutritional deficiency during critical stages of pregnancy
has been linked to emotional and behavioural problems
in children including decreased attention, decreased IQ,
language delay, and neurodevelopment and related neuropsychiatric
disorders [37–39]. More specifically, prenatal
malnutrition has been linked to an increased risk of
schizophrenia during the 1944–1945 Dutch Hunger Winter
and the 1959–1961 Chinese famine. Additionally, a
“U” relationship between serum 12(OH)D concentration
and emotion, behaviour and attention has been found
[38, 40]. Interestingly, the hippocampus, which plays an
important role in learning and memory, has been suggested
to be sensitive to the exposure of prenatal nutrition
deficiency [39, 41]. The hippocampus has also been
proven to be crucial in the pathophysiology of many
neuropsychiatric disorders, in which the changes result
from alerted brain development [41]. Maternal stress has
been associated with poor offspring outcomes including
cognition, health and educational attainment, however
methodological challenges exist leading to potential
misattribution of socially mediated (i.e. postnatal parenting)
mechanisms to biological ones (i.e. alterations to
developing fetal brain) [42, 43]. Finally, prenatal exposure
to alcohol and other substances has been increasingly
common and the consequence of the exposure differs
depending on the substance used. Alcohol, tobacco, cannabis
and opioids are among the most frequent used
substances during pregnancy and offspring outcomes
may include birth defects, developmental disability, fetal
alcohol syndrome, childhood obesity, decreased birth
weight, poor inhibitory control and other organ deficits
[44]. Thus, many neuropsychiatric disorders appear to
result from interactions among genetic background, the
prenatal environment and postnatal lifestyle choices [45,
46]. Given the known association between deficits within
the prenatal environment and other neuropsychiatric disorders
it is plausible to suggest that the prenatal environment
and subsequential gene expression may play a role
in future cannabis use and/or CUD.
As previously mentioned, a variety of factors contribute
to the complex etiology of neuropsychiatric disorders
such as epigenetic modification. Epigenetic modifications
that can regulate gene expression include DNA methylation,
nucleosomal structure and positioning, post-translational
modification of nucleosome histones, histone
replacement and small RNA molecules that influence
protein production [47]. The most studied form of epigenetic
modification is DNA methylation, which can be
influenced by a range of factors including genetic factors,
disease, environmental exposures, and lifestyle. DNA
methylation changes can be either persistent or reversible
once the exposure is no longer present, adding value
for biomarker development [48]. How cannabis, THC
and other exogenous cannabis receptor modulators alter
epigenetic mechanisms have been previously reviewed
[47]. Relatively little is known about the molecular pathways
influenced by cannabis, however, one study identified
13 proteins, 3 metabolites and 2 lipids significantly
associated with a metabolite of THC and another found
acute effects of cannabis or THC on the central nervous
system and heart rate [49, 50]. In addition to DNA
methylation, post-transcriptional chemical medication of
RNA is rapidly emerging as a key role in regulating gene
expression, known as epitranscriptomics [51]. Of growing
interest within this felid is N4-acetylcytidine (ac4C),
a key role in the transcriptional translation process. ac4C
has been implicated in the occurrence of various disease
such as inflammation, metabolic diseases, autoimmune
diseases, and cancer [52]. While the role ac4C may play
in neuropsychiatric disorders remains unknown, it is
important to consider the role epitransciptomics plays in
the gene expression with normal development.
Current knowledge on cannabis has demonstrated that
cannabis can induce structural changes to brain regions
including the hippocampus, amygdala, cerebellum, prefrontal
cortex and striatum as well as grey matter volume
[53–55]. Potential pre-existing neurobiological factors
may exist in cannabis use as well as gene x drug interactions.
For instance, in young teens, reduced orbitofrontal
cortex volume has been found to predict initiation of cannabis
use in later adolescence. The G allele of rs2023239
of CNR1 is linked with higher cortical CBR1 and is associated
with smaller hippocampal volume in chronic cannabis
users, but not healthy controls and findings that
suggest only individuals with a high genetic risk of schizophrenia
experience a negative impact on cortical maturation
during early adolescence thus suggestive of gene
× drug interactions [56–58]. In addition, functional MRI
evidence suggest specific brain activity signatures with
cannabis use such as increased functional connectivity
associated with the default node network and insula networks
and hippocampal and parahippocampal atrophy
have been associated with chronic cannabis use [59, 60].
However, neuroimaging studies of cannabis users have
yielded inconsistent findings and may reflect individual
differences that preceded cannabis use. The inconsistent
findings in the literature highlight the need for large
longitudinal studies utilizing before-and-after cannabis
use neuroimaging [61]. Taken together, it is plausible that
structural differences in brain regions could be influenced
by genetic differences between individuals, explaining the
mixed evidence within neuroimaging. Further research is
required to determine the complex interactions amongst
individual genetic predispositions, prenatal environment,
and postnatal environment contributing to individual
cannabis use behaviour and/or the development of CUD.
Understanding the genetic predispositions is one piece of
the puzzle in understanding the complex development of
cannabis use and CUD.
Finally, it is important to consider the shared genetic
basis of other substance use disorders. Heritability estimates
across substance use disorders vary, with heritability
lowest for hallucinogens (0.39) and highest for cocaine
use (0.72) [62, 63]. Additionally, substance use disorders
are the result of gene x environment interactions, with
partial risk inborn and another part determined by environmental
experiences [62]. Previous reviews have summarized
the literature on GWASs for various substance
use disorders including alcohol use disorder, nicotine use
disorder, CUD, OUD, and cocaine use disorder. However,
genetic studies within specific substance use disorders
have had varying success in replicating previously identified
associations, limiting evidence for shared genetic
basis across substance use disorders [63, 64]. The complexity
of substance use disorder make genetic prediction
efforts difficult, and while currently only alcohol use disorder
have been genetically correlated with CUD, continued
advancements in molecular genetic studies and
substance use disorder at larges further our understanding
of the biological pathways underlying substance use
disorders [9, 63, 65]. For instance, CNR1 and CNR2, components
of the endocannabinoid system, are major targets
of investigation for their impact in neuropsychiatry
and addiction phenotypes suggested shared genetic risk
factors [66, 67]. In regards to neuropsychiatric disorders,
Mendelian randomization studies have found mixed
evidence on the causal effect of cannabis initiation and
schizophrenia, finding weak evidence that cannabis initiation
increases schizophrenia risk and strong evidence
that schizophrenia liability increases the odds of cannabis
initiation, and causal evidence of ADHD on cannabis initiation
[68–72]. Through continued advances, it is hoped
that the underlying genetic basis for CUD, or a shared
genetic basis for all substance use disorders, will be identified
to provide preventative measures and treatment for
substance use disorders in the future.
Limitations
While this systematic review was rigorous and involved
a peer-reviewed protocol, it is not without limitations.
First, our inclusion criteria limited our review to only
GWASs, meaning any GWAS meta-analyses and candidate
gene studies were excluded. GWAS meta-analyses
and candidate gene studies are often more powered due
to their larger sample sizes and minimal genetic variants
tested, respectfully [11]. However, including only
GWASs was decided a priori to capture novel genetic
variants associated with cannabis use and avoid the
inclusion of multiple studies which could use the same
genetic dataset. Second, it is important to note that this
review is susceptible to publication bias, as studies that
do not achieve genome-wide significance may be less
likely to be published, and thus, not included in this
review. Unpublished GWAS findings may exist with
SNPs reaching the borderline significance threshold.
While we cannot eliminate publication bias entirely, we
searched abstracts, GWAS catalogs, and databases for
any near significant findings that were not published. If
a relevant abstract was identified, without the full study
published, the first author was contacted to determine
whether the full GWAS had been published or was
going to be submitted to a journal. Finally, if a study
met our inclusion criteria but did not report any SNPs
that fell below the genome-wide significance threshold,
study authors were contacted to confirm if any
SNPs had reached the borderline significant threshold
set for this review. Third, due to the heterogeneity of
the reported findings, it was not possible to conduct a
meta-analysis or sex and ethnicity subgroup analyses.
Although we could not conduct a meta-analysis, we
qualitatively summarized the studies and reported a
comprehensive list of all SNPs reaching the significance
threshold for this study.
Conclusion
This systematic review was able to summarize GWAS
findings within the field of cannabis use. The results can
inform future candidate gene studies and GWASs of possible
replicable SNPs that require further investigation.
We were able to identify all GWASs conducted on cannabis
use, highlighting the need for further research as no
two GWASs reported the same SNP or gene associated
with cannabis use. Further, included GWASs had limited
ethnic diversity, with only European or African American
participants. Recommendations are made for future
research to replicate reported associations and include
diverse ethnic populations to test whether SNPs associated
with cannabis use reported are generalizable across
study populations and if associations differ by ethnicity.