Sepsis is a severe and life-threatening clinical syndrome
with a primary systemic bacterial infection. Alarmingly,
the occurrence of sepsis is rising with a 17% increase
between 2000 and 2010 [1]. At the same time, the mortality
of sepsis has risen unacceptably high with a 31%
increase between 1999 and 2014 [2]. This elevation in
mortality rate is partially due to the complexity of its
immunological syndrome and multiorgan involvement
[3]. An effective prognostic biomarker that can predict
the clinical outcome of sepsis patients appropriately is in
high demand in clinical practice.
Biomarkers for sepsis may be utilized as a diagnostic
or prognostic tool. Circulating proteins including
pro-inflammatory cytokines, complement proteins, or
immunosuppressive phase proteins, have previously
been identified as single biomarkers for sepsis [4, 5].
However, single biomarkers lack specificity and sensitivity
as prognostic tools for sepsis patients. The biomarkers
containing multiple genes deliver better prognostic
power. Several studies [6, 7] attempted to combine proinflammatory
and anti-inflammatory markers and is the
method to most likely succeed in predicting the disease
development of sepsis patients. Meanwhile, a few gene
signatures associated with immune responses in sepsis
were also found in recent years. Emma E Davenport
et al. [8] unified genomics approach and heterogeneity in
sepsis to group patients by different immune responses.
Miguel Reyes et al. [9] identified a unique CD14+
monocyte
state which is inflated in sepsis patients. In general,
biomarkers to characterize immune status are powerful
tools for predicting the development and progression of
sepsis.
Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a bioactive lipid with
specific targets and functions in both intracellular and
extracellular environments. Following release from the
cell, S1P acts as a ligand upon binding to five subtypes
of S1P receptors (S1PRs) 1–5 which belong to the G protein-
coupled receptor (GPCRs) family, triggering many
receptor-dependent cellular signaling pathways. Among
all these five S1PRs, S1PR3 regulates many parts of the
vascular barrier and inflammatory responses in several
pathological disorders related to the sepsis mediated
pro-inflammatory response [10, 11]. S1PR3 is mainly
expressed in the cardiovascular system, lungs, kidney,
and spleen organs [12]. The S1P ligation of S1PR3 could
affect various organ system functions such as vascular
permeability signaling [13], heart rate, and blood pressure
[14].
S1P-S1PR3 axis played a pivotal role in sepsis. Two
independent studies have reported that S1P levels in the
blood are reduced in sepsis, and its expression correlates
with the severity of sepsis [15, 16]. S1PR3′s function in
sepsis has been studied by multiple groups. Niessen [17]
et al. suggested that the S1P–S1PR3 axis regulates latestage
inflammation amplification in sepsis. Hou et al. [18]
also showed that S1PR3 signaling is bactericidal because
it is related to the function of monocytes and the deficiency
of S1PR3 could therefore increase susceptibility
to sepsis, S1PR3 expression levels were upregulated in
monocytes from sepsis patients. Higher levels of monocytic
S1PR3 drove the innate immune response against
bacterial infection and highly associated with preferable
outcomes. S1PR3 is also noted to be significantly upregulated
in acute respiratory distress syndrome [19], a pulmonary
consequence of sepsis, suggesting a key role in
inflammation regulation. Therefore, S1PR3 is essential
for survival in sepsis, and S1PR3-regulated cell signaling
pathways in sepsis may offer a novel role in therapy. The
S1P-S1PR3 signaling may have the predictive power for
estimating the activity of host innate immune responses
and subsequent pathogen elimination.
We hypothesize that multiple S1PR3-related genes,
in combination with pro- and anti-inflammatory
cytokines, could correlate with clinical outcomes in
sepsis patients. We desire to find those genes regulated
by S1PR3 which may reflect the clinical outcome of
sepsis patients. To achieve this aim, we examined whole
blood gene expression in two standalone cohorts from
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and identified a gene
signature of 18 genes significantly associated both with
S1PR3 and sepsis survival. Our results propose that
S1PR3-associated genes may expand the outcome prediction
in sepsis.
Methods
Sepsis datasets
Two sepsis datasets with whole blood samples
(GSE54514 and GSE33118) from the GEO database
(https ://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds/) were chosen as
our research subjects (Table 1). The discovery cohort
GSE54514 contains whole blood transcriptome data of
35 survivors and non-survivors of sepsis, samples were
collected daily for up to 5 days from sepsis patients. For
validation cohort GSE33118, whole blood samples from
20 sepsis patients were tested before specific treatment.
Series matrix files containing pre-processed gene
expression values were obtained from series GSE54514
(https ://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query /acc.
cgi?acc=GSE54 514) and GSE33118 (https ://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/geo/query /acc.cgi?acc=GSE33 118). All
chip probe sets in matrix files had been transformed
into corresponding gene symbols by utilizing chip platform
files.
Identifying S1PR3‑related sepsis gene signature
We detected the DEGs between 26 survivors and 9 nonsurvivors
in the discovery cohort and set them as sepsis
survival-related genes. The limma package [33] in R (version:
3.5.2) was used to identify DEGs in this study. The
S1PR3-associated genes based on signaling pathways
and associated proteins were confirmed by searching
the STRING database (https ://strin g-db.org/) [22]. We
intersected the sepsis survival-related genes and S1PR3-
associated genes, and these intersected genes were our
S1PR3-related sepsis gene signature.
KEGG pathway analysis and PPI network
We used different methods to display our gene sets’
functional profiles and interactions. The KEGG (Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway analyses
were performed by the clusterProfiler [21] which was a
visualization tool for analyzing functional profiles such as
enriched pathways for gene clusters. We constructed the
PPI network based on the STRING protein and protein
interactions data being visualized by Cytoscape 3.5. Correlation
matrix made by corrplot was used to highlight
the most correlated genes in our gene table.
Expression score and risk score
Each patient was allocated with an expression and risk
score from gene expression and corresponding weight
values of 18 genes. The linear formula corresponding to
expression and risk score are:
Here, n is the count of genes included in the gene signature
in each dataset, Wi
represents the weight of the
ith gene (see in Table 1), ei
represents the expression level
of the ith gene, and μi and si
are the corresponding mean
and standard deviation value for the ith gene among
whole samples.
Statistical analyses
R (version 3.5.0) was utilized to perform all the statistical
calculations in this study. Receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves and principal component analysis
(PCA) was applied to prove the differentiating power
of our S3MS on sepsis survival status. R package pROC
(version 1.16.1) was used to visualize the ROC curve and
compute the area under the curve (AUC). For PCA analysis,
R built-in prcomp function was utilized to compute
expression score =
n
i=1
ei − μi
si 
risk score =
n
i=1
Wiei − μi
si 
principal components, and the R package factorextra
(version 1.0.7) to build the PCA plot. We set FDR < 0.05
as the statistically significant cutoff in this study.
Results
Identification of an S1PR3‑related molecular signature
(S3MS) associated with sepsis survival
Firstly, we identified all S1PR3-interactive proteins.
STRING (https ://strin g-db.org/) is an online biological
database with acknowledged or predicted protein–protein
interactions data. Utilizing the STRING database,
we found a total of 226 S1PR3-related genes (Additonal
file 1: Table S1) with a high confidence interaction score
(interaction score > 0.7) in addition to all the active interaction
sources, and all co-expression correlation r values
of S1PR3 with S1PR3-related genes in discovery cohort
had been shown in Additonal file 2: Table S2. Next, we
defined all sepsis survival-related genes by setting the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) between the 26 survivors
and 9 non-survivors as survival-related genes in the
discovery cohort (NIH GEO GSE54514). 1078 up-regulated
and 1134 down-regulated genes (false discovery
rate [FDR] < 5% and fold change [FC] > 1.5) in non-survivors
were found and characterized as sepsis survivalrelated
genes (Additonal file 3: Table S3).
S1PR3-related genes from the STRING database and
sepsis survival genes from our discovery cohort were
then characterized. KEGG is a collection of databases for
protein-coding gene functions, combining transcriptome
with signaling pathways [20]. In this study, we applied
an R package-clusterProfiler to detect enriched KEGG
pathways amongst our genes [21]. The most significantly
enriched KEGG pathways among S1PR3-interactive
genes include chemokine signaling, neuroactive ligand−
receptor interaction, and human cytomegalovirus infection
(Fig. 1a) while the sepsis survival-related genes
exhibited significant enrichment of ribosome, tuberculosis,
and several immune-related pathways (Fig. 1b).
To find the connection between S1PR3 pathways
and genes that affect sepsis survival, we intersected the
S1PR3-related genes and sepsis survival-related genes
and identified 18 overlapping genes (Fig. 2a). These 18
genes are classified as our sepsis gene signature derived
from S1PR3-related genes in this study and defined as
S1PR3-related molecular signatures (S3MS) (Table 1).
Interestingly, within the human genome, this overlap is
statistically significant (hypergeometric p-value < 0.05),
suggesting S1PR3 related genes are significantly enriched
among survival-associated genes in sepsis. The heatmap
demonstrates that the 18 genes (S3MS) can discriminate
non-survivors from survivors through different gene
expression patterns (Fig. 2b). Graphical maps of genome
sequence provide a method to rapidly look at the features
of specific genes. A chromosome-based circular genome
plot was utilized to illustrate all DEGs’ genome positions
within chromosome (x-axis) and corresponding FC values
(y-axis). Using a circular genome plot (Fig. 2c), we
found that the 18 genes scattered in different genome
regions suggesting that these genes are enriched in key
pathways but not genetically linked due to chromosomal
locations.
Next, we characterized the biological function and
interaction of these 18 genes in the S3MS. KEGG
pathways such as sphingolipid signaling, chemokine signaling,
Rap1 signaling, and cAMP signaling, besides others
(Fig. 3a) were found to be significantly enriched among
these 18 genes. Several of these pathways were also associated
with S1PR3 and sepsis survival-related immune
pathways (KEGG pathways) identified in Fig. 1. This
strongly indicates that the S3MS signature builds a bridge
between S1PR3 and sepsis survival-related genes. The
protein and protein interaction (PPI) network analysis
[22] provides biological insights such as the classification
of protein complexes. Our results (Fig. 3b) from the PPI
network analysis clearly suggests that the 18 genes can
be grouped into two gene clusters. One gene cluster
was associated with the VEGF signaling pathway, Rap1
signaling pathway, and Fc gamma R-mediated phagocytosis,
while the other was associated with Staphylococcus
aureus infection, chemokine signaling pathway, and
cytokine–cytokine receptor interaction (Fig. 3b). Additionally,
the correlation matrix demonstrates that 16
genes have a mostly positive correlation with each other
while only 2 genes (CXCL10 and RAC1) demonstrated a
negative correlation (Fig. 3C). Our results confirm that
the 18 genes identified in our S3MS had a strong connection
and relationship.
S3MS predicts clinical outcomes in both discovery
and validation cohorts
We developed a risk assessment scoring method to measure
the possibility of sepsis risk in patients using a linear
combination of the 18-gene expression values (Table 1).
Each value was given a weighted value which indicates
the direction of differential expression in non-survivors,
and patients were assigned a score based on those measures.
Our results focused on both the discovery and
validated cohorts. The results are in line with our expectations:
risk scores from non-survivors were significantly
higher than those of survivors in our study (Fig. 4a).
Therefore, our gene signature from S1PR3 has the potential
to predict clinical outcomes in sepsis.
Classification power of the 18‑gene signature
We investigated the classification performance of the
S1PR3 gene signature in the discovery and validated
datasets. The AUC under the ROC curve were 0.998 and
0.8 for the discovery and validation cohorts, respectively
(Fig. 4b).
A bioinformatics study by Venet et al. shows that most
gene signatures randomly selected from the human
genome with the same gene size were sometimes better
than published gene signatures [23]. We collected 10,000
random gene signatures through random selection
from the whole genome or sepsis survival-related genes
and produced either an expression score for the entire
genome or a risk score for the sepsis survival-related
genes for each patient. Corresponding AUC values were
then calculated for each random gene signature. Our
gene signature had better power on the classification of
sepsis survival than randomly generated genes with the
same gene count (better than 95% percent random gene
signatures in the whole genome) (Fig. 4c).
Principal component analysis (PCA) was also performed
to simplify the complexity in high-dimensional
data like our 18-gene expression pattern. PCA (Fig. 5a,
b) showed that the 18-gene signature thoroughly distinguished
non-survival patients from survival patients in
the discovery cohort, and only slightly overlapped in the
validation cohort.
Overall, our 18-gene had a great classification power
of discriminating the non-survivors from survivors on a
gene expression level.
Discussion
Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response to pathogenic
microorganisms such as gram-positive or gram-negative
bacteria [24]. The mortality rate of sepsis is still relatively
high (20% and 80% [25, 26]) despite improvement in sepsis
treatment. Regulation of the immune response plays
a vital role in the pathogenesis of sepsis [27, 28]. S1PR3,
our target molecule, belongs to a family of GPCRs that
regulate host innate immunity. Jinchao Hou et al. [18]
validated that S1PR3 expression in macrophages is upregulated
following bacterial stimulation and ameliorated
the severity of sepsis. Additionally, S1PR3 regulates
various inflammatory responses and vascular barrier
function in several pathological septic conditions [29].
S1PR3 is an attractive biomarker candidate due to its
involvement in several signaling pathways and gene coexpression
related to sepsis. Finding S1PR3 gene signatures
in sepsis will reveal several biological or clinical
features of the pathogenesis and progression of sepsis. In
this study, we chose two gene expression datasets from
the GEO database which contain whole blood samples
from sepsis patients with clinical outcome information
to identify an S1PR3 gene signature. Our investigations
yielded the following observations: (1) Identification of
an 18-gene signature in this study which could discriminate
non-survivors from survivors at the gene expression
level. (2) 18-gene signature is an “independent” prognostic
marker for predicting or estimating the potential risk
of sepsis. (3) Signaling pathways enriched in our gene signature
linked S1PR3 pathways with severe sepsis-related
processes.
Biomarkers are a non-invasive clinical method that
could objectively predict or evaluate usual biological
processes or host response to therapy. Up to now, the
use of molecular biomarkers has been only concentrated
on the diagnosis of sepsis, no gene signatures are used
in the prognosis of severe sepsis. No biomarkers with
single genes are likely to adequately reveal the rapidly
evolving nature of a septic patient’s status. Some studies
[6, 7] have attempted to combine several pro-inflammatory
biomarkers or both pro- and anti-inflammatory
markers randomly. However, we specifically derived the
18-gene signature based on the S1PR3 processes which
are strongly related to the development of sepsis. Our
gene signature performs very well as a novel biomarker
for sepsis survival based on the performance of our risk
assessment score in both the discovery and validation
cohorts. This novel biomarker exhibits significance
in three ways: (1) Independence. Our S3MS was not
derived from a combination of other biomarkers, so it is a
method to discover new sepsis biomarkers based on key
signaling pathways; (2) Performance. S3MS performs not
only better than random gene signatures from the whole
genome with the same size but better than sepsis survival
gene signatures with the same gene size (see Fig. 4). (3)
Growth potential. Unlike most biomarkers such as circulating
protein, gene signature can be adjusted dynamically
to functionally perform better.
In order to account for the potential for false-positive
results that are typical of multiple-testing [23], we have
utilized random gene signature comparison. Therefore,
resampling tests were utilized in our study in discovery
and validation cohorts to answer this doubt. S3MS-based
AUC values in the discovery and validation cohort were
compared with random gene signatures from the whole
genome and sepsis survival-related genes. The results
showed that the classification power of the 18-gene signature
is mostly better than that of the gene sets randomly
chosen from the whole genome. Comparing to
random genes or combined biomarkers, our S3MS also
demonstrated a strong relationship with signaling pathways
and protein interactions.
Numerous signaling pathways have been identified as
enriched within our gene signature. The VEGF (vascular
endothelial growth factor) pathway, which regulates vascular
development in angiogenesis, was enriched in our
gene signature. Kiichiro et al. [30] highlighted the importance
of the VEGF pathway in altering sepsis morbidity
and mortality. Many innate or adaptive immune pathways
(chemokine signaling pathway, cytokine–cytokine
receptor interaction, and Rap1 signaling pathway) were
enriched within our 18-gene signature. Down-regulation
of these immune pathways is known to worsen the prognosis
of sepsis. Otherwise, 18 genes had intense interactions
with each other. Hence, the 18-gene signature from
S1PR3-related genes not only predicted the clinical outcome
of sepsis patients but also revealed the signaling
pathways which could play a pivotal role in the development
and progression of sepsis.
Among S1PRs 1–5, we found both S1PR1 [31] and
S1PR3-related gene signature are capable of predicting
the survival of patients with sepsis. Several studies [18,
32] already indicated that S1P-S1PR3 signaling drove
bacterial killing, S1PR3 was associated with preferable
sepsis outcomes. In contrast to S1PR3, S1PR1 didn’t
have corresponding experimental support, so the S1PR3-
related signature holds more prognostic value than
S1PR1. S1PR1 and S1PR3 play a diverse role and belongs
to different signaling pathways in sepsis progression.
S1P–S1PR1 signaling plays a critical role in supporting
the integrity of the endothelial barrier, while S1P-S1PR3
signaling drives bacterial killing in macrophages. Only
4 common genes among S1PR1-associated genes (557
genes) and S1PR3-related genes (226 genes). In general,
S1PR1 and S1PR3 gene signature have diverse molecular
mechanisms in the pathology of sepsis, so we decided to
publish them separately.
In this study, we showed that the S1PR3-related protein-
coding gene signature is capable of predicting which
patients are at an elevated risk of developing severe sepsis.
However, our work in the S1PR3-related gene signature
was only based on bioinformatics methods. The
potential power of our gene signature needs to be verified
by clinical investigations.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we identified a gene signature containing
18 protein-coding genes capable of being reproducible
predictors of clinical outcomes in patients with sepsis.
Thus, our results could have a potential value in clinical
evaluations and disease monitoring in patients with
sepsis and may ultimately help improve sepsis treatment
algorithms based on severity risk.
