Background
Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS, OMIM#606232),
also referred to as 22q13 deletion syndrome, is a rare
genetic disorder caused by deletion of the distal long
arm of chromosome 22 with a variety of clinical features
that display considerably heterogeneous degrees of severity.
This syndrome is characterized by global developmental
delay, intellectual disability, absent or severely
delayed speech, hypotonia, minor dysmorphic features
and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) [1]. The SHANK3
gene has been identified as the critical candidate gene
for the neurological features of this syndrome [2]. However,
previous genotype-phenotype studies of PMS [3–7]
and several case reports of 22q13 interstitial deletion [8–
10] have implied the role of additional genes or regulatory
regions proximal to the SHANK3 gene in PMS.
Here, we report identical clinical and molecular findings
from one pair of boy-girl twins with a de novo interstitial
22q13.31-q13.33 deletion not involving the SHANK3
gene. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report
of fraternal twins with PMS not involving the
SHANK3 gene.
Case presentation
Our patients are seven-year-old boy-girl twins who were
born from the first pregnancy of healthy unrelated parents
(a 32-year-old mother and a 37-year-old father) of
Chinese descent with unremarkable family histories. The
patients were conceived by in vitro fertilization because
their mothers’ fallopian tubes were blocked. No abnormality
was identified on prenatal ultrasonography. The
serum triple-marker (including alpha-fetoprotein, free-β-
human chorionic gonadotropin, and unconjugated estriol)
screening test result for Down syndrome was negative.
The twins were born at 40 weeks gestation by
caesarean section with some minor complications. At
birth, the foreheads, cheekbones, wrists and ankles of
the two infants were cyanotic, and they both cried
weakly; the condition of the boy was more serious than
the condition of the girl. To date, the cyanosis has not
disappeared but is better that observed at birth. The degree
of jaundice was also more serious in the boy than
in the girl. As a result, the boy was not discharged until
7 days after bili light treatment. The boy was born with
thyroid cartilage hypoplasia that spontaneously resolved
after 1 month, whereas the girl did not exhibit this
complication.
Both infants showed infantile hypotonia and feeding
difficulties and could not control their heads until they
were 2 years old. At the age of 6 months, their parents
took them to the child health department for routine
medical examinations. The twins underwent a neuropsychological
development examination, which was carried
out using the Chinese version of Gesell
Development Scale (GDS). Infant development was
assessed using the development quotient (DQ) according
to the following criteria: normal (DQ ≥ 85), borderline
(75 ≤ DQ < 85) and abnormal (DQ < 75). The girl had
DQ of 60 for “gross motor”, 55 for “fine motor”, 35 for
“language”, 47 for “adaptive behavior” and 48 for “personal-
social behavior”. The boy had DQ of 58 for “gross
motor”, 54 for “fine motor”, 32 for “language”, 45 for
“adaptive behavior” and 46 for “personal-social behavior”.
The results showed that they had intellectual disability.
Subsequently, the clinician advised them to have
trace element (including calcium, magnesium, iron, copper,
zinc, lead and cadmium) and brain MRI examinations.
Trace elements in the blood were normal, and
brain MRI showed hypoplasia of white matter and external
hydrocephalus. They were able to sit at 6 months
and walk against a wall at 24 months, though their gait
was not stable. At the age of 2–4 years, the twins underwent
physical therapy; however, no significant clinical
progress was observed. They then developed severe language
disability and could not speak any words. They
had abnormal social interactions, were no shy with poor
eye contact and stereotypic behaviors and were
interested in only one children’s song. These features indicated
ASD in the patients, but they received no formal
testing for autism. The girl and boy developed febrile
convulsions at the age of 3 years and 4 years, respectively.
When they experienced febrile convulsions, they
were advised to have EEG (four-hour visual EEG, awake)
and brain MRI examinations performed. The EEG and
brain MRI results were normal, and the abnormalities
observed in the first brain MRI had disappeared.
At the age of 5 years, they walked without a sense of
direction and showed some toe-walking behavior and a
scissor-like gait. They were unable to travel up and
down stairs independently, and their neck, wrist and
ankle muscles were still weak. Mild facial dysmorphic
features included dolichocephaly, large prominent ears, a
prominent forehead, widely spaced eyes, bilateral ptosis,
a bulbous nasal tip, a wide nasal bridge and a long philtrum.
In addition, they showed large fleshy hands and
feet, fifth finger clinodactyly of the right hand and dysplastic
nails (Fig. 1). Initial genetic testing consisted of
tandem mass spectrometry and karyotype analysis, the
results of which were unremarkable. The karyotype analysis
of the parents was also normal. Copy number variation
sequencing (CNV-seq) analysis of the two patients
revealed a heterozygous deletion involving the 22q13.31-
22q13.33 region. The deletion sizes in the boy and the
girl were 6.36 Mb and 6.34 Mb, respectively. To further
confirm the size of the deletion, we reanalyzed the two
patients and both parents by third-generation sequencing.
DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples
obtained from the two patients and their parents using
the Ezup Column Blood Genomic DNA Purification Kit
(Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). Third-generation sequencing
was performed on the single-molecule sequencer
GenoCare at the GeneMind Biosciences Company
Limited, Guangzhou, China. GenoCare sequencing was
performed according to a previously disclosed protocol
[11]. We found that the two patients’ deletions were
identical; both were 6.0 Mb, with breakpoints at
44850001 bp and 50,850,001 bp (GRCh37/hg19). Carrier
testing in the parents revealed normal results in the
22q13.31-q13.33 region, indicating a de novo 22q13.31-
q13.33 deletion in their children (Fig. 2). The hemizygous
region included 45 protein-coding genes not involving
the SHANK3 gene, 34 of which are OMIM genes
(Additional file 1: Table S1).
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was conducted to
validate the SHANK3 gene and FBLN1 gene (positive
control) in the family. Genomic DNA was extracted
from peripheral leukocytes using the QIAamp® DNA
Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). Partial exons and
partial introns of the SHANK3 gene and FBLN1 gene
were amplified using qPCR primers (Table 1). The
GAPDH gene served as a reference gene (control group).
Amplification and detection were performed on the
LightCycler 480 II (Roche Diagnostics) using TB Green®
Premix Ex Taq™ II (Takara, Japan). qPCR was conducted
under the following cycling conditions: 95 °C for 30 s,
followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 30 s.
Data were analyzed using the △△CT method. The copy
numbers of intro1, intro8, intro11, exon17, exon22, and
exon23 of the SHANK3 gene were approximately the
same as the values in the control group, and the copy
numbers of exon4, intro11, and intro14 of the FBLN1
gene were only approximately half of the values in the
control group, indicating that both copies of the SHAN
K3 gene have been retained in the patients and confirming
that the patients carry a de novo 22q13.31-q13.33
deletion not involving the SHANK3 gene (Fig. 3).
At the age of 7 years, The girl’s height was 120 cm (25-
50th percentile), her weight was 25 kg (50-75th percentile),
her body mass index was 17.4 kg/m2 (85th percentile)
and her head circumference (HC) was 51 cm (74th
percentile). The boy’s height was 115 cm (5-15th percentile),
his weight was 23 kg (50th percentile), his body
mass index was 17.4 kg/m2 (85-95th percentile) and his
HC was 50 cm (22nd percentile). Both patients had increased
pain tolerance and incontinence. The twins felt
neither hungry nor satiety. They did not feed themselves
or squat down, but they were able to move around obstacles.
They did not know that any relatives or strangers
could take them away. The boy had abnormal genitalia.
The girl had sleep disturbances (easy to wake) and recurrent
upper respiratory tract infections, while the boy
did not. A timeline of historical and current information
is shown in Fig. 4.
Discussion and conclusions
In this study, we described identical clinical and molecular
findings in one pair of boy-girl twins with intellectual
disability, speech absence, facial dysmorphism, cyanosis,
large fleshy hands and feet, dysplastic fingernails and abnormal
behaviors. Using third-generation sequencing,
we identified a 6.0 Mb de novo interstitial deletion of the
22q13.31-q13.33 region encompassing 45 protein-coding
genes.
Several reports have indicated that although probands
obviously have de novo deletions, siblings can have the
same deletions, probably due to germline mosaicism in a
parent, which is similar to our report [12, 13]. Germline
mosaicism may be a significant mechanism for the generation
of de novo pathogenic CNVs [14]. If the 22q13.3
variant found in the proband cannot be detected in the
leukocyte DNA of either parent, the recurrence risk in
siblings is estimated to be 1% because of the theoretical
possibility of parental germline mosaicism, which is marginally
greater than in the general population [15].
Therefore, prenatal diagnosis is essential for normal parents
with affected children.
Previous genotype-phenotype studies have revealed
that many clinical features of PMS are associated with
deletion size. In a study of 201 patients, Sarasua et al.
found that some neurologic and dysmorphic features,
such as speech and developmental delay and macrocephaly,
correlated with deletion size [3]. A genotypephenotype
study of 71 patients showed an association
between increased deletion size and 16 features [4].
Samogy-Costa et al. found that renal abnormalities,
lymphedema, and language impairment were positively
associated with deletion sizes [5]. Moreover,
22q13.2q13.32 genomic regions were associated with the
severity of speech delay, developmental delay, and physical
features by statistical analysis in 70 patients with terminal
22q13 deletion [6]. Tabet et al. found that the
absence of speech, ophthalmic features, and gastroesophageal
reflux were associated with deletions of genome
segments located at the 42.6–46.3 Mb region,
42.25–44.6 Mb region and 48.9–49.9 Mb region on
chromosome 22, respectively [7]. Although the relationship
between deletion size and phenotype has not been
consistent across reports, the role of additional genes or
regulatory regions proximal to the SHANK3 gene has
been suggested. Several case reports of 22q13 interstitial
deletion support this view. The SULT4A1 and PARVB
genes have been suggested to be related to neurological
features and macrocephaly/hypotonia, respectively
[9]. In addition, Palumbo et al. proposed CELS
R1, ATXN10, FBLN1, and UPK3A as candidate genes
in the onset of the main clinical features of 22q13.31
microdeletion [10].
The phenotype of our patients described in the
present study closely matches that of previously described
patients with 22q13 interstitial deletions,
namely, developmental delay/intellectual disability
(DD/ID), speech delay/absence, hypotonia and malformations
of the hands or feet. To further investigate
genotype-phenotype correlations in 22q13 interstitial
regions proximal to SHANK3, we collected 1 wellcharacterized
patient from the DECIPHER database
(https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/) with good overlap with
our patients. Additional file 2: Table S2 lists and
compares the clinical and molecular findings of the
probands and 14 previously reported cases, and a molecular
comparison is shown in Fig. 5. Analysis of the
data shows that consistent findings included DD/ID
(15/16), delayed speech (15/16), hypotonia (12/16),
macrocephaly (10/16), dolichocephaly (3/16), feeding
problems (9/16), hands/feet anomalies (10/16) and facial
dysmorphisms (14/16). Similar to all patients with
a terminal 22q13 deletion, the 16 patients without a
SHANK3 deletion had DD/ID, delayed speech, hypotonia
and dysmorphic features. Our findings further
confirmed that other deleted genes in the 22q13 region
likely contribute to the phenotypic characteristics
of PMS.
The deletions identified in our two probands were
identical and encompassed 45 protein-coding genes.
Based on different analyses of the genes in the 22q13
region [2, 7, 16] and the pLI score (Additional file 1:
Table S1) of these genes, we suggest that the genes
CELSR1, ATXN10 and WNT7B are also responsible for
the neurodevelopmental clinical features observed in
PMS patients, while FBLN1 is a candidate gene that
may explain hands/feet anomalies [17]. Our hypothesis
is similar to that of Palumbo et al. [10]. The functions
of the four candidate genes mentioned above are listed
in Additional file 3: Document S1. The deletions in
three previously described patients (patient 2, patient 4
and patient A) did not encompass the CELSR1/
ATXN10/WNT7B genes, but their deletion region contained
the SULT4A1 gene, which may be associated
with neurological symptoms in PMS [9]. To confirm
our hypothesis, more patients, including those with
only microdeletions of the ATXN10/CELSR1/WNT7B
genes or point mutation carriers of these three genes,
must be identified to determine whether their neurological
development is affected. Thirteen of the 16 patients
we described had a FBLN1 gene deletion. Among
them, 8/13 had hands/feet anomalies. The most common
abnormalities were large fleshy hands and feet. Although
not all patients with gene deletions show the
phenotypes, the possibility that FBLN1 may be related
to hands/feet anomalies cannot be ruled out. Other
mechanisms may affect the expression of the FBLN1
gene, and larger case series and basic research are
needed to confirm this hypothesis. No other PMS gene
appears to be associated with hands/feet anomalies.
This study is the first report of one pair of boygirl
twins with PMS not involving the SHANK3 gene.
The clinical and molecular findings of the two patients
were identical, likely resulting from germline
mosaicism in a parent. Thus, we suggest that prenatal
diagnosis is essential for normal parents with
affected children. In addition, we found that the
clinical phenotype of patients without SHANK3 deletion
was similar to that of patients with SHANK3
deletion and further confirmed that other genes
within this region may have a role in explaining
symptoms in individuals with PMS. In particular, we
propose that four candidate genes, CELSR1,
ATXN10, FBLN1 and WNT7B, may also be involved
in the etiology of the clinical manifestations of PMS.
However, more studies of smaller interstitial deletions
with 22q13 are needed to corroborate our hypothesis
and better define the genotype-phenotype
correlation. Our findings contribute to a more comprehensive
understanding of PMS.
