Background
Colon cancer is the sixth in men and the fifth in women
the most common cause of cancer-related death globally
[1]. In the United States, colon cancer is estimated to
have 135,430 newly diagnosed cases and result in 50,260
deaths in 2017, accounting for 9% of cancer deaths [1].
Colon cancer is a complex disease with many risk factors,
such as genetics, lifestyles, and dietary habits.
Among them, inherited gene mutation, which can pass
through family members, is one critical factor to increase
one’s colon cancer risk. A common colon cancer
feature is the intra-cancer heterogeneity, which makes
patients distinctive from each other in clinical presentations
and responses to treatment. Colon cancer treatments
should be tailored based on the individual’s risk
factors and genetic factors.
The inherited colon cancers can be broadly classified
into two categories: familial adenomatous polyposis
(FAP) and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer [2].
Molecular features in the genomics level play an essential
role in treatment decision making and will continue
providing more insights for pathological classification
and tailored treatment for colon cancer. Proper colon
cancer classification will significantly improve the survival
rate, but hinders considerably by limited available
prognosis assays.
Among the genetic factors, transcription factors (TFs)
play a vital role in most important cellular processes,
such as cell development, response to inner and outer
environment change, cell cycle controls, and carcinogenesis.
TFs are proteins that control the transcription of
fragment DNA to messenger RNA by binding to specific
DNA regions [3]. Their functions are to regulate, turn
on and off genes to make sure that genes expressed in
the right cell at the right time and in the right amount
throughout the life of the cell and the organism [4]. For
example, the NF-κB comprises a family of five TFs that
form distinct protein complexes, which bind to consensus
DNA sequences at promoter regions of responsive genes
regulating cellular processes. NF-κB signaling and its mediated
transcription play a critical role in inflammation
and colorectal cancer development [5]. STAT3 is reported
constitutively activated in colon-cancer-initiating cells and
play a significant role in colon cancer progression [6].
FOXM1 was another TF that had been reported to be a
key regulator of cell cycle progression, inflammation,
tumor initiation and invasion [7].
In the past two decades, many researchers have implemented
machine learning (ML) methods in the discovery
and validation of cancer prognosis, especially after the
population of High Throughput Technologies (HTTs)
[8]. Recently, Long Nguyen Phuoc, et al. [9] developed a
novel prognosis signature in colorectal cancer (CRC) by
implementing several ML methods on public available
CRC omics data. Their results demonstrated that the
random forest method outperformed other ML methods
they tried. Some researchers focused on microRNAs to
find cancer prognosis signatures. Fatemeh Vafaee, et al.
[10] proposed a prognostic signature of colorectal cancer
comprising 11 circulating microRNAs. They also tested
several different ML methods including RF and Ada-
Boost in their study. Their performance of the proposed
prognostic signature was confirmed by an independent
public dataset. Similarly, Jian Xu, et al. [11] developed a
4-microRNA expression signature for colon cancer patients
by using the data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA). Their study showed that this 4-microRNA signature
might play an important role in cancer cell
growth after anti-cancer drug treatment. In 2016, Guangru
Xu, et al. [12] discovered a 15-gene signature that
could effectively predict the recurrence and prognosis of
colon cancer using a Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm.
Their study pointed out that some genes in this
signature might be an indicator of new therapeutic targets.
Although these previous studies implemented machine
learning methods on the discovery of cancer
prognosis signatures, the crucial role of TFs has not
been sufficiently addressed in cancer prognosis signature
development.
The goal of our study is to identify the fundamental
transcript factors, which are associated with clinical outcomes
of colon cancer patients, by implementing an innovative
cancer prognosis signature discovery process
that combines the random forest algorithm with classic
Cox Proportional Hazard (Cox PH) method. Our study
will emphasize on only using TFs expression data to
conduct prognostic analysis and we will provide a new
perspective on how we can better use gene expression
profiles to conduct prognostic research. By using proposed
workflow, a TFs based prediction model has been successfully
developed for colon cancer prognosis. The prediction
power of our model is validated on hundreds of colon
cancer patient samples available in the GEO database [13].
Our TF-based colon cancer prognosis prediction model
can be used for a better classification of colon cancer patients
in survival. Successful findings of this study will
shed lights on understanding the mechanisms of the
underlying colon cancer development and metastasis.
Methods
Data sources
In this study, we are using the expression data of TFs
from two public resources. One is TCGA colon cancer
(COAD) dataset, which can be downloaded from UCSC
Xena (http://xena.ucsc.edu) [14] for both the expression
dataset and the clinical data of patients. There are 497
samples in the COAD dataset, including 456 primary
cancer tissue samples and 41 adjacent normal tissue
samples. The downloaded TCGA level 3 RNAseq data is
in the log2(counts + offset) format. The TCGA COAD
dataset is used as the training set in this study to build
the predictive model for the colon cancer prognosis.
Only patients carrying a primary tumor with the overall
survival times and events were included in the training
dataset. Then we further filtered the dataset by excluding
patients who have missing information in cancer
stage and other clinical information including sex and
age. Finally, 435 patients with primary cancer tissue information
were remaining in the training TCGA dataset,
The second public expression data resource is the
microarray data from GEO database, which will be used
to validate our prediction model. We chose four Affymetrix
Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array microarray
study as validation datasets. The accession numbers, sequencing
platform information, and sample sizes of each
GEO dataset used in this study were listed in Table 1.
The respective clinical data were retrieved from published
literature. The GEO dataset also filtered similarly
to the TCGA COAD dataset with the survival events
and times. In the end, the total number of GEO samples
we used for prediction model validation is 1584. Before
performing further analysis, the Affymetrix microarray
data were normalized using the Robust Multi-array
Average (RMA).
As shown in Table 1 for the summary of the training
and testing datasets, there are substantial similarities
upon patient diagnosed age, gender and in the AJCC staging
level. The consistency in the pathology levels renders
convincing for further analysis without bias or
overfitting.
Workflow of the study
The overall workflow of our study is demonstrated in
Fig. 1, which can be classified into three stages: TFs
Screening, Predictive Modeling, and Model Validation.
In Stage 1, we first identified a complete list of human
TFs with official annotation from previous publications.
Since not all the human TFs have the expression data in
TCGA COAD dataset, the overlapped genes between
TCGA COAD dataset and the complete list of TFs identified.
Among the overlapping TFs, we further narrow
down the numbers of TFs by the Cox PH Model
analysis, which resulted in a limited set of TFs. Cox PH
model is a widely used and performance proved statistical
model in prognostic signature construction [8].
In Stage 2, since there are still too many colon prognosis
TFs (more than 20 TFs), we need to decrease the
final prognosis TFs to build a valid and good performance
prognosis signature. The ensemble learning
method, random forest method, is performed to refine
further and reduce the TFs. Based on the RF training results,
the most significant TFs are selected based on the
top feature importance of RF. With the final TF list, we
trained a predictive model for colon cancer prognosis
using Cox PH regression.
Stage 3 is the validation of the predictive model. First,
the prediction power is tested by accuracy analysis. Furthermore,
the predictive model is validated on colon
cancer datasets, collected from GEO database, including
925 samples from 4 studies. The Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) [15] was also conducted to obtain further
insights into our prediction model in the pathway
level.
Details on the variable selection and survival analysis
methods
In Stage 1 of the variable selection, we used the univariate
Cox PH model in the statistical environment R
(v3.4), the association between expression profiles of TFs
and the overall survival of patients was calculated to
identify the prognostic ones. Any TF with a p-value less
than 0.01 was considered statistically significant and
used for further investigation.
In Stage 2 of refining variable selection, we performed
RF methods for variable selection given that RF can be
used for both classification problems and regression
problems. RF [16] is an ensemble algorithm that use a
bagging method to combine the multiple decision trees.
It draws a set of samples from the whole dataset with replacement
to feed the decision tree. After one decision
tree has been trained, another sample set will be drawn
from the whole dataset to train another decision tree.
The process is repeated in the RF algorithm until the desired
number of decision trees are trained. The final output
of the prediction RF model can be the average of
each decision tree’ output. In cancer prognosis signature
discovery practice, RF is a performance proved method
[9, 10, 17]. In our study, the randomForestSRC for survival
package [18] was used to measure the importance
of each variable’s contribution to the overall survival of
colon cancer patients. This package uses minimal depth
variable selection. The algorithm is the termed RSFVariable
Hunting [19]. It exploits maximal subtrees for
effective variable selection in survival data scenarios. In
our implementation, the parameters used in the feature
selection RF model were ntree = 1000 and nstep = 5.
In Stage 3, for the validation of the predictive model,
the Kaplan-Meier (KM) curve [20] was used to estimate
the difference in the survival between high and low risk
groups in validation datasets. The log-rank test [21] was
conducted to test the significance of the difference between
subgroups since the log-rank test is a very robust
statistical method to test important differences between
two groups and is widely used in clinical trial
experiments.
Results
The results of identifying the potential prognostic
transcription factors
The complete list of 1987 human TFs was downloaded
based on the census of human TFs from the Nature Review
Genetics paper by Vaquerizas, Juan M., et al. [22].
Among the listed human TFs, 1834 of them have gene
symbols annotations. After mapping to TCGA COAD
dataset, only 1780 TFs have gene expression data in
TCGA COAD dataset, which were included in this
study.
The univariate Cox PH regression was applied to the
gene expression profiles for the overlapping 1780 TFs
and the patient clinical data in TCGA colon cohort, to
identify the TFs, which are associated with the survival
of the patients and have the potential using as
prognostic markers. Those TFs with p ≤ 0.01 were kept
for further analysis (The selected 23 TFs are listed in
Supplementary Table S1).
Results on building the multi-TF predictive model
To identify the minimum subset of TFs that can still
achieve a good prediction of colon cancer survival, the
23 TFs from the Cox PH regression model were further
evaluated with a random forest algorithm, randomForestSRC.
In the randomForestSRC variable hunting mode,
top P ranked variables will be selected, P is the average
model size and variables are ranked by frequency of occurrence.
In our study, five TFs (i.e., HOXC9, ZNF556,
HEYL, HOXC4, and HOXC6) were chosen for the final
predictive model construction. The results of the algorithm
is shown in Fig. 2. The parameters for random
forest are ntree = 1000 and nstep =5.
To establish a multiple molecular based regression
model, the multivariate Cox PH regression was trained
with gene expression data using the five TFs and clinical
variables from TCGA COAD dataset. The coefficients
from the Cox model were then applied to a multivariate
linear regression model. The risk score was calculated
with the following formula:
Risk score ¼ 0:139HOXC6 − 0:046HOXC4
þ 0:165HEYL
þ 0:106ZNF556 − 0:032HOXC9
The final coefficients of the model have been modified
automatically to achieve better performance and to increase
accuracy overall. Thus, the coefficients of HOXC9
and HOXC3 are adjusted to slightly below zero, which are
much smaller than those positive coefficients. Then we
performed the KM analysis and the log-rank test result
over these five selected TFs. The results and the p-value
from previous Cox PH analysis, along with the hazard ratio
for each of these genes are summarized in Fig. 3. It can
be seen that all selected 5 TFs has Cox p-value < 0.01,
which indicates all these TFs are highly related to the
overall survival of patients according to Cox PH analysis.
For the log-rank p, only the ZNF556 has a p-value of
0.107, while all the other four have p-value < 0.05. According
to the RF results, the importance of ZNF556 is ranked
fourth in all 23 TFs with no significant difference with
other TFs in maximum depth (Fig. 2), this qualifies the
ZNF556 as one of the most important prognostic TFs.
The Hazard ratios of all these five TFs are more than 1.0,
indicating higher risks of colon cancer prognosis.
Results on validation of the five-TF based prediction
model
Based on the median value of the predicted risks scores
of all the patients in both the training and validation set,
patients are classified into high-risk and low-risk subgroups.
KM curve analysis and log-rank test were
conducted to evaluate the performance of predicting
power in colon cancer prognosis on TCGA COAD
dataset. The results are shown in Fig. 4. The scatter
plot (Fig. 4A(b)) shows the distribution of patients’
overall survival status. The red point indicates the patient
belonging to a high-risk group while a blue
point indicates the patient belonging to a low-risk
group. From the scatter plot, we can observe that the
red points are more concentrated in the lower part of
the figure. This is an indication that high-risk patients
have a shorter survival time comparing to low-risk
patients. The heatmap (Fig. 4A(c)) shows that the five
selected TFs in our predictive model were highly
expressed in TCGA COAD dataset. Moreover, the
KM curve (Fig. 4B) shows a distinctive survival difference
between the high-risk and low-risk groups in a
time span of more than 10 years. All these results
prove the prediction power of our predictive model
on TCGA COAD dataset.
To test the five-TF based signature as colon cancer
survival predictor, we further validated the predictive
model on another four independent microarray datasets
with a total of 1584 samples for GEO with GSE39582
(n = 563), GSE17536 (n = 177), GSE37892 (n = 130) and
GSE17537 (n = 55). The risk score of each patient in validation
dataset was calculated by using the same formula
established with TCGA training dataset. The same coefficients
were utilized to assign weight to each of the
selected TF. By using the same median cutoff strategy
to divide patients to the high-risk and low-risk
groups, the KM curve analysis shows the consistent
patterns with the TCGA COAD dataset. Patients in
the high-risk group have a significantly shorter survival
time than patients in the low-risk group
(Fig. 5a–d), which suggests the clinical robustness
among multiple centers. Therefore, our five-TF based
signature is proved to be a robust predictor for colon
cancer survival.
Results on pathway analysis
The Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) [15] was
conducted to investigate the biological function of
this five-TF based signature, including its molecular
function and gene-gene network. GSEA is performed
on the TCGA COAD dataset with predicted high-risk
subgroup versus low-risk subgroup. In conducting the
GSEA study, the reference gene pathway database is
the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
(KEGG) pathway database [23]. The GSEA number of
permutations is set to be 1000, and the phenotype labels
are determined according to whether a patient is
in the high-risk subgroup or the low-risk subgroup.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the GSEA results showed that
several cancer-related pathways were alternated in patients
with high-risk scores, such as the pathways for
the Epithelial-mesenchymal transition, the ECM receptor
interaction, the cytokine-cytokine receptor
interaction, and the cell adhesion molecules (Fig. 5ad).
Taken together these findings, it’s indicated that
the five TFs in our model may highly associate with
tissue morphogenesis, intercellular regulations and cell
adhesion. By affecting these cell processes, these TFs
may promote the tissue malignant then result in a
poor overall survival rate of colon cancer patients.
Discussions
We implemented an innovative machine learning approach
for signature variables, which combines the
Cox PH method with the random forest algorithm.
Our signature selection process can find the minimum
subset of TFs to build the prognosis prediction
model with satisfying performance. A five-TF predictive
model was developed by training the classifiers on
TCGA COAD dataset. The trained multivariable linear
predictive model was validated with multiple datasets
from the GEO database.
Three out of the five selected genes, i.e., HOXC4,
HOXC6, and HOXC9, belong to the homeobox family of
genes. The homeobox genes are highly conserved TF
family and play an essential role in morphogenesis in all
multicellular organisms. Dysregulation of HOX gene
expression implicated as a factor in malignancies,
and up-regulation has been observed in malignant
prostate cell lines and lymph node metastases [24].
HOXC6 was also reported to be overexpressed in
colorectal cancer tissue, and highly correlated with
poor survival outcome and acts as a significant prognostic
risk factor [25].
For the other two genes selected in our predictive
model, HEYL belongs to the hairy and enhancer of
split-related (HESR) family of basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH)-type transcription factor. A recent study
shows that HEYL may be a tumor suppressor of liver
carcinogenesis through upregulation of P53 gene expression
and activation of P53-mediated apoptosis
[26]. ZNF556 belongs to zinc finger protein (ZNF)
family. Despite the large size of ZNF gene family, the
number of disease-linked genes in this family is very
small [27]. To the best of our knowledge, the research
on ZNF556 related to cancer is very limited.
Therefore, our study provided new insight on potential
relationships between overexpression of ZNF556
and the development of colon cancer.
Our study also showed that by using TFs to build a
predictive signature for colon cancer prognosis is
practical. The prediction power of the model is promising.
Intuitively, the TFs have the overall control on
the gene expressions in cells so that a TF-based predictive
model should be able to indicate the different
gene expression levels in some cancer types with high
accuracy.
Our innovative signature discovery process can potentially
be extended on other cancer types such as
breast cancer or lung cancer. It will be interesting to
carry out studies on whether these five TFs used by
our model have tissue specific expression patterns in
colon cancer. Moreover, by conducting downstream
analysis such as gene regulation network analysis, we
can probably identify genes that are regulated by our
five TFs, these downstream genes can be potentially
added to the prediction model to add more robustness
to our model. Another future study is to examine
the performance of combining traditional
statistical methods, such as Cox PH, with other machine
learning methods, such as the artificial neural
network (ANN) [28], to select potential prognostic
TFs or other signatures for different types of cancer.
Conclusion
We have successfully identified a five-TF signature and
built a predictive model for colon cancer prognosis
signature with the selected five TFs by using a machine
learning approach. Our five-TFs based linear model
was validated on hundreds of publicly available patient
data from the GEO database. The results showed that
our model has a good predicting power in predicting
colon cancer overall survival. Our predictive model and
its biological functions would provide more insights in
the precision treatment of colon cancer, which leads to
further investigation on these five TF genes and their
roles during the development of colon cancer at the
molecular level.