Background
Oesophageal atresia (OA) is the most common congenital
anomaly of the oesophagus with an incidence of around 1
in 3500 births [1, 2]. The malformation is characterized by
a distal tracheoesophageal fistula, classified as Gross type
C, in 85% of all cases [3]. Isolated OA occurs in approximately
50% of cases whereas the remaining are syndromic
[4–7]. Although the genetic basis for syndromic OA has
been identified in a proportion of syndromic cases, the
genetics behind isolated forms remains elusive. The recurrence
risk for isolated OA is estimated to approximately
1% and twin studies have shown a concordance rate of
2.5% [8–10]. The few familial cases of isolated OA that are
reported suggest an autosomal dominant inheritance with
reduced penetrance [8, 11, 12] whereas epidemiological
studies on isolated OA indicate a multifactorial aetiology,
with a contribution from both gene variants and environmental
factors [4]. A prior effort to unravel genetic factors
behind isolated OA using SNP microarray analysis identified
two distinct de novo CNVs in a cohort consisting of
129 cases [13]. When including syndromic OA, no consistent
genomic region was identified. While the study
provided important information, it is still unclear whether
structural variants (SVs), small insertions/deletions
(indels) and single nucleotide variants (SNVs), below detection
limit of the DNA microarray used, are associated
with the malformation.
Genetic variation in humans can be everything from
rare to common, where variants usually associated with
Mendelian traits tend to be rare whereas more frequent
allele variants contribute risk for complex disease phenotypes
[14]. The genetic architecture of both rare Mendelian
diseases and multifactorial disorders such as birth
defects may be explained by a continuum based primarily
on the frequencies of the relevant variant alleles. Furthermore,
incomplete penetrance for one or several common
variants has inferred a shift beyond the classical concept
of Mendelian inheritance [15, 16]. Complex traits can be
seen as omnigenic and thereby driven by large numbers of
variants of small effects and, in this context, we also need
to identify modifier loci that contribute to penetrance of
variation [17]. We therefore set out to analyse the genomic
sequences of three families with recurrent cases of a
low tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), the most common
form of congenital OA. In order to decipher gene variants
in individuals with the malformation we performed whole
genome sequencing of affected members and their parents.
Bioinformatic analysis using a set of variant calling
algorithms revealed a large number of candidate SNVs,
indels, and SVs shared by affected and obligate carriers.
Our data provide a selected set of candidate genetic variants
to further identify, prioritize and test for genetic
mechanisms associated with OA.
Methods
Patients
We identified three families with recurrent and isolated
OA treated in our tertiary paediatric surgical centre between
1994 and 2014 among a cohort of in total 55 cases
with isolated OA Gross type C. Each of the three families
comprised two individuals born with isolated OA. All the
patients had an isolated OA with a lower tracheoesophageal
fistula (Gross type C). None of them had other malformations
or dysmorphic features, including VACTERL
association or CHARGE syndrome (Fig. 1a).
In Family 1, the mother and her son were born with
OA. In Family 2, two affected girls were second cousins
and their fathers, respectively, were first cousins. In
Family 3, a girl and a boy with OA were second cousins.
The father of the girl and the mother of the boy were
first cousins (Fig. 1b).
Genetic analysis
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed on
peripheral blood DNA from the affected individuals (n =
6) and the presumed obligate and healthy carriers (n =
4). Sequencing libraries were prepared using the TruSeq
PCRfree DNA sample preparation kit and sequenced
using HiSeqX and paired-end 150 bp read length, v2.5
sequencing chemistry (Illumina). Quality control measurements
are gathered using Qualimap v2.2. For data
analysis we used Piper, a pipeline system developed and
maintained at the National Genomics Infrastructure
build on top of GATK Queue. For more information
and the source code visit: www.github.com/National-
GenomicsInfrastructure/piper. Data has been aligned to
the GRCh37.75 reference using BWA-MEM v0.7.12 [18]
and we identified single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and
indels using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK v3.3).
For deduplication PicardMarkDuplicates, available in
Picard that is bundled with GATK (broadinstitute.
github.io/picard). For the analysis of structural variants
(SVs), we used Manta, Delly, CNVnator and Tiddit as
described previously [19–23]. Manta and Delly calls SVs
using combination of paired and split-reads and report
breakpoints for SVs with strong evidence from splitreads
whereas CNVnator uses read depth technique.
TIDDIT is mainly designed to identify larger SVs (> 1
kb) using coverage and insert size distribution to identify
SVs based on discordant read pairs. We collapsed SVs
who had regions where both starts and ends were within
10 bp, as they likely represent the same called SV. All
variants were annotated using ENSEMBL Variant Effect
Predictor (VEP) [24]. Variants that potentially affect
splicing were identified using SpliceAI (Score cut off 0.2
(high recall/likely pathogenic), 0.5 (recommended/pathogenic),
and 0.8 (high precision/pathogenic)) [25]. We
filtered SNVs and indels for frequency and sequencing
errors using the Moon (www.diploid.com) software and
against GnomAD [26]. The SVs were filtered against
1000 Genomes and the SweGen dataset using the aforementioned
SV callers [23]. The SweGen dataset is the
largest available cross-section of variation detected by
the same WGS pipeline as we used in the Swedish population
and can be seen as a population matched control
dataset for our families. We annotated identified SVs
with allele frequencies from 1000G, GnomAD and the
SweGen dataset for all four SV callers.
Tissue expression of genes was investigated using the
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx; gtexportal.org) Project
Portal of 05/08/19. We did pathway analysis using
EnrichR (amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr). We investigated
associations between candidate genes identified in our
study and oesophageal disease using GeneDistiller [27]. A
candidate gene list was generated in GeneDistiller by adding
OMIM entries using the keyword ‘esophageal’ and
manually adding genes previously associated with OA or
similar phenotypes (complete reference gene list: ALDH2,
C2orf40, CHD7, COL4A6, CTAG1B, DEC1, DLEC1,
EFTUD2, FANCB, FGF8, FOXC2, FOXF1, FOXL1,
GAEC1, GER, GLI3, HOXD13, HSN1B, LZTS1, MTHFSD,
MYCN, PTEN, RFX6, SOX2, SPG9, TMPRSS11A, and
ZIC3). Associations identified by GeneDistiller included
Gene Reference into Function (GeneRIF) and Search Tool
for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING;
string-db.org).
Results
Whole genome sequencing
Quality control measurements show that the mean coverage
for the 10 samples was 32.6X (min 21.9X; max 39.9X)
with a median insert size of 394 (min 371; max 419). The
total number of reads was 1,057,991,431 (min 794,472,
217; max 1,279,622,464) per sample and the number of
aligned reads was 1,052,483,855 (min 791,300,824; max 1,
270,865,080) corresponding to 99.5% aligned reads (min
99.3%; max 99.7%). The duplication rate was 35% (Standard
deviation = 5.4%; min 28%; max 42%). We excluded
sample bias by looking at the GC-content distribution
compared to a pre-calculated distribution for the reference
genome (hg19; Additional file 1).
Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions/
deletions (indels)
After an initial filtering for uncommon variants (< 2%
frequency in GnomAD) shared by the affected members
of each family, we identified in total 345,156 (6604 coding)
variants in Family 1, 199,780 (3450 coding) variants
in Family 2 and 207,691 (3549 coding) SNVs variants in
Family 3. We also performed a combined analysis using
all three families and identified 109,712 (2098 coding)
SNVs and indels shared by all six affected individuals.
Since no shared homozygous, or compound heterozygous,
variants were identified with an allele frequency
less than 0.001 in GnomAD, we considered dominant
acting variants and filtered for rare coding heterozygous
variants present in all sequenced individuals. This approach
revealed in total 47 heterozygous variants in
coding sequences and splice sites. However, when filtering
against the Moon database, which includes sequencing
errors, all 47 variants showed an allele
frequency of > 0.029. These high frequencies suggest
that the variants are either benign or common sequencing
errors. We therefore performed a re-analysis of
each family separately. By applying all abovementioned
filtering steps, we identified 59 variants in Family 1,
three variants in Family 2 (in KATNB1, ZMYND15 and
DHX33) and three variants in Family 3 (in BCAP29,
DOCK4 and PPP1R3A) (Fig. 2a). All identified variants
were heterozygous compatible with a dominant model
(Additional file 2). We further analysed our data using
SpliceAI in a similar fashion and identified 40 heterozygous
splice-site variants in Family 1, 5 variants in Family
2 and 6 variants in Family 3. Four variants were
shared by all 10 sequenced individuals (Fig. 2a). The
variants have a predicted effect on splicing of the
PRIM2, FAM182B, MAP2K3 and CCDC144NL genes
(Additional file 3). The shared variants identified in
Family 2 and Family 3, respectively, were present also
in the obligate carrier parents of affected cases. No variants
identified was inherited from the non-sequenced
parent, indicating co-segregation from the obligate carrier
parents in family 2 and 3 and from the affected
parent in family 1.
Structural variants (SVs)
We then analysed our sequencing data for SVs. In total,
we identified 5777 deletions (DEL), 1480 duplications
(DUP) and 104 inversions (INV) that were detected in at
least one sample. Filtering for SVs shared by all six affected
individuals was performed as for SNVs and small
indels (AF < 0.003 in SweGen which equals at most two
individuals carrying the SV) resulting in a total of 52
SVs, i.e. 43 DEL and 9 DUP (Additional file 4). Analysis
of SV shared by the two affected individuals in each separate
family resulted in the identification of 339 DEL, 47
DUP and 3 INV in Family 1, 172 DEL, 19 DUP and 2
INV in Family 2 and 135 DEL, 17 DUP and 1 INV in
Family 3 (Fig. 2a; Additional files 5, 6 and 7). All identified
variants were found also in the parents of each family
confirming segregation.
Combination of variants in genes shared by all affected
individuals
When combining our data sets we identified rare
SNVs, splice variants or SVs that were annotated to
in total 100 genes in all three families (Fig. 2b). The
major proportion of variants consisted of SVs (involving
95 genes) followed by splicing (involving 4 genes).
A single gene (DOCK4) showed a SNV (NM_
014705.3:c.717G > C) in Family 3 in combination with
a splice variant (acceptor gain) in Family 1 and a SV
(intronic deletion of 33 bp) in Family 2 (Additional
file 8). The 100 genes were then subject
analysis by GeneDistiller to identify genes associated
to the oesophagus. Two genes, DEFB4A and PDS5B,
are associated (GeneRIF) with Esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC). A third gene, PRKCZ, is indirectly
associated to the same disease in that it interacts
(STRING) with the ESCC susceptibility gene
LZTS1. The 100 shared genes are apparently diverse
in function as we could not identify any significantly
enriched category using EnrichR. Similarly, if we consider
all genes from each family regardless whether
they are shared (595 genes) we similarly did not find
any significantly enriched category.
Discussion
Epidemiological studies indicate that the causes of isolated
OA are multifactorial similar to many other birth
defects. We identified three families segregating isolated
OA and performed whole genome sequencing on samples
from family members in search for candidate gene
variants with a relatively high penetrance for the malformation.
The clinic was very similar between all three
families described as OA Gross type C. However, all
families was genetically analysed separately. Due to the
fact that familial cases of OA is rare and that the patients
came from the same population (Swedish), we also
considered shared aetiology. A possible pattern of inheritance
was autosomal dominant, with reduced penetrance
in two families and, retrospectively, only genes
with heterozygous variants were shared between individuals
in each family. We hypothesized that shared rare
variants in the two extended families 2 and 3, each one
with affected second cousins, would bring stronger support
for associated gene variants given the number of
meiosis separating the cases. Due to the large number of
variants identified in each of the small families (> 400
per family), we decided to focus the discussion on variants
in genes shared by all three families. Bioinformatic
analysis of WGS data disclosed 100 genes affected by a
combination of SNVs, splice site variants and SVs in all
six affected individuals (Fig. 2b). Our initial analysis of
rare protein coding SNVs or small indel (filtered for an
AF < 0.001) did not show any shared variant among all
six cases. However, further analysis using SpliceAI revealed
four heterozygous variants, none of them present
in GnomAD, in the sequenced family members. The
variants predict perturbed splicing of the PRIM2,
FAM182B, MAP2K3 and CCDC144NL genes, respectively.
Notably, variants in PRIM2 have been associated
with a specific microbiome community of the
oesophagus and CCDC144NL show differential expression
in drug resistant oesophageal carcinoma cells
(ESCC) [28, 29]. No connection could be found for the
genes FAM182B and MAP2K3 to oesophageal disease,
although MAP2K3 show a high level of expression in
oesophageal tissue.
Importantly, the largest group of called variants that
were shared among the six individuals with isolated OA
and the four presumed carrier parents consists of SVs.
Identification of SVs from short-read sequencing data is
challenging as it yields a large amount of both false positive
and false negative results. This is mainly due to repetitive
elements that frequently result in ambiguities
when trying to assign short read sequences to reference
sequences. To this end, we combined four different callers,
with their advantages and disadvantages, for the
identification of SVs. This resulted in the identification
of in total 52 shared SVs in all three families. Variants
were identified in two gene regions with association to
the oesophagus, namely DEFB4A and PDS5B previously
associated with ESCC [30, 31] (Additional file 4). The
DEFB4A gene (previously called HBD2) has an almost
oesophagus specific expression and promotes both
growth and invasion of oesophageal cancer [30, 32].
Moreover, allelic loss and altered expression of the
PDS5B gene has been associated in ESCC [31]. A third
gene, PRKCZ has a weak association to the oesophagus.
This gene encodes for Protein kinase C zeta, a protein
that interacts with Leucine zipper tumour suppressor 1
encoded by the gene LZTS1 [33]. Somatic variants in
LZTS1 have been associated primary oesophageal cancer
[34]. Interestingly, young adults with OA have a 100-
fold increased prevalence of ESCC compared to the general
population and a shared mechanism between the
two disorders is plausible [35]. Cancer is usually associated
with loss of function variants, while in our cases
non-coding SVs may alter expression of genes that are
required for proper specification and elongation of the
oesophagus during embryogenesis, ultimately resulting
in OA [36]. However, the high incidence of gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD) in patients after OA repair
may be an additional contributing factor to ESCC [37].
Recessive variants in the gene TRAP1 have previously
been associated with VACTERL, therefore it is possible
that the heterozygous variant identified in this gene in
Family 1 is a possible modifier of disease [38].
Our study adds to the few families reported with recurrent
isolated OA and suggests contributing genetic
factors behind the malformation. Furthermore, we applied
a combination of bioinformatic tools on WGS data
from affected families highlighting a large number of
rare variants, primarily SVs, in individuals with the
malformation in our cohort. Genome wide association
studies (GWAS) of other non-syndromic congenital malformations
such as cleft-lip-palate (CLP) and congenital
heart disease have reported associations to numerous
SNVs with significant effect sizes [39]. These risk variants
occur frequently in the population and each one
confers a modest effect size. In CLP, a GWAS study suggested
a genomic region that is also vulnerable to rare
variants [40]. However, risk loci identified by GWAS
account for only a small fraction of the heritability of
congenital malformations [41] and this is likely also for
OA. While previous GWAS studies of different types of
congenital malformations have provided important information
on contributing genetic factors, they have not
clarified the potential role of specific SVs in the aetiology
of isolated birth defects and for some of the missing heritability
[39]. Our study shows that the identification of
rare SVs, whether in coding or non-coding regions, is
possible using whole genome sequencing and novel bioinformatic
pipe-lines.
Conclusion
In summary, we explored the possible association between
familial forms of isolated OA and rare gene variants
using whole genome sequencing. In two out of the
three families, the affected members were second cousins,
whereas one family consisted of an affected mother
and son. Among all variants (SNVs, splice sites and SVs)
in 100 genes shared by the six individuals from the three
families, we identified variants in three genes associated
with oesophageal disease, namely CCDC144NL, DEFB4A
and PDS5B, bringing further support for a molecular
link between OA and oesophageal cancer. Furthermore,
our study provides a data set for further computational
and functional analyses of both isolated and syndromic
OA. We anticipate that the identification of additional
families segregating isolated OA, in combination with
our findings, will facilitate the identification of specific
gene variants contributing to this serious malformation.