Background
Congenital malformations account for ~ 20% of infant
mortality and ~ 18% of pediatric hospitalizations [1–3].
Many are recessive disease syndromes that are severe,
untreatable, and adversely affect quality or length of life,
prompting parents to seek prenatal counseling for future
pregnancies. Over 3000 individual genes are currently
linked with Mendelian disease, and this list continues to
grow rapidly [4]. Furthermore, there is growing consensus
around standardized interpretation of genetic variants
within a clinical context [5] and diagnostic decision
support software (DDSS) can provide an additional level
of certainty as to pathogenicity [6, 7].
Autosomal recessive diseases account for ~ 26% of severe
pediatric conditions undergoing diagnostic sequencing
[8], and impart a standard 25% recurrence risk.
Most of these diseases are not evident with fetal ultrasound
prior to 20 gestational weeks (GW), especially
neurological conditions, since much of human brain development
occurs after mid-gestation [9, 10]. Next generation
sequencing (NGS) diagnostic approaches are
becoming more common for children with likely recessive
diseases [11], and families receiving a molecular
diagnosis for their child could benefit from this information
for prenatal testing for their subsequent pregnancies.
However, there are few reports documenting
population-level effectiveness of fetal genotyping supporting
the prevention of disease recurrence through
elective termination of pregnancy (eTOP), and despite
this approach gaining acceptance, each prenatal center
follows its own best-practices.
Here, we leverage family-specific NGS sequencing,
combined with fetal targeted genotyping to measure the
impact of this approach on the eventual disease recurrence
risk in families, by providing predictive affectation
status information to couples carrying a pregnancy that
were at 25% risk for disease recurrence. We show that
accurate molecular diagnosis in an older affected child
in a family can support prenatal diagnosis (PND) and
genetic counseling for families returning with a subsequent
pregnancy, which can influence informed decisions
about pregnancy termination, ultimately leading to
reduced disease recurrence.
Methods
Study design
We studied the utility of molecular diagnosis in children,
using exome or genome sequencing, on the potential to
support the reduction of disease recurrence in families.
Most recessive pediatric brain disease (rPDB) seen in
our center do not have obvious structural fetal anomalies,
rendering fetal imaging sub-optimal for determining
affectation status. We reasoned that, as cases received a
molecular diagnosis, families would be interested in
using this information to distinguish affectation status of
future pregnancies, that could ultimately impact their
decisions about eTOP of fetuses predicted to display disease.
Our framework was based on assessing the potential
impact of NGS diagnosis of an older child on the
recurrence risk in the same family, compared with historic
25% risk. We first validated the use of diagnostic
sequencing, benchmarked diagnostic decision support
software for mutation validation using a signs/symptoms
approach, and utilized this information in counseling
families.
Study cohort
Information on 1172 families that were seen from 2007
to 2016 at a single Egyptian national referral center was
reviewed. These families had 92% reported parental consanguinity
and one or more children suffering from a severe
undiagnosed neurogenetic disorder. Inclusion
criteria for the study were (a) presence of a likely rPBD
in a child, (b) condition presenting before the age of 2
years and (c) in families with more than one affected
child, both children had a nearly-identical clinical presentation.
All living affected children from families meeting
study criteria were examined by a clinical geneticist
and a child neurologist with a review of developmental
trajectory, and history of medications, epilepsy, intellectual
disability (ID), growth parameters, radiological, electrophysiological
(EEG, NCV, EMG), metabolic testing,
and detailed family history. DNA sampling in the form
of blood or saliva was obtained for the entire nuclear
family including all affected and unaffected children and
their parents, and in some cases genetically informative
extended relatives. OMIM features with standard diagnostic
criteria were used to determine affectation status
of newborn children, as assessed by the neurologist and
geneticist.
Family molecular genetic testing
All 1172 families were subject to exome sequencing between
2010 and 2016 with a goal of identifying the molecular
cause of the disease in each case. Exome
sequencing was performed on samples from at least one
affected member per family, but usually included two affected
children or one affected child and the parents for
singleton cases as described [12].
Exome and genome sequencing
Exome on DNA samples was performed using IDT Exome
capture kit. Hybrid selection libraries covered >
80% of targets at 20x with a mean target coverage of
>80x. The exome data were demultiplexed and each
sample’s sequence was aggregated into a single BAM file.
Genome on DNA samples (500 ng to 1.5 ìg) was performed
using a PCR-free protocol. These libraries were
sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 with 150-bp
paired end reads and target mean coverage of >30x.
A strict set of criteria was used to determine the causal
variant in each family (Section S1). The results of the research
sequencing were provided to the medical team
and subsequently to the families only if (a) the variant
was reported as an OMIM gene implicated in a severe
rPBD, (b) met ACMG guidelines as a pathogenic or
likely pathogenic variant [13] and (c) was confirmed in a
clinical laboratory by targeted sequencing. These families
received genetic counseling and were informed about
prenatal or preimplantation genetic diagnosis, gamete
donor, adoption, and treatment/therapy options for subsequent
affected children. Families were invited to return
to clinic if they become pregnant in the future.
Genome-phenome validation of molecular diagnosis
All families that received molecular diagnosis and
returned to the genetics clinic while in the first trimester
of pregnancy were followed up in this study. Families interested
in prenatal genetic testing were screened by the
team and subsequently consented for PND. For these
families, an additional unbiased comparison between
genotype and phenotype within the clinical context
using SimulConsult® (SC) diagnostic decision support
software (DDSS) was performed (Figs. S1–2). Quantitative
assessment of ‘zygosity pertinence’ was calculated, as
a joint probability of a match between signs/symptoms
and gene mutation. Cases with less than 90% pertinence
were excluded from PND. This additional step was performed
in order to orthogonally evaluate the pathogenic
variant that was identified using ACMG guidelines.
Integration of genotyping results into clinical practice
Families that opted to conceive again, and succeeded in
becoming pregnant after receiving genetic diagnosis,
returned to clinic between 2013 and 2017 and were offered
the possibility of PND under conditions: (a) a singular
genetic cause for the affected child could be
identified with certainty, (b) the genetic cause could be
confirmed through DDSS that incorporated the latest
published gene discoveries and associated disease phenotypes,
(c) the pregnancy was prior to 16 GW at the time
of testing, (d) amniocentesis could be performed at the
clinic with a reported standard risk for all complications
of < 3%, (e) the condition in the older child was considered
untreatable and likely to severely limit lifespan.
Care was taken to avoid maternal blood contamination.
Fetal DNA was extracted and genotyped using Sanger
sequencing for zygosity and segregation in the family in
both parents and all available older children. Assessment
of maternal DNA contamination was performed using
SNP analysis. Analysis of the results were discussed with
the family to convey available options, and risks/benefits
of eTOP in families requesting this information. In all
cases, families had one or more prior affected offspring,
and thus had an appreciation of the natural history of
the disease that potentially impacted their fetus.
Safety
All families with pregnancies received counseling on
risks-to-benefits for prenatal testing procedures. When
amniocentesis was elected, fluid sampling was performed
under ultrasonic guidance at 15–16 GW to minimize
the risk of complications while obtaining fetal genotyping
results as early as possible. Families deciding on
eTOP were referred to certified abortion clinics with
standard low complication rates.
Outcome measures
The primary outcome measure in this study was the affectation
status of live-born children that were genotyped
prenatally through amniocentesis. Phenotype
assessment was performed after birth, at 12 months, and
at 36 months (where possible) and included an evaluation
of growth parameters, psychomotor development,
vision, hearing and measures of pertinent features that
distinguished the clinical presentation of the older offspring
in the family, adjusted for age-of-onset of symptoms
on a case-by-case basis. Secondary outcome
measures included complications of pregnancy, amniocentesis,
abortions and deliveries and included spontaneous
pregnancy termination, Rh-incompatibility, severe
bleeding or loss of amniotic fluid, post-procedure infections,
severe cramping and fetal trauma.
Power calculations
Given the expected 25% recurrence risk for each subsequent
pregnancy in recessive disease, our study cohort
of 67 births following genetic counseling provided power
of 92.2% (with a two-sided type I error of 5%) to detect a
significant effect of prenatal testing on reduction in the
primary outcome measure, with the observed 67% decision
to terminate pregnancies of an affected fetus corresponding
to a change in outcome measure from
predicted 17 out of 67 affected births to observed 8 out
of 67 affected births (Fig. S3).
Statistical analysis
Comparison of categorical variables using the binomial
goodness-of-fit test was performed on a 2 × 2 contingency
table with the following cells: expected number of
affected children (25%), expected number of unaffected
children with no prenatal testing (75%), number of observed
affected children with prenatal testing, number of
observed unaffected children with prenatal testing.
Negative predictive value (NPV) was calculated according
to the formula NPV = number true negatives / (number true negatives + number false negatives). Positive
predictive value for the full dataset could not be determined
due to inability to phenotype eTOPs..
Results
Identification of disease-causing variants in study
participants
In this retrospective study, 1172 families with a likely
rPBD were previously enrolled at a single referral site in
a genetic study aimed at evaluation of the genetic
cause(s) (Fig. 1). Positive family history of consanguinity
was reported in 92% of families. These families presented
with one or more infants or children with a severe
neurodevelopmental disease that significantly
impacted health or predicted shortened lifespan. Fully
73% of families already had two or more affected children,
consistent with a recessive mode of inheritance.
Exome sequencing was performed (see Methods) with
standard clinical interpretation of potentially damaging
variants, including recessive bi-allelic, dominant, Xlinked,
de novo, post-zygotic (i.e. somatic) and structural
variants. Through assessment of segregation of the variant(
s) in the family and analysis of splicing in patient cell
lines, evidence that the variant fulfilled ACMG guidelines
was determined. In 37% of families, lack of a molecular
diagnosis based upon exome led to subsequent
genome sequencing in the trio, which in 7% of cases led
to the identification of a likely disease variant that was
missed from exome, mostly as a result of reduced exome
coverage in certain regions as reported [14].
In 413 families (35.2%), no likely-causative variant
(LCV) could be identified, despite a ‘reflex to trio’
and ‘reflex to genome’ approach (see below), and
were thus excluded from further study. Twenty-one
families (1.7%) displayed variants consistent with
other forms of inheritance (i.e. de novo or X-linked)
and were excluded from study in order to limit the
study to recessive disease. Ultimately in 739 families
(63.0%) a single biallelic LCV was identified in 441
total genes. Of these, 233 families had LCVs in 197
novel genes not implicated in disease prior to the return
of molecular testing results, classified as a ‘variant
of unknown significance’ (VUS) in a ‘gene of
unknown significance’ (GUS). As new disease genes
were constantly published, 88 of the VUS/GUSs were
reinterpreted as pathogenic or likely pathogenic
(ACMG guidelines) within a clinical context upon annual
re-review, and the families re-enrolled in the
study (Fig. 1). Similarly, through re-analysis of exome
and genome data, many families with initially negative
sequencing results were subsequently solved according
to ACMG guidelines and re-enrolled in the study.
Fig. 1 Genetic screening for disease-causing biallelic variants. All 1172 families presented with a likely autosomal recessive disorder for genetic
counseling from 2010 through 2016, and underwent exome sequencing. In 413 families, no genetic diagnosis could be made despite ‘reflex to
trio’ and ‘reflex to genome’. In 21 families a disease-causing variant was identified in a gene with a different inheritance pattern (i.e. de novo or Xlinked),
and both of these groups were excluded. In 739 families, a single variant was identified that was likely causative. Of these 233 occurred in
genes not Counseling parents for genetic testing results
Five hundred twenty-six families had a pathogenic or a
likely pathogenic variant residing in a gene in which
biallelic variants have been linked to a rPBD with a reported
phenotype that closely matched the documented
family phenotype, according to ACMG guidelines. All
clinically relevant variants were confirmed in a clinical
laboratory according to local requirement, confirmed results
results were reviewed by clinical geneticists and
shared with families. Parents of these 526 families were
contacted to convey the sequencing results and for genetic
counseling regarding prospective family planning.
Each family was counseled on the prognosis and currently
available treatments and/or supportive therapies
for the disorder, on the available options of PND procedures
and the associated risks.
Fetal genotyping
Of 526 families that received molecular diagnoses, 91
(17.3%) conceived again, and returned for prenatal counseling
within a four-year time frame between 2013 and
2017 with 101 pregnancies, as 10 families returned with
two pregnancies each. There were 18 (3.4%) families lost
to follow-up. The remaining 417 (79.3%) families upon
follow up, either decided against future pregnancies or
did not succeed in becoming pregnant during this study
period. This was likely in part due to the long interval
between recognition of disease in their child and the
molecular diagnosis (average 2.9 years). There were no
other pregnancies reported by these families in this
study.
For the 101 pregnancies seeking PND, evidence supporting
pathogenicity of their variants is provided in
Table S1. Risks and potential false-positive and falsenegative
results of PND were discussed prior to
ultrasound-guided amniocentesis. In 17 pregnancies,
PND was declined at that point. Since for many families,
the molecular diagnosis was made several years prior to
the current pregnancy, and more detailed information
became available both on clinical presentation and genetic
variants associated with these disorders, reevaluation
of the data was appropriate. DDSS was used
for those families seeking PND to increase certainty of
genotype to match the phenotype in each case (Table
S1). Due to the possibility that an incorrect provisional
diagnosis of older offspring could have inadvertently influenced
the genetic findings, we opted for a signs/symptoms-
based DDSS, to provide a quantitative joint
probability for a match (i.e. zygosity pertinence) with the
full NGS variant table (Fig. S1-S2). In all families (84
pregnancies) pertinence was > 95% between signs/symptoms
and molecular cause (Data S1), and none were excluded
based upon this additional validation step.
Clinical features in families that received fetal genotyping
Of the 74 families that received PND, clinical manifestations
were assigned to one of 7 disease categories, based
on presenting clinical features: (a) microcephaly (MIC),
(b) degenerative brain disease (DBD, including progressive
epileptic encephalopathy), (c) lissencephaly/polymicrogyria
(LIS/PMG), (d) Joubert syndrome and related
disorders (JBTS), (e) cerebellar atrophy (CBA), (f) hereditary
spastic paraplegia (HSP) and (g) ponto-cerebellar
hypoplasia (PCH) (Fig. 2). Example pedigrees, photographs
and brain scan images for each disease category
are shown (Fig. S3).
For each family, available clinical data included signs
and symptoms of general and neurological dysfunction
as well as degree of ID (Table S2). All children presented
with moderate to severe motor delay and over 90% had
profound or severe ID, which was likely to be associated
with congenital syndromes and often involved multisystem
abnormalities predicted to limit lifespan. Each case
presented at least two neurological features, with the
majority displaying 4 to 5 features (Fig. S4), consistent
with severe rPBD. Microcephaly and dysmorphic features
were observed in the majority of cases (> 60%).
Features such as spasticity, ataxia, seizures and developmental
regression were noted.
Correlation of fetal genotyping with pregnancy outcomes
Amniocentesis followed by Sanger sequencing of the
variant in the extracted DNA compared with DNA of
the rest of the family, including both parents and all
available children (both affected and unaffected) allowed
for accurate genotyping of all 84 pregnancies. Secondary
outcome measures were all negative for losses of pregnancy,
extensive bleeding or post-procedural complications,
there was no detectable maternal blood
contamination in collected fetal samples, and no equivocal
genotyping results. There were 39 that genotyped as
heterozygous for the pathogenic variant and 21 as
homozygous reference, all predicted to be unaffected by
the disease for which they were tested. Upon follow up,
we found that none of these children showed evidence
of the tested disease at the latest evaluation (Fig. 3 and
Table S3). Among these were one case of a spontaneous
loss of pregnancy that was not attributed to the amniocentesis
procedure, and one with a skeletal deformity
(absent sternum) at birth that was unrelated to the
phenotype of the affected older sibling, and that
remained otherwise neurologically normal. None of the
children showed any structural deformities attributed to
the amniocentesis procedure. Ten families subsequently
became pregnant again during the study period, and had
a second pregnancy undergo PND (Table S3).
Out of 24 that tested positive for the biallelic pathogenic
variant, 16 ultimately decided on eTOP and 8 carried the pregnancy to term. None of the 16 women
experienced notable complications of the eTOP. Due to
local customs and medical practice, assessment of fetal
tissue for malformations or genotyping could not be performed.
The 8 that were carried to term each returned
to follow up clinic, and each was assessed for clinical
features observed in the older affected sibling(s), according
to OMIM criteria for each of gene/mutation, in an
age-dependent and organ-specific fashion. Each displayed
a phenotype concordant with that of the older affected
sibling(s) and was ultimately diagnosed as affected
by the same disease (Table S4). Thus, while positive predictive
value (PPV) of PND could not be assessed, negative
predictive value (NPV, i.e. probability that offspring
does not have disease given negative PND) was 100%.
Statistical evidence for reduction of recurrence in families
Tests of significance were limited to the 101 pregnancies
that returned to clinic in molecularly diagnosed cases,
rather than in the full cohort of 1172 cases. Power analysis
to detect significant differences in outcome was
performed by varying the number of pregnancies and
the proportion of predicted affected pregnancies terminated.
We determined that a sample size of 80, given
eTOP decision in 70% of affected pregnancies, would
yield > 90% power to detect a significant difference in
outcome from this study (Fig. S5). The observed 12% affected
and 88% unaffected for the tested disease livebirths
were compared with the expected 25%:75% affected:
unaffected, respectively (using normative recessive
inheritance rates) and showed a statistical difference in
the observed percent of liveborns affected by disease
compared with expected (95% CI, 0.04–0.20; P = 0.011).
The observed ratios were also compared with the measured
proportions (i.e. 28.6% tested positive for the biallelic
disease-causing variant, whereas we expected 25%),
using a two-tailed binomial test for the goodness-of-fit.
This resulted in a P-value of 0.0017, indicating a significant
reduction in observed recurrence risk over expected
in this study.
Assessment of decision regret by parents
We assessed parental experiences with their decision
about eTOP at ~ 6 months after the predicted due date
for all 24 pregnancies. None of the 8 parents of pregnancies
carried to term had feelings of regret about their decision,
despite clinical features of disease apparent in
most. These 8 couples cited several reasons why eTOP
was not pursued, including social, logistical, religious or
economic reasons contributing to their decision. None
of these couples were attempting to become pregnant
again at the time of the 6-month follow up, and no further
pregnancies were observed from these 8 couples.
None of the 16 parents of the eTOPs had feeling of
regret about their decision at follow-up. Several of these
couples were attempting to become pregnant again by
the 6-month visit, and several families had a second
fetus undergo PND during the study period (Table S3).
Discussion
Despite the expansion of NGS into the clinic, and the
improvements in molecular diagnostic rates for neurogenetic
disease [13, 15] successful utilization of this information
to improve outcomes or reduce recurrence has
been limited [16, 17]. Using NGS from families recruited
for discovery of genetic causes of severe or lethal rPBDs
allowed for: (a) unbiased assessment of the pathogenicity
of the variant with DDSS, (b) ethical, social, and medical
risk considerations, (c) PND of a genetically susceptible
fetus, (d) referral for eTOP of genetically affected fetuses.
Many single-gene disorders do not show gross
structural defects that would be identified by fetal imaging
in the first trimester, and PND is a valid alternative
to identify fetuses that are predisposed to show
severe disease.
PND could be applied to future families in which the
cause for the index recessive case is determined by targeted
panel, exome or genome sequencing. Since the
current diagnostic rates with these techniques vary between
~ 25 and 60% [8, 18–20], this approach could impact
a substantial number of families with recessive
disease that undergo sequencing. Limitations of this
study are that only 91 of the 526 families that received a
molecular diagnosis returned to clinic with a subsequent
pregnancy, which is only 17% of those that could have
benefited. We were also not able to assess the 417 families,
where no molecular cause was identified, on
whether family planning decisions would have been different
if a molecular cause had been identified. Nevertheless,
our results could help to further justify use of
NGS in genetic diseases beyond clinical management of
the affected proband or affected siblings, to include the
potential benefit for future family planning [16]. Even
though reproductive specialists often provide genetic
testing based upon experience, widespread acceptance
by public health authorities and insurance providers
could benefit from future prospective studies demonstrating
NGS implementation that ultimately lead to reduced
disease recurrence.
Family planning and counseling are some of the most
challenging issues facing the medical team. Decisions ultimately
lie with the mother or couple, but can be influenced
by numerous ethical, social, familial, legal and
logistical considerations. The concepts surrounding consent
for PND are evolving in collaboration between families,
physicians, sociologists and ethicists to ensure that
couples are provided accurate assessment of risks and
benefits [21]. By limiting this study to a single referral
center where the practice was consistent among clinicians
and genetic counselors, families received
consistency in the approach. It will be important to
evaluate psychological issues, inadvertent delays in the
process, and potential barriers to service, to minimize
the likelihood that families cannot receive information
and medical care that they seek.
The NPV of 100% that we observed may not be representative
for larger applications of this design, taking
into account the 0.1% estimated sequencing error and
the possibility of human error, which would negatively
impact diagnostic accuracy. Additionally, PPV could not
be calculated due to the inability to independently confirm
the phenotype of fetuses predicted to be affected,
and the absence of clinical features prior to eTOP in
nearly every case. Minimal variability in expressivity of
each condition in each family was observed, where there
were two or more affected children diagnosed prior to
PND, and each of the 8 children later diagnosed as affected
displayed features nearly identical to their older
affected sibling(s).
PND performed in the study was targeted to the previously
identified biallelic variant in families with a previously
affected offspring, and as such at best could only
be used to prevent recurrence of disease. The benefit of
this approach is that each family had prior experience
with the disease in their older offspring, which may have
facilitated the decision about subsequent pregnancies.
An imperfect comparison can be made with approaches
that utilize premarital carrier sequencing or fetal NGS in
naïve families even in the presence of congenital malformations,
where experience with the anticipated disease
is minimal or nonexistent.
Although the method chosen for fetal sampling was
amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a comparable
alternative, if available, as it can be performed
earlier than amniocentesis. This would allow for earlier
return of results, provide families with additional time to
consider options, and open up less invasive eTOP options,
while only minimally increasing risk of complications
[22]. Additionally, the variants identified in
probands could be alternatively used in preimplantation
genetic diagnosis (PGD) to reduce recurrence risk in
subsequent pregnancies. PGD is not widely available in
Egypt where this study occurred, limiting its impact, and
suffers its own limitations [23–25].
In our study we focused on direct Sanger sequencing
of the pathogenic allele in the fetus that was previously
identified in an older sibling(s). An alternative approach
utilizing NGS of fetal DNA directly in disease-naïve families
would expand the benefit of PND [26], but suffer
from nonpenetrant variants, as was recently reported for
cystic fibrosis or Krabbe diseases [27, 28]. Consanguineous
families might especially profit from this approach
due to the higher risk of recessive diseases, or risk of
more than one recessive disease [29].
Recent publications highlight that between 4.9–13% of
cases show two different diseases or disease-causing mutations
in the same child [30, 31]. Such occurrence
would reveal a limitation of our approach, unless both
diseases were recognized prior to fetal genotyping. We
did not observe evidence of multiple single-gene disorders
in any of our families, probably in part because
families with clinically discordant siblings were excluded.
We observed a skeletal deformity in an otherwise
healthy case newborn, suggesting a second genetic condition,
but the genetic origin of the skeletal deformity
was not investigated. Ideally, assessment of all such conditions
relevant to the fetus could be performed
simultaneously.
Premarital genetic counseling is seen by some as a superior
method to prevent disease, and is in reach for
some common genetic alleles in certain populations [32,
33]. For instance, recessive traits in the Ashkenazi population,
like Tay-Sachs disease (1:27–1:30 carrier frequency)
formed the basis for genetic premarital efforts
that reduced the incidence by > 90% [34]. With an expansion
of NGS accessibility, preconception carrier
screening for the majority of inherited diseases will be
feasible, but will suffer from imperfect predictive power
in many instances. Our study is unique in that it provides
a practical approach for predicting the phenotype
of fetuses in families with a previously affected offspring,
and supports the workflow with the largest to-date
retrospective analysis of outcomes.
Conclusions
Identification of causes through NGS, coupled with prenatal
fetal genotyping in subsequent pregnancies, allows
families to make informed decisions to reduce recessive
disease recurrence.
