Background
Hiatal hernia is a common condition often associated
with symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD) [1]. Laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair (LHHR) is
now considered to be the gold standard for the management
of hiatal hernias, and is associated with a reduced
rate of perioperative morbidity and shorter hospital stay
compared with the open approach [1, 2]. The standard
steps include the excision of the sac, a thorough
oesophageal mobilisation, primary closure of the hiatus,
and a fundoplication [3, 4].
Oelschlager et al. reported that the recurrence rate
after pure suture repair without mesh reinforcement is
as high as 59% at 5-year follow-up [4]. Primary repair of
the paraesophageal hiatal hernia is a significant risk factor
for recurrence, especially when suturing the pillars of
the diaphragm together under tension for the giant hiatal
hernia. Two randomised trials have demonstrated that a
significant reduction in recurrence rates can be achieved
by using synthetic mesh for large hiatal hernia repair
[5, 6]. However, a few synthetic mesh-related complications,
such as mesh erosion, stricture and dysphagia, are
reported [7, 8]. In order to avoid those complications,
the surgical technique for reliable mesh fixation has been
improved, and the mesh specially designed for hiatal hernia
has also been improved.
On the other hand, recent studies have reported
favourable results from using biological mesh for hiatal
hernia repair [9, 10]. Due to the concern about potential
complications related to synthetic mesh, biomaterial was
adopted in the repair. However, the long-term results,
especially for recurrence, still needs to be investigated
further.
In our study, a retrospective study was conducted into
laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair at our centre to review
our experience with biological mesh for crural reinforcement
and on mesh fixation with medical glue and suture.
Methods
A retrospective study was conducted for a consecutive
series of patients undergoing laparoscopic hiatal herniorrhaphy
for symptomatic hiatal hernia between January
2018 and January 2019. Preoperative evaluation routinely
included endoscopy, CT scan, upper gastrointestinal
(UGI) series and oesophageal manometry test, and 24-h
PH monitoring.
Surgical technique
One dose of antibiotics was administered at induction.
Five laparoscopic ports were routinely used. Circumferential
dissection of the hernia sac from the hiatus and
mediastinal structures was performed. The sac was then
first everted over the gastroesophageal junction and then
excised. The hiatus was closed posteriorly with an interrupted
suture (2-0 Prolene) to about 2.5 cm. A piece
of biological prosthesis (ThomalGEN surgical patch,
6*8 cm, Guanhao Biotech Co. Ltd., Guangzhou, China)
was prepared and cut in a U configuration, and was fixed
with medical glue (Compont medical adhesive, 1.5ml/
tube; Beijing Compont Medical Devices Co. Ltd., Beijing,
China) for reinforcement of the crural closure (Fig. 1).
The medical glue set consists of a sprayer, catheter, and
n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue. The catheter is
introduced through one of the operating trocars and a
5mm grasper is inserted through the second trocar and
used to direct the application of the glue. The mesh is
fixed with four–five sprays. In addition, a three-point
suture with three intermittent sutures (3−0 vicryl ) was
used to further strengthen the prosthesis fixation (Fig. 2).
Fundoplication was then performed with an interrupted
suture (2-0 prolene) [11].
Outcome measurement
Operative data were collected, including operation time
(skin cut to closure), the time cost for prosthesis fixation,
blood loss, any intraoperative complication, hiatus
measurement, and the length of the intra-abdominal
oesophagus after dissection.
Upper Gastrointestinal (UGI) Series: the preoperative
and every 6-months postprocedural UGI series were
performed at our medical centre. Preoperative exams
were interpreted by the clinicians and were used as the
primary means of hiatal hernia diagnosis. The radiologists
were asked to formulate a consensus interpretation
based on the following five-point scale: (1) Intact
fundoplication located below the diaphragm without
any portions of stomach seen above the plication; (2)
Intact fundoplication, but with indeterminate positioning.
Plication seen within 2 cm of the level of the
left hemidiaphragm; (3) Intact plication with probable
small sliding hiatal hernia. Plication seen between 2 cm
and 5 cm above the left hemidiaphragm; (4) Intact plication
with a large sliding hiatal hernia (5 cm above the
left hemidiaphragm); (5) Slipped or disrupted fundoplication,
and a portion of stomach present above the plication
[9].
Symptom Questionnaire
A standardised symptom questionnaire was provided to
patients two to four weeks after the operation, 6 months
after the operation, and 1 year after the operation.
Patients individually scored symptoms based on severity.
The symptoms included in the questionnaire were:
heartburn, chest pain, dysphagia, and gas bloating. The
severity was scored using a visual analogue score (VAS),
and patients marked each symptom from 0 to 10 (0 representing
no effect on life and 10 representing extreme
effect). In addition, the overall satisfaction with the outcome
after surgery was scored from 0 to 10 (0 representing
not satisfied and 10 representing highly satisfied) as
well [11].
Endoscopy was routinely undertaken six months after
the operation to evaluate if there was any recurrence.
SPSS 25.0 software was used for statistical analysis.
The protocol for this study was approved by the Clinical
Research Ethics Committees at our hospital.
Results
From January 2018 to January 2019, 36 patients underwent
laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair with biological
prosthesis fixed by medical glue and suture. Baseline
Characteristics of patients is summarised in Table 1.
There were 12 males (33.3%) and 24 females (66.7%) with
a mean age of 68.4 ± 17.2 (range 31–84 years). The average
BMI was 28.6 ± 6.8. No case underwent previous
anti-reflux procedure.
Preoperative oesophageal manometry showed that
LESP on average was 6.8 ± 3.6mmHg, and 12 cases were
found to have mild motility disorder. Endoscopy identified
the hiatus hernia in all patients, and 7 cases had concomitant
esophagitis.
The final diagnosis was confirmed during the operation.
Two cases (5.6%) were sliding hiatal hernia (type
I)with severe acid reflux, five cases (13.9 %) were giant
hiatal hernia (type IV) containing at least two-thirds of
the stomach, and 29 cases (80.5%) were paraesophageal
hernia(type II and type III).
Anethesia evaluation included 31 cases of ASA grade
2 and 5 cases of ASA grade 3. All the patients underwent
laparoscopic surgery uneventfully with an average operation
time of 92.6 min (range 73–135 min). All surgery
was performed by one experienced surgeon. The average
blood loss was minimal (range 5–20ml). The width
of hiatus on average was 4.4 ± 1.4 cm, and the length was
5.2 ± 1.2 cm. The length of intraabdominal esophagus
was more than 3 cm. Fundoplication was performed in
all cases. Intraoperative complications were described
in four patients (11.1 %): three cases of pneumothorax
(8.3%) during dissection of the sac that could be closed
laparoscopically without placement of a chest tube,
and one case of superficial liver laceration coagulated
laparoscopically.
The mesh placement and fixation took approximately
12 min. The medical glue can provide a very solid fixation
to the crural immediately, as the glue can be sprayed
quite evenly in small particles. The suture fixation was
completed by three intermittent sutures. The prosthesis
was well secured, and there was no movement during the
following fundoplication.
The analgesia was given when necessary. The patients
started to mobilize 6 h after surgery.
Clinical follow-up is summarised in Tables 2 and 3.
The follow-up time was on average 18.4 months, ranging
from 13 to 24 months. Overall, the clinical outcome
was favourable. In general, most clinical symptoms such
as heartburn,acid reflux, regurgitation, and chest pain
improved significantly after the operation. The overall
satisfaction score was 8 at 6 months follow up. Even
though more than 50% experienced mild dysphagia and
gas bloating after the operation, they improved gradually
with diet instruction and all can eat normal diets at
6 months follow-up. No patient needed further intervention,
such as endoscopic dilatation or reoperation.
Endoscopy at 6 months follow-up, no recurrence was
found. Among the 7 cases with concomitant esophagitis,
6 cases was cured, and one case was improved from
Grade C to Grade A. At 1-year follow-up, one patient had
asymptomatic recurrence shown at Upper GI series, and
was scaled as 3 by a radiologist according to the abovementioned
criteria (Figs. 3 and 4).
There was no serious postoperative complication, and
all were classified into Clavien- Dindo Grade 1. Only one
case of asymptomatic recurrence did not need any treatment.
No case needed further PPI treatment.
Discussion
The application of bioabsorbable prosthesis such as
Surgisis (small intestinal submucosa, SIS), BioA Tissue
Reinforcement (polglycolide or teimethylene carbonate)
or AlloDerm (human acellular dermis) in hiatal hernia
repair has been suggested to avoid mesh related complications,
such as erosion or stricture [9, 12, 13]. In our
study, we used a prosthesis made of bovine pericardium
for the reinforcement, and this mesh has been widely
used in inguinal and ventral hernia repair in China.
However, the concern on using biological prosthesis is
the weaker strength compared to synthetic material,
and this might result in higher recurrence. A few recent
studies have confirmed reliable outcomes with biological
prosthesis for hiatal hernia repair [13–15]. In our study,
including more than 90% of giant or paraesophageal hernia,
there was no symptomatic recurrence during followup.
The case of sliding hernia shown at the Upper GI
series 1 year after operation did not need further medical
intervention. This patient was an 83-year-old female with
a giant hiatal hernia, and we were advised to perform
the surgery for a shorter time with lower CO2 pressure
by the anaesthetist during the procedure for the safety.
Therefore, a simple crural closure was performed without
fundoplication, and this could be the reason why the fundus
slipped upwards.
In this study, we used NCBA medical glue for prosthesis
fixation after crural closure, and the results were
satisfactory. The manipulation was easy, and fixation
was secure. Previous animal studies have confirmed the
safety of chemical and biological adhesives for mesh fixation
[16–19]. Moreover, clinical studies have shown that
adhesives, both biological and chemical, are an effective
means of mesh fixation in hernia repair and results are
comparable to those of traditional techniques such as
suture and tack devices [20–27]. However, the shortcomings
of biological sealants (e.g., fibrin glue), which are
expensive, provide a weak bond, are slow to apply, and
are potentially allergenic, have limited their application,
particularly in China [7]. For these reasons, Compont, an
NBCA chemical adhesive, which is fast acting and provides
good adhesive strength, is the preferred surgical
adhesive used in China today [28]. The reason why additional
suture fixation is needed is that the oesophageal
hiatus is a very dynamic area with approximately 3,000
movements every day, therefore erosion, stricture or
recurrence might happen with inadequate fixation [12].
However, without glue spray, the fixation needs more
sutures, and therefore becomes more time consuming.
Proper mesh fixation is the key for the efficiency
and the safety of hiatal hernia repair. Most surgeons
currently use suture and some use tacks or staples for
fixation. Both of these methods have their problems
and do not allow strong, uniform, and immediate fixation
of the mesh to the crural fibres. Having used the
NCBA glue for mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal
hernia repair since 2009 at our centre, we noticed
that the fixation of the mesh was strong, immediate,
and uniform [27]. On the other hand, the application
of tacks at hiatus has been reported to cause serious
complications such as cardiac tamponade and mortality
[29]. As a result, tacker fixation has been strongly
advised against by several surgeons [30]. In addition,
the SAGES guidelines for management of hiatal hernia
state that care should be taken about the mesh fixation
technique. In particular, tacks can breach the aorta or
pericardium when applied low on the left crus or anteriorly
near the apex of the crura [30]. In comparison,
medical glue fixation is safe without the risk of penetrating
important organs. Furthermore, some studies
reported that fixation by glue combined with suture is
as strong as tacker [28].
In conclusion, biological mesh reinforcement of crural
closure was safe and effective for repairing large
hiatal hernias. Medical glue combined with suture can
provide solid and secure fixation and can reduce the
serious complications caused by fixation. The limitation
of this study includes the small number of patients
and relatively short follow up period. Ideally, a multiple
center clinical study with control group could be carried
out for further research.
Conclusions
Biological mesh fixed with suture and medical glue was
safe and effective for repairing large hiatal hernias. Of
course, a longer follow-up is still needed for determining
long-term outcomes.