Background
Ganglioneuroma (GN) is a rare benign tumor which
originates from neural crest cells. It is mainly composed
of mature Schwann cells, ganglion cells and nerve fibers.
GN may arise anywhere along the paravertebral
sympathetic plexus. The retroperitoneum and posterior
mediastinum are the two most common locations of GN
[1–4]. Although GN is regarded as an uncommon tumor,
more and more GNs have been detected with the dramatically
increased use of computed tomography (CT)
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Though GNs
are benign tumors, they may cause pain and compression
symptoms and recurrence or malignant transformation
has been reported [2, 5, 6]. Due to these characteristics,
surgical resections and postoperative monitoring are recommended
for GN patients.
There have been several studies describing the radiological
appearances of GN [2, 7–16], but the reported
case series are relatively small. To date, few studies have
focused on the primary non-adrenal retroperitoneum
GN. The precise diagnosis of non-adrenal retroperitoneum
GN prior to surgery remains challenging. The
non-invasive diagnosis of GN is important, because
the surgical strategy and surgical approach can be different
for benign and malignant tumors. Prior to the
surgical procedure, CT and MR images can demonstrate
important features of the tumors and help to narrow
the differential diagnosis. Moreover, CT and MR
images enable a multiplanar evaluation revealing the
exact localization of the lesion and could heip to accurately
evaluate the association of the mass with adjacent
structure. Therefore, preoperative imaging of GNs
could substantially facilitate preoperative planning. In
this study, we reviewed a relatively large series of histopathological
proved non-adrenal retroperitoneum
GN cases at our institution and interpreted the CT and
MRI features of them. Furthermore, we analyzed risk
factors of increased surgical blood loss based on radiographic
images for the first time.
Methods
This study was a single-center retrospective study
approved by the Committee on Ethics of Medicine of
Changhai hospital and the study was carried out in
accordance and relevant guidelines and regulations.
The requirement to obtain written informed consent
was waived by the Committee on Ethics of Medicine of
Changhai hospital. Computerized patient record systems
and the laboratory, pathology and radiology databases
were searched from January 2012 to June 2019. The
inclusion criteria were as follows: pathologically proven
retroperitoneum GN; undergone contrast-enhanced CT
or MRI before surgery. The exclusion criteria were: adrenal
GN cases; absence of a presurgical contrast-enhanced
CT or MRI record in our hospital; not undergoing surgical
resection of tumors. Follow-up data were obtained
by searching medical records in our hospital and making
phone calls to the patients. The written informed consents
were obtained from all patients.
Patients
A total of 35 patients (18 male, 17 female) were pathologically
diagnosed with retroperitoneum GN during the
7-years-period in our hospital. Their age ranged from 14
to 66 (median, 40 years). All of them were treated operatively.
The mean time interval from preoperative imaging
to surgery was 5 days (range, 0–27 days).
Modalities
Among them, 24 patients had undergone CT scans and
19 patients had undergone MR examination before treatment.
The CT scans were carried on by a 320-multidetector
row CT system (Toshiba Medical Systems, Tokyo,
Japan). The CT scan parameters were as follows: 120 kV,
150 effective mAs, a matrix of 350 × 350, and a gantry
rotation time of 0.5 s. The intravenous iodinated contrast
agent (Iopamiro, Bracco Sine Pharmaceuticals, Shanghai,
China) was administered for contrast media enhancement.
The contrast-enhanced CT scans were performed
in arterial (20–25 s) and venous (60–70 s) phases after the
contrast agent injection. MR imaging was performed by a
1.5 T MR system (GE Medical System, USA) with a body
coil. The MR protocol contained horizontal T1 (repetition
time (TR) 2.58 ms, echo time (TE) 1.18 ms) and T2
weighted (TR 6316 ms, TE 87 ms) images, coronal T2
weighted images (TR 7000 ms, TE 1230 ~ 1270 ms) and
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) (TR 5000 ms, TE
of 80 ms, b = 800). Images were obtained with a field of
view of 440 × 440 mm, an image matrix of 224 × 270,
and a slice thickness of 5 mm. Gadolinium-diethylenetriamine
pantaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA, Magnevist, Berlin,
Germany) was intravenously administrated for contrast
media enhancement. The delayed time was 30 and 70 s
after injection of contrast agent.
Image analysis
The images were reviewed by two experienced radiologists
(Zhang & Yang) independently, and discrepancies
were resolved by consensus. The two readers were
blinded to the operation records. The following radiological
characteristics were assessed: tumor size (maximal
diameter measured on axial and coronal 2D images),
shape (round, oval or irregular), calcification (present
or absent), density (CT)/ signal (MR) features, pre-contrast
appearance (homogeneous or heterogeneous), the
pattern of enhancement, specific signs including vessel
encasement and whorled sign. The vessel encasement
sign represented that the tumor showed the trend to surround
major blood vessels (> 180°). The vessel encasement
signs are categorized into 3 types: tumor encasing
the origin of the coeliac axis, and/or of the superior mesenteric
artery; tumor encasing one or both renal pedicles;
tumor encasing the aorta and/or vena cava [17, 18]. The
whorled sign was evaluated on MR T2-weighted images.
The manifestation of the whorled sign was that the tumor
was predominantly high intensity on T2-weighted image
and an interlaced or nodular low-signal part can be seen
within the tumor (Fig. 1). The whorled sign corresponded
to the microscopic interlacing patterns of Schwann cells
and collagen fibers within the tumor [10, 19]. All the
clinical details, laboratory, pathological and follow-up
data were also documented.
Statistical analysis
The statistical analyses were performed with Predictive
Analysis Software 18.0 (IBM, Armonk, New York, USA).
Two-tailed P values were computed and a P value of less
than 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
All data were checked up with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
test to assess the normality. Continuous variables were
showed as mean ± standard deviation (SD), while categorical
variables presented as numbers or percentages.
Differences between groups were assessed using
the independent samples t test for continuous variables
if they are conformed to the normal distribution and the
Mann–Whitney U-test for those were not normally distributed.
Logistic regression analysis was performed to
examine associations between characteristics and surgical
outcomes.
Results
Basic characteristics
Thirty-five retroperitoneum GN patients were enrolled in
this study, including 18 male and 17 female patients. The
baseline characteristics were displayed in Table 1, including
age, gender, histological tumor size, symptoms, surgical
blood loss, postoperative hospital stay. In detail, the
mean age of the involved patients was 40 years, ranging
from 14 to 66 years. The documented histological tumor
size was 10.12 cm ± 4.56 cm for average. As for clinical
manifestations, the tumor was asymptomatic in 25
patients (71.4% of the cases). The remaining 10 patients
(28.6% of the cases) suffered from abdominal pain or
discomfort (n = 7) and back pain (n = 3). Among the 25
asymptomatic patients, 21 cases were incidentally discovered
by health check-ups, and 4 cases were detected
when checking for other diseases such as cholecystitis,
ureteral calculi and lumbar fracture. The adrenal hormonal
levels of all the patients were within the normal range.
Image findings
Twenty-four patients had undergone CT scans and 19
patients had undergone MR imaging. Eight patients
had both CT and MR records. The imaging features
were described in Tables 2 and 3 separately. In 17 cases,
tumors tend to surround major blood vessels but without
invasion or occlusion. None of the cases showed evidence
of regional lymph node enlargement and visceral
metastasis.
Twenty-four patients had undergone enhanced CT
scans (Table 2). GNs presented hypodense on pre-contrast
CT images, with a mean attenuation density of
32.11Hu (range, 19.4–53.2Hu). They were homogenous
in 15 of 24 patients and heterogeneous in the remaining
9 patients. Punctate calcifications were found in 8 cases.
After contrast, the progressive delayed enhancement was
seen in 20 of 24 cases, while slightly contrast washout
was observed in one case. In 3 cases, the tumor did not
enhance at all. The enhancement pattern was shown in
Fig. 2.
Nineteen patients had undergone enhanced MR imaging
(Table 3). GNs revealed hypointense signals on
T1-weighted images and heterogeneous hyperintense
signals on T2-weighted images in all 19 patients. The
whorled appearance was observed in 14 patients. GNs
presented delayed heterogeneous enhancement in 12
patients and relatively homogenous enhancement in 6
patients. In one case, no enhancement was seen.
Surgical findings and outcomes
Complete tumor resection was carried out in 34 cases
(97.1%), and partial excision in 1 patient (2.9%) because
the patient refused to take risks of nephrectomy. One
patient underwent distal pancreatectomy and one underwent
nephrectomy because of tumor adhesion. The
median blood loss during surgery was 200 ml, ranging
from 20 ml to 4000 ml. The estimated blood loss was over
or equal to 400 ml in 15 cases and less than 400 ml in
20 cases. Severe surgical complications occurred in one
patient (patient no.13) because of postoperative rebleeding
that led to hypoperfusion. The patient died of multiple
system organ failures on the 18th postoperative
day. Follow-up data were available for 28 patients and
the median follow-up duration was 22 months (range,
10–81 months). No recurrence or metastasis was found
in these patients. Six patients were lost of follow-up
because of the wrong phone number.
Risk factors of increased blood loss during surgery
Maximal tumor size measured on axial image, maximal
tumor size measured on coronal image, calcification,
encasing one or both renal pedicles, encasing the aorta
and/or vena cava and whorled sign on MRI showed significant
difference between the blood loss ≥ 400 ml and
blood loss < 400 ml group (Table 4A, B). Logistic regression
revealed that maximal tumor size measured on
axial images (OR: 1.12; 95% CI: 1.02–1.24; P = 0.023) and
encasing one or both renal pedicles (OR: 22.39; 95% CI:
1.35–372.99; P = 0.030) were independently correlated
with surgical blood loss (Table 5). Age, gender, encasing
the origin of celiac axis, and/or of the superior mesenteric
artery and CT value demonstrated no significant
difference between the two groups.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this study is the largest case series of
retroperitoneum GNs and this was the first study evaluating
imaging-based risk factors of increased surgical
blood loss. In this case series, retroperitoneum GNs were
recognized to be hormonally inactive, mostly incidentally
discovered and with satisfying outcomes after surgery.
Since GNs are mostly hormone-silent and asymptomatic
and retroperitoneum space is deep and extensive, they
can be huge when detected. These findings were consistent
with previous studies [1, 4, 20]. The gender incidence
of GN varies in literature [7, 8, 14, 21, 22]. In our
experience, we found a similar GN morbidity between
females and males.
Retroperitoneum GNs in our study displayed as welldefined
hypodense masses on unenhanced CT images,
mostly homogenous. Punctate calcifications were
found in 33.3% cases. The sight or moderate progressive
enhancement was observed in most patients. On
MR images, GNs often presented to be hypointense on
T1-weighted images, heterogeneous hyperintense on
T2-weighted images and hyperintense on DWI images.
These imaging features were similar to previous literature
reports [1, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 19, 23]. The whorled sign,
as previously reported, was considered as a specific sign
of GN [9, 10, 19]. In our study, the whorled sign could
be seen in 73.7% patients and it was in accordance with
the pathological components of GN. The large amount
of myxoid stroma presented predominantly high signal
intensity on T2-weighted images. The cellular components,
including Schwann cells and ganglions, may
be responsible for the interlaced or nodular low signal
intensity [1, 3, 7]. Interestingly, retroperitoneum GNs
tend to extend along the inter-vessel space and partially
or wholly surround major blood vessels, with nearly half
of the patients (17/35) presented with vessel encasement
signs. Under this circumstance, the GNs could be confused
with malignant tumors.
The differential diagnosis of GN includes many malignant
and benign tumors, including neuroblastoma (NB),
ganglioneuroblastoma (GNB), schwannoma, lymphangioma
and so on. NB, GNB and GN originate from the
ganglion cells. The three tumors differ in their degree
of cellular and extracellular maturation. NB are highly
malignant lesions and GNB has intermediate malignant
potential. NB are more aggressive and occur in younger
patients (median age, under 2 years). NB and GNB often
present as irregularly shaped, unencapsulated lesions
and tend to be inhomogeneous owing to tumor necrosis
and hemorrhage. They have the trend to invade
adjacent organs and adjacent vessels and tend to metastasize
to bone, bone marrow, liver and lymph nodes [1].
Regional invasion of paraspinal musculature and psoas
may occur, and invasion of the neural foramen into the
epidural space is also frequent. In our retroperitoneum
GN cases, no invading of the vessels and organs was
observed, which suggested benign tumors. Moreover,
metastasis was rarely seen in GNs. Schwannomas arise
from the nerve sheath and constitute the majority of neurogenic
retroperitoneum neoplasms. They are commonly
diagnosed in patients in the 2nd to 5th decades of life.
Schwannomas are composed of alternating Antony A and
Antony B areas and degenerative parts [24]. Schwannomas
are encapsulated masses and extend along the nerve
course. Large schwannomas may present prominent
cystic degeneration and calcification. Schwannomas have
been reported to exhibit a target-like appearance, i.e.,
peripheral high-signal intensity and central low-signal
intensity, on T2 weighted images [25]. Retroperitoneal
lymphangiomas can present at any age and are common
in males. They often present as unilocular or multilocular
thin-walled cysts with no enhancement.
Surgical treatment is the optimal choice for the treatment
of retroperitoneum GNs [2, 26]. According to the
experience of our institution, complete rection was possible
for most patients. However, since GNs may adhere
to tissues nearby and surround the major adjacent vascular
structures [12], the resection can be complex and
surgical risks should not be underestimated. In this study,
the estimated blood loss was over or equal to 400 ml in
15 cases during the operation, with the maximum blood
loss as 4000 ml. A large amount of bleeding may lead to
blood transfusion, even to organ ischemia–reperfusion
injury, shock and death. As a result, preoperative radiological
interpretations of retroperitoneum GNs are crucial.
Importantly, we have found that larger tumor size
measured on axial images and encasing one or both renal
pedicles (Fig. 3) may lead to increased blood loss during
surgery. Moreover, we have found that the maximal
diameters measured on coronal 2D images of retroperitoneum
GNs were more extensive than those measured
on axial images in 68.6% (24/35) cases, which was in
accordance with the potential of GNs to grow vertically
from the sympathetic ganglia [2]. These findings may
help the surgeon to predict surgical risk, select surgical
technique, and carry out surgical treatment. Our followup
data, consistent with previous studies [15, 16], indicated
the good prognosis of retroperitoneum GNs after
surgical procedure.
We acknowledged that our study had several limitations.
First, this was a single-center retrospective study,
which may lead to the bias of data. Also, those patients
who did not receive surgery were not enrolled, which
could limit the representation of our case series. Despite
these limitations, we believe that our data indeed provided
valuable information on retroperitoneum GN. And
studies with large sample sizes will be carried out for further
verification.
Conclusions
In summary, CT and MR displayed vital roles in the diagnosis
and pre-operative evaluation of GNs. Though GNs
are uncommon tumors, they should be taken into consideration
when specific features are presented. These
features are as follows: (a) relatively low density on unenhanced
CT images, (b) the whorled sign on T2-weighted
images, (c) the possible tendency to surround major vessels
but with no narrowing, (d) the delayed progressive
enhancement on enhanced CT and MR images. Preoperative
images could provide image-defined risk factors for
surgery. Larger tumor size measured on axial images and
encasing one or both renal pedicles may lead to increased
blood loss during surgery.