The presence of axillary lymph nodes metastases in
breast cancer patients helps determine surgical and postsurgical
care and is recognized as one of the most important
prognostic factors for overall survival [1].
However, recent studies such as ACOSOG Z0011,
AATRM 048/13/2000 and IBCSG 23–01 trials have reported
that completion of axillary lymph node dissection
(ALND) in women with a limited number of axillary
nodal disease (i.e, 1–3 positive nodes) cannot improve
long term prognosis [2–4]. Rather, it is increasingly important
to exclude advanced axillary node metastases
(i.e, 3 or more positive nodes) than detecting clinically
node positive disease. If there is a noninvasive imaging
modality that can accurately determine node negative
disease, omitting ALND and even sentinel lymph node
biopsy (SLNB) could be considered, resulting in a significant
reduction of morbidity.
Breast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is a noninvasive
imaging modality for axillary evaluation to identify
node positive and negative disease in patients with
breast cancer [5]. However, the use of MR imaging for
the evaluation of axillary lymph nodes is controversial.
Previous studies assessed lymph nodes seen at preoperative
breast MR imaging instead of using dedicated highspatial
resolution axillary MR imaging sequences [6–9].
But others described that bilateral assessment of axillary
lymph nodes and even the supraclavicular area was limited
when using only dedicated breast coils [10–12]. The
use of dedicated axillary MR imaging sequence has been
shown to improve the accuracy of MR imaging in nodal
evaluation [10, 13–15]. Although a dedicated examination
of the axilla can be more accurate, it requires more
scanning time [13, 16]. Indeed, there have been many
various attempts to evaluate axillary lymph nodes. Baltzer
et al. [14] insisted that technically axillary staging is
feasible with conventional breast MR using a dedicated
whole-body scanner. Another study also investigated
gadofosveset enhanced MR imaging of axillary lymph
nodes in breast cancer patients [15].
With increasing incidence of screening for breast cancer,
more simplified and less time consuming examinations
are demanded, which developed abbreviated MR
protocol. The abbreviated MR has been considered to
reduce scan time under ten minutes with including only
pre-and immediate post contrast sequences with high
diagnostic accuracy [17]. Although there has been several
studies comparing the diagnostic performance of abbreviated
MR protocols in breast cancer itself, there has
been no previous study justifying for omission of dedicated
axillary sequence. Thus, comparison of standard
MR and dedicated axillary imaging sequences for axillary
assessment in both screening and diagnostic setting is
required. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the
diagnostic performance of standard MR imaging compared
to dedicated axillary MR imaging for the evaluation
of axillary lymph node in patients who performed
breast MR imaging for various reasons.
Methods
Patients
The institutional review board approved this retrospective
study, and the requirement for written informed consent
was waived. From January 2018 and March 2018,
we identified a total of 750 consecutive patients who
performed breast MR imaging, using a computer database
at our institution. We excluded 263 patients who
were treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (n = 235),
had incomplete histopathological information (n = 14)
and follow-up loss (n = 14). Finally, a total of 487 patients
(age range, 23–90 years; mean age, 50.1 years)
were included in this study.
Breast MR technique
MR examinations were performed in the prone position
using either a 1.5-T or 3-T scanner (Magnetom Avanto
(n = 135) or Skyra (n = 301), Siemens Medical Solutions,
Erlangen, Germany; Ingenia (n = 51), Philips Medical Systems,
Best, The Netherlands) with a dedicated 18-channel
phased-array breast coil (Supplementary Table 1). Standard
imaging sequences included a T2-weighted sequence
and a dynamic contrast material-enhanced fat-suppressed
axial 3-dimensional T1-weighted sequence that included
one precontrast-enhanced and 5 contrast-enhanced sequences.
For axial T2-weighted imaging, a fast spin-echo
sequence with fat suppression was used ([repetition time/
echo time (TR/TE), 6700/74 msec; matrix size, 448 × 448;
field of view (FOV) 300 × 300mm; and slice thickness, 1.5
mm] for 1.5-T and [TR/TE, 1100/131 msec; matrix size,
256 × 416; FOV, 341 × 210mm2; and slice thickness, 1.5
mm] for 3-T system). The dynamic contrast materialenhanced
MR images were acquired with fast low-angle
shot volume interpolated breath-hold examination
(FLASH VIBE) pulse sequences ([TR/TE, 5.2/2.4 msec;
matrix size, 384 × 384; slice thickness, 0.9mm] for 1.5-T
and [TR/TE, 5.6/2.5msec; matrix size, 360 × 360; slice
thickness, 0.9mm] for 3-T scanner.
For further evaluation of nodal status, bilateral dedicated
axial axillary imaging sequences were acquired
using a body coil. A T1-weighted, contrast materialenhanced),
fat-saturated, spoiled, volumetricinterpolated
gradient-echo sequence was performed after
a dynamic breast sequence. Imaging parameters were as
follows: TR/TE, 5.6/2.6 ms; flip angle, 10°; matrix size,
298 × 352, slice thickness, 1.5mm for 1.5-T scanner, TR/
TE, 4.1/1.3 ms; flip angle, 12°; matrix size, 340 × 380;
slice thickness, 1.0 mm; 160 slices for 3-T scanner. The
field of view was optimized to involve the bilateral
axillae (levels I–III), supraclavicular area, and inferior
neck (levels IV–VII).
Contrast medium (0.1 mmol/kg; Dotarem, Guerbet,
Aulnay-sous-Bois, France or 0.2 ml/kg; Uniray, Dongkook,
Seoul, Korea) was injected at a flow rate of 1 or 2
ml/s followed by a 20-ml saline flush, using an MRcompatible
power injector (Spectris; Medrad, Pittsburgh,
PA).
Image analysis
All patients were reviewed by two dedicated breast radiologists
(S.M.H., and E.Y.C., with 7 and 9 years of clinical
experience in breast imaging) in consensus. Image
interpretation was performed in two reading sessions:
(1) standard MR imaging and (2) dedicated axillary MR
imaging sequences. We analyzed axillary lymph nodes
first using standard MR imaging –sequence and then
-using dedicated axillary MR sequence. The minimum
interval between the reading sessions was 1 month to reduce
the possible bias caused by the likelihood of
readers remembering what they had previously read.
The readers were blinded to the result of other reading
session, clinical and histopathologic information.
The axillary lymph nodes were evaluated using standard
MR imaging sequence consisting of axial T2-
weighted and T1-weighted images obtained with fat saturation.
If lymph node was suspected of metastasis [10,
11, 13, 18], the most suspicious node was selected and
recorded for analysis. A lymph node was considered suspicious
if it had one or more of the following features:
(1) round or macrolobulated shape, which was determined
when a node larger than 4mm was not visible as
an oval structure on two contiguous images; (2) loss of
fatty hilum, with fat signal intensity not seen in the
node; (3) uneven cortex, when a focal increased cortical
thickness was noted but not placed in the center of the
node but placed on one side; or (4) lobulated margin,
when the node had an irregular outer contour. Using
both MR imaging sequences, a confidence level scale of
0 (definitely benign) to 4 (definitely malignant) was recorded
for each patient, by using the criteria as described
by Baltzer et al. [14]. In addition, the largest
dimension (LD) and the cortical thickness (CT) of the
lymph node were measured and the ratio between cortical
thickness and largest dimension of lymph node was
calculated. When there was no suspicious lymph node in
the axilla, the largest benign looking lymph node was selected
for analysis. Dedicated axillary imaging sequence
consisting of axial, fat saturated T1-weighted image was
also evaluated in the same manner.
Clinicohistopathologic analysis
The reference standard for axillary nodal status was a
combination of pathological results (n = 340) and clinical
follow-up results (n = 147) at least one year. The pathological
data were reviewed from samples obtained by
SLNB (n = 281), ALND (n = 38), core needle biopsy (n =
6) or fine needle aspiration (n = 15). Lymph node status
was recorded as benign, isolated tumor cells (size≤0.2
mm), micrometastases (> 0.2mm and ≤ 2.0 mm), or
macrometastases (> 2.0 mm). For the purposes of this
study, isolated tumor cells and micrometastases were
considered as negative. In addition, the clinical indications
for breast MR imaging was reviewed for each
patient.
Statistical analysis
Diagnostic performance parameters, including sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative
predictive value (NPV), were analyzed for standard
MR imaging and dedicated axillary imaging sequences,
using the confidence level scale. The confidence level
scale for axillary nodal status was dichotomized, with
lymph nodes scored 2 or lower considered as negative
and those scored 3 and higher as positive test result.
The diagnostic ability to identify patients with positive
lymph nodes was also assessed based on the area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), the
summary measure of the accuracy with AUC of 0.5, no
ability to diagnose, 0.7–0.8 acceptable, 0.8–0.9, excellent
and > 0.9 as outstanding performance. The diagnostic
performance of both sequences was compared using the
Exact binomial or Generalized score or McNemar’s test
and AUC was compared using the DeLong test.
A Mann-Whiney U test or Student’s t-test was used to
compare the quantitative measurements recorded (largest
dimension, cortical thickness, and the ratio of cortical
thickness to largest dimension) between positive
and negative axillary lymph nodes. A correlation coefficient
was calculated to evaluate the agreement of quantitative
features (largest dimension, cortical thickness and
the ratio of cortical thickness to largest dimension) between
standard MR imaging and dedicated axillary MR
imaging sequences. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered
statistically significant. All statistical analyses
were performed using SPSS software (version 23.0, Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences, Chicago, IL).
Result
Patient characteristics
Of the 487 women who underwent breast MR imaging,
68 (14.0%, 68/487) were node-positive and 419 (86.0%,
419/487) were node-negative. The clinical indications
for breast MR imaging included preoperative evaluation
for known breast cancers in 354 patients, surveillance
for women with a personal history of breast cancer in
106 patients, silicone implants or free injections in 14
patients, screening for high risk group with genetic
mutation in 4 patients, or others in 9 patients. Among
354 patients with known breast cancers, the mean tumor
size was 20.5 ± 16.6mm (range, 1–103 mm). The tumors
were predominantly invasive ductal carcinoma (222/354;
62.7%).
Diagnostic performance of standard and axillary MR
imaging for axillary lymph nodes
Table 1 summarizes the diagnostic performance parameters
of standard MR and dedicated axillary sequences for
the evaluation of axillary nodal status. The standard MR
sequence had the following diagnostic performance: sensitivity
of 64.7%, specificity of 94.0%, PPV of 63.8%, NPV
of 94.3% and accuracy of 89.9%. The dedicated axillary
sequence showed comparable diagnostic performance:
sensitivity of 66.2%, specificity of 93.3%, PPV of 61.6%,
NPV of 94.4% and accuracy of 89.5%. There were no statistically
significant differences between two sequences
in comparison of sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV and
accuracy (P > 0.05). The average AUCs were 0.794 for
standard MR (95% confidence interval (CI), 0.735–0.852)
and 0.798 for dedicated axillary sequence (95% CI,
0.740–0.855). The difference in AUC between two sequences
was not statistically significant (P = 0.825)
(Fig. 1).
Quantitative measurement of standard and axillary MR
imaging
Quantitative measurements, including the largest dimension
(LD) and the cortical thickness (CT) of the lymph
node and the ratio between CT and LD of lymph node,
are summarized in Table 2. Using standard MR sequence,
LD, CT and CT/LD ratio were found to be significantly
higher in the node-positive group than in the
node-negative group (all variables: P < 0.001). Using
dedicated axillary sequence, these three quantitative
measurements were also found to be significantly higher
in the node-positive group than in the node-negative
group (all variables: P < 0.001).
Cortical thickness (CT) proved to be the most discriminative
quantitative measurement to predict axillary
lymph node metastasis (Table 3). The AUCs for CT
were highest for both sequences, at 0.823 for the standard
MR and 0.846 for the dedicated axillary. The AUCs
for LD and CT/LD ratio were similar for both standard
MR (0.727 vs. 0.754, P = 0.598) and dedicated axillary sequences
(0.717 vs. 0.791, P = 0.155) (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3).
The intra-class correlation coefficients of LD, CT and
CT/LD ratio between two sequences were 0.949 (95%
CI, 0.940–0.957), 0.947 (95% CI, 0.937–0.956) and 0.747
(95% CI, 0.705–0.784), respectively (Fig. 4, 5 and 6). All
are > 0.70, which indicates strong agreement.
Discussion
Our study demonstrated that there was no significant
differences between standard MR and dedicated axillary
MR sequences in the evaluation of axillary lymph nodal
status. Using both imaging sequences, quantitative measurements
including the largest lymph node dimension,
cortical thickness and the ratio of cortical thickness to
largest dimension were significantly higher in the node-
positive group. In addition, cortical thickness proved to
be the most discriminative quantitative measurement to
predict positive lymph nodes using both sequences.
Axillary MR imaging are performed complementary to
breast MR routinely, mostly for staging of breast cancer
[19, 20]. A prior study reported that the role for MR is
limited in the preoperative staging of axillary in breast
cancer patients with poor sensitivity (43.0–50.0%), specificity
(78.0–84.0%) and accuracy (68.0–72.0%) [21] and
insisted only aggressive tumors or those with a later
stage will more often show accurate MR findings. According
to our results, standard MR and dedicated axillary
MR imaging sequences demonstrated similar
diagnostic performance to differentiate positive and
negative axillary lymph nodes in both screening and
diagnostic setting, with 64.7 and 66.2% sensitivity (P >
0.999), 94.0 and 93.3% specificity (P = 0.581), 94.3 and
94.4% NPV respectively (P = 0.715). Prior studies using
dedicated axillary coil reported a median sensitivity of
84.7% (range, 73.0–94.6%) and NPV of 95.0% (range,
78.0–98.0%) [10, 22–24]. In contrary, using a coil covering
both breast and axilla, lower median sensitivity of
82.0% (range, 33.3–97.0%) with NPV of 82.6% (range
1.9–95.7%) were observed [6, 7, 25–28]. Indeed, there
have been many various attempts to evaluate axillary
lymph nodes. A systemic review paper [5] concluded
that using unenhanced T1 weighted or T2 weighted and
USPIO enhanced T2*w sequences in combination with
dedicated axillary protocol allows most acceptable sensitivity
of 84.7% and NPV of 95.0%, allowing omission of
SLNB during surgery; that dedicated axillary protocol is
superior to standard protocol including both breast and
axilla in the same field of view. Axillary MR imaging is
often affected by respiratory movement artifacts from
the thoracic wall and discrimination between lymph
nodes and adjacent vasculatures can be challenging [15].
Though, with further technical refinement and improved
resolution of breast MR imaging, the use of breast coil
that covers the axillary region provide sufficient and
good imaging quality of axilla. Our results demonstrate
comparable sensitivity and NPV of standard MR imaging
for axillary lymph node evaluation for both screening
and diagnostic settings, that there is no added benefit of
dedicated axillary MR sequence, which justify for omission
of extra exam or MR scanning time.
Our results showed that cortical thickness is the most
discriminative feature of suspicious lymph nodes with
high AUC values, both using standard MR (0.823) and
dedicated axillary MR sequences (0.846). Using both imaging
sequences, largest lymph node dimension and the
ratio of cortical thickness to largest dimension were also
significantly higher in the positive lymph nodes. In
addition, largest lymph node dimension, cortical thickness
and the ratio of cortical thickness to largest dimension
using both imaging sequences revealed strong
agreement (all, > 0.70). Scaranelo et al. [6] reported that
a cortical thickness greater than 3mm was highly associated
with malignancy (P < 0.001) and was the most reliable
measurement to predict axillary metastasis, which is
concordant to our finding. In a study evaluating axillary
dedicated MR sequence, maximum cortical thickness,
short and long axis length, relative T2 value, absence of
fatty hilum (P < 0.001, respectively) and eccentric cortical
thickening (P < 0.003) were found to be significantly different
between positive and negative axillary lymph
nodes. When four of the previous findings were noted,
the specificity was about 90.0% [29]. Chung et al. also reported
similar results showing that the mean size of the
nodes in positive axillary lymph nodes is significantly
larger [30].
With increasing incidence of breast cancer screening,
abbreviated MR imaging has emerged which consists of
pre-contrast and one early post-contrast T1 weighted
series, post-contrast subtraction sequence and subtraction
reconstructed imaging data for interpretation. This
more simplified MR protocol decreases technologist and
magnet time, decrease radiologist reading time and decrease
overall cost, which makes breast MR a more viable
screening option. Previous studies have shown
similar cancer detection rates, PPV and/or NPV versus
conventional MR imaging [17]. We found that standard
MR imaging sequence demonstrate comparable high
diagnostic performance to dedicated axillary MR sequence,
suggesting standard MR imaging sequence alone
is sufficient for lymph node evaluation and omission of
dedicated axillary MR imaging sequence can be justified
in abbreviated MR protocol.
This study has several limitations. First, this was a
retrospective study and conducted in a single tertiary referral
center with a large number of known cancer patients
(72.7%). There may have been bias in the selection
of patients for this study. Second, our statistical test was
performed according to the number of patients affected
axillae instead of the total number of involved lymph
nodes. Thus, patients surgically treated with SLNB or
ALND were unable to obtain a precise correlation of the
visualized and/or interpreted lymph nodes. We assumed
that the pathologic lymph node of the most suspicious
node, assessed by imaging criteria, correlate with the
overall diagnosis. Third, the primary purpose of this
study was screening to identify whether the patient has
any positive lymph nodes or not, not in setting of staging
for breast cancer. Fourth, we excluded patients treated
with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, which may have caused
relatively low sensitivity. Lastly, breast MRI protocols
were non-uniform (1.5 T and 3 T) during the study
period, which may have affected diagnostic performance.
Image analysis was performed in the same manner, regardless
of the MRI systems.
Conclusion
Our study revealed that the diagnostic performance of
standard breast MR imaging sequence in the evaluation
of axillary lymph node is comparable to dedicated axillary
MR imaging sequence in women who underwent
breast MR imaging. Using standard MR imaging
sequence, we reliably classified node-positive versus
node negative patients. Our results demonstrate the justification
of omitting of dedicated axillary imaging sequence,
especially in the abbreviated breast MR for
breast cancer screening. Further studies should be performed
to evaluate the value of our results with respect
to guiding patient management regarding axillary lymph
nodes.