Introduction
Shared decision making is a bidirectional communication
process in which clinicians and patients collaborate
on making a health decision and discuss the available
options (based on the best available evidence), the benefits
and harms of each option, and the patient’s values,
preferences, and circumstances [1, 2]. As part of making
decisions about the prevention or management of a
health condition, patients need to know about more than
just treatment options; they also need to know about the
prognosis of the condition, with and without treatment.
Communication of prognostic information is essential
as it helps patients to know what may happen to their
health over time, to make appropriate preparations, and
to make informed decisions about whether to intervene
and if so, how. If prognostic information is not communicated
adequately, patients may have inaccurate expectations
about the likely course of their illness [3–5]. Poor
communication of prognostic information can also make
patients anxious, confused, and damage the relationship
between clinician and patient [6, 7].
Prognosis communication can be complex and challenging
for clinicians and patients. Clinicians sometimes
try to avoid or delay this kind of communication, while
patients often wait for their clinicians to initiate the process
[8]. As with the communication of treatment information,
a contributor to the challenge of communicating
prognostic information well is the difficulty that clinicians
and patients can have understanding relevant quantitative
information [9–11].
To facilitate discussion about prognosis, clinicians may
use visual means (such as a graph) to present the quantitative
information. Although there is a large body of
synthesized evidence on how to communicate the quantitative
benefits and harms of treatments, we are unaware
of any synthesis about the various visual presentations
that can be used to communicate quantitative prognostic
information.
Methods
The protocol of this systematic review is registered at
(CRD42020192564) and can be found in the Open Science
Framework osf.io/ze26g.
Objective
This systematic review aimed to identify and synthesize
research that has evaluated visual presentations that
communicate quantitative prognostic information to
patients or the public.
Information sources
We searched for studies in six databases: MEDLINE,
EMBASE, CINAHL, ERIC, PsycINFO, and the Cochrane
Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), each
from date of inception till December 2020. We used a tailored
search strategy for each database (see Additional
file 1). Forward and backward citation analysis of the
included studies was performed using Web of Science.
Eligibility criteria
Study types and participants
We included only studies with a quantitative design
that looked at the prognosis of any health condition
(real condition, hypothetical scenario, or fictitious
condition). The only participation restriction was the
exclusion of health professionals or health professional
students. Studies of mixed populations (e.g. health
professionals and patients) were eligible if data were
reported separately for the eligible group. There was no
limitation on study setting or publication language.
Interventions
Studies were eligible if they compared a visual presentation
(e.g. a graph, words and numbers displayed in
tabular format) with at least one another type of presentation
(e.g. another type of graph, or free text) to display
quantitative prognostic information and included
a specified time frame (e.g. over the next 5 years) or
time point (e.g. at 1 year). Prognostic information was
defined as information about the likelihood of any
future outcome in patients with a given health condition
including those who received no treatment (natural
history) or those who did.
Outcomes
Our primary outcome was comprehension of the presented
information that was assessed using questions
that required a quantitative answer (e.g. likelihood or
duration of the outcome). For this reason, only some
of the questions asked were eligible. Studies/data that
assessed comprehension with questions requiring qualitative
responses were ineligible. Secondary outcomes
included: preferences for any of the presentations evaluated;
satisfaction with the presentation; and behavioral
intentions relevant to the information presented
(e.g. intention to be screened).
Study selection
Two authors (EA and MB) independently screened the
titles and abstracts, and then the full text of potentially
included studies. Discrepancies were resolved through
consultation with the other two senior authors (CDM
and TH).
Data extraction and risk of bias assessment
Data were extracted into a custom-designed spreadsheet.
The studies’ characteristics (e.g., study settings,
sampling methods, study design) and participants’
characteristics (e.g., age, sex, educational level, health
literacy level, numeracy level, and the health condition
studied). Intervention details (including type of
presentation (e.g., bar graph), the presented information,
who delivered the information, how, where and
when the information was delivered), outcome details
(including the eligible outcomes, how they were measured
and at what timepoints) and result details (including
number of responses analysed, follow up rate,
results of eligible studies) are tabulated in the Additional
file 1 and show the data extracted. Two authors
(EA and MB) independently extracted relevant data
and assessed risk of bias of included studies using the
Cochrane Risk of Bias tool for randomized trials—version
2 (RoB2) [12]. Any discrepancies either in data
extraction or risk of bias assessment were resolved by
consulting the other two senior authors (CDM and
TH).
Analysis
Due to heterogeneity of the primary outcome measures
(comprehension) and visual presentations used, we
were unable to conduct a meta-analysis and therefore
report the results narratively. The percentage of participants
who answered each eligible question correctly
are reported separately for each question and we calculated
the average percentage correct across the eligible
questions in each study. In studies that did not report
the percentage correct for an individual question, we
extracted the overall percentage correct for all comprehension
questions as reported in the studies.
Modifications from the protocol
After reviewing the articles generated from our search,
we added explicit exclusion criteria that were not
detailed in our protocol. Studies that compared alternative
statistical formats (e.g. relative risk reduction vs.
absolute risk reduction) and studies that compared the
framing (i.e. positive or negative) of health information
were excluded as they have been previously synthesized
[13, 14]. Also excluded were studies that only compared
methods of wording free text for conveying prognostic
information. The eligibility of the primary outcome
measure was also clarified to include questions that
required participants to perform a quantitative calculation
and then select the answer from categorical or
dichotomous response options. The search strategy
(see Additional file 1) was slightly modified by adding
more MeSH terms (e.g., Comprehension, Knowledge,
Data Display, Communication, Perception, “Decision
Making, Shared”) at the request of reviewers during the
peer-review process. This resulted in no additional eligible
studies.
Results
Study selection
Our search identified 5648 articles across the databases
and 614 articles identified through forward and backward
citation analysis of the included studies (6262 in
total), 5133 remained after duplicates were removed.
After the full-text screening, we identified 9 articles: in
2 of these, 2 separate studies were reported, resulting in
11 eligible studies [15–23] (Fig. 1).
Characteristics of included studies
All 11 included studies were randomized trials. Seven
studies were conducted in the United States, 3 in Germany,
and 1 in the United Kingdom. The total number
of participants was 9737 (mean 885, range 120 to
2305). All participants were adults; 4 studies included
only men, 3 studies included only women, 3 included
both, and 1 did not report this. Eight studies were conducted
online and 3 face-to-face. Health information
in the interventions related to the prognosis of cancer
(9 studies), middle ear infection (1 study), and multiple
sclerosis (1 study). Details of the included studies are
presented in the Table of characteristics (see Additional
file 1).
Risk of bias assessment
The overall assessment of the risk of bias of the 11 studies
was judged at “some concerns” level. All included
articles were judged to have “some concerns” for at
least one domain of risk of bias. Ten studies had “some
concerns” for the selection of reported results and six
had “some concerns” for their randomization process.
(Fig. 2a, b).
Visual presentations evaluated
Details of the visual presentations evaluated are provided
in the Additional file 1 (Table of interventions).
Studies were grouped into 4 categories according to
the presentation type they used: 6 studies compared
a graphic format to another graphic format: 3 studies
compared a bar graph to a pictograph/icon array, 2
studies compared survival curves to mortality curves,
and 1 study compared two variations of pictographs
(the last is covered in “other comparisons”. Four studies
compared a graphic format to a tabular format (also
known as a ‘fact box’), Three studies compared a tabular
format to free text. (Fig. 3).
Primary outcome: comprehension
Graph versus graph (6 studies)
Bar graph versus pictograph (i.e. icon array) (3 studies)
Three studies compared bar graphs to pictographs
(see Fig. 4a). There was no statistically significant difference
in comprehension between these types of graphs
[17, 18, 21]. One of the studies enrolled 420 men and
randomized them to 1 of 8 graph variations communicating
the likelihood of recurrence of prostate cancer over
3-time points (including: 3 pictographs and 2 bar graphs
variations). It found that 89% of participants who viewed
pictographs (regardless of the variation shown) answered
comprehension questions correctly compared to 87% of
those who viewed bar graphs (regardless of the variation
shown) [17].
In a study on breast cancer prognosis, 1619 participants
were randomized to 1 of 4 graph variations (2 pictographs,
2 bar graphs), 51% of participants who viewed
pictographs (regardless of the variation) answered comprehension
questions correctly compared to 42% who
viewed bar graphs (regardless of the variation) [21]. In
a study with 682 people with multiple sclerosis, participants
were randomized to 1 of 4 graph variations (2 pictographs,
2 bar graphs). The question about prognosis
was answered correctly by 91% of those who viewed the
pictograph, compared to 64% who viewed the bar graph
[18].
Survival curves versus mortality curves (2 studies) Two
studies measured comprehension after presenting participants
with either survival curves or mortality curves
(Fig. 4b). A study on the communication of breast cancer
prognosis analyzed responses of 1461 participants
and found that there was no difference in comprehension
regardless of whether a survival or mortality curve was
presented [22]. A study of 451 participants, using a colon
cancer scenario, found that those who viewed survival
curves scored significantly better than those who viewed
mortality curves, with an average correct difference of
13%. A group of participants in the same study who were
shown both survival and mortality curves performed
slightly better than the group who only saw mortality
curves, but the difference was not significant [15].
Graph versus tabular format (i.e. fact box) format (4 studies)
Four studies compared pictographs to a tabular format
(Fig. 4c). Two studies (reported in the same article,
one conducted face-to-face and one online) used three
groups to compare a tabular format alone, to a tabular
format plus a single pictograph (that showed both benefits
and harms), to a tabular format plus two pictographs
(one showing benefits and one showing harms). In both
studies, the authors reported that the interventions had
a similar effect in facilitating comprehension. An average
of 74% of participants who viewed the tabular format
in the face-to-face study (75% in the online study) compared
to 80% who viewed the pictographs (results from
both pictograph formats combined) (60% in the online
study) correctly answered comprehension questions [20].
Another article reported two studies: a study communicating
prostate cancer screening information for male
participants and a study communicating breast cancer
screening for female participants. The study about prostate
cancer found that the use of a pictograph format
significantly improved comprehension (P = 0.003) compared
to a tabular format, with 72% and 61% of participants
answered correctly, respectively. Similar results
were reported in the breast cancer study, with 62% of
those who viewed the pictograph were able to answer
the questions correctly compared to 58% who viewed the
tabular format [19].
Tabular format versus text (3 studies)
Three studies compared a tabular format to a free text
format (Fig. 4d). Two studies (reported in the same
article) found no significant difference between using
a tabular format and free text to communicate prostate
cancer prognosis to male participants and prognosis
of breast cancer to female participants. In the prostate
cancer study, 64% of participants who viewed the text
format compared to 61% who viewed the tabular format
answered the questions correctly. In the breast cancer
study, 61% of those who viewed the text format answered
correctly compared to 60% of those who viewed tabular
format [19]. A study communicating prognosis of acute
middle ear infection with and without antibiotics found
that participants who saw a tabular format scored significantly
higher on comprehension questions than those
who saw a free text format (85% vs 72% correctly answering)
[16].
Other comparisons
Static formats were better understood than animated
formats when displayed online in a German web-based
study of 682 people with multiple sclerosis [18]. Displays
that contained less information were generally better
understood than those with more as found in two
studies conducted by the same author [21, 23]. One of
these found that pictographs with information about
the outcome of two treatment alternatives, compared to
those with four, were significantly better understood [21].
In the other study, pictographs that presented data for
only one outcome (survival only; the number of women
alive after 10 years who had treatment) were significantly
better understood than pictographs that presented information
about multiple outcomes (survival, mortality due
to cancer, mortality due to all causes) [23].
Secondary outcomes
Format preference (1 study)
In the study that randomized participants to 1 of 8 formats
(3 pictographs, 2 bar graphs, 1 line graph, 2 pie
graphs), participants preferred the bar graph and thought
they would understand it better than other formats. The
pictograph was rated the lowest on both preference and
expected understanding, regardless of the format they
were randomized to. Overall, there was no statistically
significant difference between graph preference and comprehension
in this study [17].
Satisfaction (2 studies)
In a study that compared 4 visual presentations (2 bar
graph variations, 2 pictograph variations), both the pictograph
formats (4-options pictograph and 2-options
pictograph) received statistically significantly higher satisfaction
scores compared to the 4-options bar graph.
However, even though participants were significantly
more satisfied with the 2-options bar graph compared
to the 4-options bar graph, the satisfaction scores were
not as high as for the pictograph formats [21]. In another
study, a pictograph that contained only survival data had
significantly higher satisfaction scores than a pictograph
showing multiple outcomes [23]. Participants of the
study involving middle ear infection prognostic information
reported being more engaged with the tabular format
compared to the free text format [16].
Behavioral intentions (4 studies)
Participants in the communication of breast cancer prognosis
study who viewed the survival-only pictograph
were statistically significant less likely to say that they
would have both chemotherapy and hormonal therapy
compared to those who viewed the multiple outcome
pictograph (P = 0.04) [23]. In a 3-arm study that used
colon cancer information to compare survival curves,
mortality curves, and both curves, participants who
viewed survival curves were more likely to choose a preventive
colectomy than an annual exam compared to the
other two groups [15]. In the study of providing middle
ear infection prognostic information, the format did not
affect participants’ recommendation to a family member
to use antibiotics [16]. Two studies on the communication
of prostate cancer prognosis screening outcomes
found no association between the type of presentation
and the intention to be screened for prostate cancer at
any measurement time point in two studies (one conducted
online, one conducted face to face) [20].
Discussion and conclusion
Discussion
Our main finding is that from the existing studies there
does not appear to be a single type of visual presentation
that is consistently superior over another for
improving the comprehension of quantitative prognostic
information for members of the public. In the
few studies that examined this, simpler formats (such
as one outcome instead of multiple, and fewer intervention
options presented at one time) were generally
better understood and achieved higher levels of satisfaction.
The impact of various types of visual presentations
on behavioral intention is inconsistent.
Many primary studies and reviews [9, 10, 13, 14,
24–31], have investigated various methods of communicating
treatment benefits and harms. While there
are similarities between the communication of treatment
benefits and harms and the communication of
prognosis information, the extent to which methods
identified as superior for communicating treatment
quantitative information are also suitable for facilitating
the comprehension of prognosis information is
unknown. Similar to the findings of a review of methods
of communicating quantitative treatment information
[9], we found little difference between bar graphs
and pictographs in facilitating comprehension and that
there is no superior single method for conveying quantitative
information.
Research on the comprehension of information from a
survival curve with different variations found that comprehension
was generally good across each variation [32].
Our review found inconsistent findings of the comparative
effect of survival and mortality curves for the comprehension
of prognosis information. However, we only
identified two studies that had examined this. Details of
the chosen curve, such as the complexity of information
and the time frame used in the curve, maybe as important
as the type of curve [33–37].
The strengths of our systematic review arise from the
rigorous method of systematically identifying, screening,
and reviewing the relevant literature. Our search was not
limited by language; however, studies that do not have an
English language title or abstract in the databases might
have been missed. Although we searched six databases
and conducted citation analysis of the included studies,
we may have missed eligible studies. A meta-analysis was
precluded due to heterogeneity of the included studies
as they used many variations of visual presentations and
comprehension was assessed with different measures.
Most of the included studies were conducted online,
using hypothetical scenarios with participants who did
not have the condition being presented. Studies involving
participants with the condition of interest may generate
different impacts on comprehension, satisfaction, and
decisions.
Few primary studies have compared the effectiveness
of different visual presentations on the comprehension
of quantitative prognostic information and more are
needed. Most of the existing studies used cancer scenarios
and so future research that explores other conditions
would address this research gap, as would head-to-head
studies that compare the different presentations. As the
superiority of any single visual presentation was not
established in this review, visual presentations should
be co-designed and piloted with the target population
before widespread use.
Conclusions
From the existing research, there is inconsistency about
the superiority of a particular visual presentation to use
when discussing quantitative prognostic information
with patients. Any of the existing visual presentations
that were identified in this review may be suitable to use
to aid comprehension.