Background
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19), a type of pneumonia
caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2(SARS-CoV-2) was known in December
2019 [1]. The patients showed typical symptoms such
as fever, cough, fatigue, and even respiratory failure [2,
3] especially for high-risk people with chronic disease
or decreased immunity [4]. With extremely high infectiousness,
COVID-19 confirmed cases have accumulated
to 83,597 in China till April 13, 2020 [5]. The Chinese
government took effective control measures including
scaling up diagnostic testing, isolating suspected cases,
classifying, tracking, and managing contacts of confirmed
cases and restricting mobility [6], limiting events
and gatherings, and calling for universal wearing of
masks. COVID-19 experienced an outbreak worldwide,
till April 13, 2020, the confirmed cases in the whole world
have been 1,773,084 with 111,652 deaths [5].
Medical studies have been conducted to investigate
COVID-19 globally. Clinical findings were analyzed via
different test methodologies [7], and in diverse groups
(e.g. children, pregnant patients, regular patients, critically
ill patients [8–12]). Modelling studies were applied
in different areas [13–16] and towards disparate directions,
e.g. control strategy interventions, dynamic
transmission, etc. [6, 15–17]. Clinical case studies were
conducted in a specific region, or a specific domain e.g.
risk factors [18, 19]. Virus-related features and distribution
analyses [20] were also investigated. Semantic and
geographical analysis towards COVID-19 trials were
completed to reveal the trends [21]. Liu et.al. completed
an ontology towards coronavirus named Coronavirus
Infectious Disease Ontology (CIDO) and targeting at
drug identification and repurposing [22].Plenty of techniques
(e.g. artificial intelligence, virtual reality, internet
of things (IoT), internet of medical things (IoMT), etc.)
were applied in COVID-19 related clinical and practical
research [23–26]. With the production of mass exponential
data, knowledge graphs covering genes, pathways,
and expression, etc. were constructed and various data
processing methods were applied for drug repurposing
and treatment including deep learning, graph representation
learning, neural networks, etc. [27, 28].
As COVID is causing increasingly great loss, researchers
in multiple areas especially in medical field strongly
demand for latest scientific publishment such as published
literatures. The literatures are conveyed in different
languages. However, it is simpler for people to search
resources with language they are used to [29], thus the
requirement for retrieval in different languages has
largely risen. Knowledge dissemination can be promoted
through automatic machine technique, for instance a
cross-lingual professional system. While more structured
machine-readable data should be fed to the intelligent
techniques such as deep learning model to realize further
data mining and ontology construction, and cross-lingual
terminology is necessary to be created. Additionally,
parallel machine-readable corpus would contribute
to more applications (e.g. machine translation). In this
study, we constructed a bilingual COVID terminology
named COVID Term aiming to accelerate the spread of
COVID knowledge across different countries, support
the bilingual retrieval requirement towards COVID-19,
and provide bilingual machine-readable data for intelligent
techniques.
Methods
To enable the reuse of terminology data for ontology
and knowledge graph construction, we referred to the
top-down strategy for building domain specific ontologies
[30, 31], and authoritative terminology system ICD,
SNOMED CT for terminology criteria establishment [32,
33]. The designed workflow included six steps, respectively
(1) Classification schema design (2) Concept representation
model building (3) Term source selection
and term extraction (4) Hierarchical structure construction(
5) Quality control (6) Web service. All the editing
part was performed on TBench, a work platform for
cross-lingual terminology system editing and maintenance
[34].
Classification schema design
The purpose of the classification schema design was to
define a certain scope of the whole terminology, focusing
on the important branches that need to be included. The
classification schema design should take multiple dimensions
of research in COVID-19 into consideration, e.g.
the research direction of epidemiology and a specific disease,
the data structure design, etc. Specifically, in terms
of epidemiology, 8 categories were proposed including
person status, affected group, disease distribution, disease
spreading, incidence, occurrence; etiology, and the
disease understanding [35]. Still, other information categories
were necessary to be mentioned (e.g. diagnosis
method and treatment technique) and the terminology
construction shared quite different emphasis compared
to epidemiological concern, more requirements have
to be considered especially when establishing a indexing-,
annotation-, and retrieval-oriented terminology
system. We also referred to other structure of terminology
system, e.g. SNOMED CT where body structure,
clinical finding, environment or geographical location,
event, observable entity, organism, specimen, substance,
etc. were incorporated. Since this category system was
designed mainly for clinical use and general medical field,
it might not be appropriate for a specific disease (e.g.
COVID-19). To get more comprehensive perspectives
for clinical and data researchers, we consulted experts in
medical informatics and achieved agreements. We then
developed 10 classification schema for the first level top
nodes involving disease, anatomic site, clinical manifestation,
demographic and socioeconomic characteristics,
living organism, qualifiers, psychological assistance, medical
equipment, instruments and materials, epidemic prevention
and control, diagnosis and treatment technique.
Concept representation model building
Referring to SKOS Simple Knowledge Organization System
[36], we designed a concept representation model
where all the terms were organized on the basis of its
core concept. As shown in the concept representation
model (Fig. 1), each core concept was assigned one particular
concept ID and three elements, i.e. definition,
term, and semantic type. The semantic type represents
the most similar category and meaning of one concept,
it is an efficient way to retrieve concepts and terms that
have a certain semantic type. Each term was designed
with attributes of term ID, lexical value (term content),
term source, preferred term flag (whether this term is
preferred term or synonym), and language. Semantic
type ID, its lexical value and language information were
introduced in semantic type. Definition involved lexical
value, definition source and language information.
In terms of relationships, each concept but leaf concept
has sub concept of another concept. Each concept not in
the top category is the sub concept of another concept.
Each concept has its term, definition and semantic type.
Each term is the term of one concept. Each definition is
the definition of one concept. Each semantic type is the
semantic type of one concept.
Term source selection and term extraction
A bilingual terminology system towards a worldwide
emergency disease was supposed to be correct, authoritative
and highly correlated to the theme, where exact
bilingual concepts, semantic types, etc. should be demonstrated.
Therefore, the information resources we took
were limited to authority publishment from the situation
report or document of World Health Organization, journal
articles such as preprint, open access, etc., nationwide
regulation, policy document, professional textbooks, etc.
Bilingual terms were mostly extracted from bilingual
WHO documents, textbooks, and related papers. Definitions
were located from textbooks and related papers
under most conditions.
Hierarchical structure construction
We adopted top-down and bottom-up synthesis approach
to formulate the final hierarchical structures. On the one
hand, related clinical classification architectures were
identified and reused in associated documentation, literatures,
textbooks (e.g. textbooks in epidemiology, virology,
and preclinical medicine), etc. On the other hand,
measures were taken for terms extracted from literatures
and other resources, i.e. synthesis from bottom up. Agile
model was adopted during the procedure, i.e. adjusting
the structure by adding, altering or deleting specific
substructures when necessary. The finalized hierarchical
structure (Fig. 2) was reviewed and assessed by one
expert on clinical medicine and one two professionals on
medical informatics.
Relationship and property development
Relationship and property of each concept were developed
in this step. Each concept was assigned with properties
including concept ID, term ID, bilingual semantic
type, Chinese preferred term, and English preferred term
as the obligatory items, and Chinese synonym, English
synonym, bilingual definition, definition source as alternative
items. We combined terms with same meanings as
one concept with different synonyms; integrated terms
within the same classification as one subset with various
concepts. The editing date and time were automatically
generated in the system. Among these properties,
concept ID and term ID could be directly linked to other
systems through automatic mapping; each definition was
required with a source for users to look up to. Synonyms
were not a prerequisite element but more synonyms
would help with the search scope and term location.
Quality control
To guarantee the correctness of the terminology, we
performed quality control after each round editing and
before each version update. After editing in each round,
two examiners with professional background and related
practice experience were invited to validate the accuracy
of the terminology. A third party with clinical experts
would be involved when disagreement was reached.
Before each releasing round, we performed quality control
via cross assessment, i.e. automatic checking and
expert review. The former was responsible for repeated
terms detection (i.e. repeated terms with different concept
identification), language detection (i.e. English terms
marked as Chinese or vice versa), abnormal character
detection (i.e. term that cannot be read by machine),
closed hierarchical relationship detection (e.g. whether
there is circularity in a hierarchical tree), hierarchical
depth detection (whether a term is too deep for users to
browse), spelling detection (whether there is questionable
spelling). The expert review covered classification
checking (whether the classification is appropriate from
professional perspective and whether a term is suitable
under a specific category) and content checking (whether
the definitions or synonyms of a certain term is correct
and related). Based on the positive feedback of quality
control, we updated and released the terminology online.
Web service
We built a website for COVID Term, making it available
for users to access each updated data version. For each
update round, enriched sub branches with abundant
information were required, where up to date COVID
resources e.g. the lancet coronavirus theme, NIH 2019
novel coronavirus theme, WHO COVID-19 theme, the
New England Journal of Medicine COVID-19 theme
[37–40], etc. were constantly followed by COVID team
to provide most recent terminology. The terminology
towards COVID-19 was named as COVID Term. Earlier
versions were also released on the PHDA (Population
Health Data Archive) [41].
Results
COVID term overview
We constructed a 6-level bilingual terminology system
for COVID-19 involving 464 concepts, 724 Chinese
terms, 887 English terms, 464 Chinese preferred terms,
464 English preferred terms, 260 Non-preferred Chinese
terms, 423 Non-preferred English terms, 42 Chinese
definitions, and 5 English definitions. The first-level category
was designed as disease, living organism, clinical
manifestation, diagnosis and treatment technique, qualifiers,
demographic and socioeconomic characteristics,
epidemic prevention and control, medical equipment,
instruments and materials, psychological assistance, and
anatomic site. Detailed term statistics were shown in
Table 1.
Concept distribution
In this 6-level structure, all first-level terms were root
nodes with leafs. There were 10 first-level terms, same
as first-level categories, 104 second-level terms, 180
third-level terms, 138 fourth-level terms, 31 fifth-level
terms, and 9 sixth-level terms. Sixth-level leaf nodes only
existed in category ‘Disease’, ‘Living Organism’, and ‘Anatomic
Site’. One example was ‘Living Organism—pathogen—
virus—coronavirus—human coronaviruses—severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2’. Concept distribution
in different categories was calculated. Concepts
in ‘Clinical Manifestation’, ‘Diagnosis and Treatment
Technique’, ‘Epidemic Prevention and Control’ ranked
top 3, which accounted for over half concepts, with proportion
respectively 20%, 18%, 14%. Concept distribution
was shown in Fig. 3.
Terminology property analysis
We performed data statistics on each property of every
category including concept, bilingual term count, bilingual
synonym count, and bilingual definition count
in descending order of concept. Concepts in category
‘Clinical Manifestation’ ranked first with 94 concepts,
together with 99 Chinese synonyms and 125 English
synonyms. Most English terms took a major proportion
in all properties among different categories. Few English
definitions were included in the system. Category ‘Qualifiers’
showed the most definitions as 15. Categories with
English synonyms over 50 were ‘Clinical Manifestation’,
‘Disease’, and ‘Diagnosis and Treatment Technique’ and,
as shown in Fig. 4.
Semantic type distribution
We assigned a semantic type for most of the concepts,
which mostly were the top second level term. For example,
the semantic type of either latex gloves or gloves
was labelled ‘Medical Protective Items’, representing its
semantic meaning. There were 18 semantic types in total
as illustrated. As seen in Fig. 5, the top 3 semantic types
were ‘Epidemic Prevention and Control’, ‘Disease’, and
‘Medical Protective Items’. Concepts in top half semantic
types covered nearly 80% of the whole terms. There was
only one terminology in pathological examination i.e.
biopsy. Different clinical stages were classified into the
semantic type ‘Clinical Trial’.patients in lack of medical resources are suffering from
the disease. With the constant enlargement of the epidemic
coverage, related data and information in various
types have been growing exponentially. Researchers
who did their survey on COVID-related knowledge have
strong requirements for information retrieval in different
languages, as a result, we created this bilingual terminology
system-COVID Term. We referred to authoritative
terminology system e.g. ICD, SNOMED CT for their
structure design. However, there is obvious differences
between COVID Term and them. ICD is focused on diseases
which brings benefit for statistical analysis in classification.
SNOMED CT is focused on clinical field, which
is aiming at electronic exchange of clinical health information
and interoperability. Both ICD and SNOMED
CT are designed for general medical field with different
specific purposes. For a specific disease, more exquisite
concept granularity is needed. Consequently, ontology
aiming at drug repurposing towards COVID-19 were
constructed. COVID Term is a bilingual terminology
focused on only COVID-related terms, meeting multilingual
retrieval requirements in this specific disease and
providing parallel bilingual data for machine algorithms
and applications such as information extraction.
We constructed a 6-level 10-category COVID-focused
terminology system named COVID Term by collecting
and integrating highly related bilingual concepts, synonyms,
definitions, and semantic types. 464 bilingual preferred
terms, 724 Chinese terms, 887 English terms were
included in the terminology system, where each term was
classified into a category involving Diagnosis and Treatment
Technique, Epidemic Prevention and Control, Psychological
Assistance, Clinical Manifestation, Qualifiers,
Disease, Anatomic Site, Living Organism, Medical Equipment,
Instruments and Materials, and Demographic and
Socioeconomic Characteristics. In addition, we provided
simple knowledge graphs to illustrate their relationship
and built a website so that terminology dataset could be
open accessible to all users.
Application prospects
COVID Term is a terminology dataset applicable for
people from all over the world, despite careers, ages, and
nationalities, which can be used in many applications
and senarios. For people with the cross-lingual requirements,
it would support knowledge dissemination and
promote scientific achievement sharing towards COVID-
19. Furthermore, front-line physicians, clinicians, and
other clinical staff could directly look up to the Term as
a dictionary, quickly obtaining appropriate ways of specific
professional vocabulary aiming at COVID-19 and its
definition in different languages. With the continuously
increasing demands for scientific discovery of COVID-
19, retrieval of high recall and high precision is supposed
to be supported for information accessing [42].
COVID Term plays a critical role in this part since all the
preferred terms, synonyms, bilingual counterparts and
related definitions can be enriched and expanded to the
necessary query schemas when searching for literatures.
In this way, more scientific result, publishment, and
achievement can be widely accessible to users in need,
especially for those who desire to know information from
cross countries (e.g. USA and China). COVID Term can
also be viewed as a cross-lingual database or dataset,
the requirement for which has always been proposed
to reduce language ambiguity and realize knowledge
transmission [43]. For instance, it is a specific parallel
corpus prepared for machine translation algorithm and
application.
For people with natural language processing requirements,
COVID Term could be used in multiple conditions
especially via NLP techniques. In one case, when
performing data mining in COVID-related medical data,
clinical electronic health record is a solid and important
choice for its abundant information. However, it could
only be automatically used when the unstructured text
data are transformed to the structured data, COVID
Term could be used for information extraction and transformation.
In another case, the publisher, data broker,
scientific researchers can use COVID Term in the automatic
indexing or annotation of medical documents
e.g. biomedical literature, which is also known as coding
and is pervasively applied in influential terminology
or ontology systems such as ICD, SNOMED CT, UMLS,
etc. Name entity recognition could be carried out using
the data already labelled in COVID Term for not only
electronic health records but also more other medical
information resources. Also, COVID Term can provide
support for those COVID-related medical documents
requiring classification management.
For people with knowledge organization and ontology
system construction requirements, we could take maximum
advantage of COVID Term in different operations
settings and scenarios. Medical informatics scientists,
analysts, and other data processing technicians could
construct COVID ontology by reusing COVID Term
directly, thus providing functions such as data integration
and data standardization [44]. Most existed terminology
or ontology system (e.g. SNOMED CT, ICD) are aiming
at general medical field thus might lack information
of this newly-occurred disease. COVID Term could be a
supplement for these types of systems with multilingual
service. Since the data and properties could be seen as
the relationship in COVID Term, more comprehensive
knowledge graph construction could be completed via
the integration of existing simple small-scale knowledge
graphs, where automatic question and answering system
for public could be supported by the knowledge network.
For instance, if the question is proposed as “what image
tests do I need to take for COVID-19?” the answer should
involve “Chest imaging”, “chest X-ray” or other imaging
diagnostic methods in COVID Term”. In addition, the
knowledge graph can also provide assistance of knowledge
reasoning and decision making for clinicians, (e.g.
inferring a potential disease given existed symptoms).
Limitations and future studies
Currently, there are only 42 Chinese definitions and 5
English definitions included in the system. More definitions
need to be integrated. With the growing data generated
from all over the world, more classifications should
be included and more relationships are supposed to be
designed. For future work, we would continue collecting
related terms including the gene terms, expression
terms, pathway terms, constructing more mature systems,
and designing more interfaces applicable to various
platforms. Also, we plan to integrate our data according
to the mapping criteria and format of OBO Foundry
[45] and submit the data as a complement to the existed
systems.
Conclusions
To promote the COVID-19 related bilingual information
retrieval, information dissemination, data reuse through
intelligent techniques, we constructed a COVID focused
terminology system at vocabulary level in the name of
COVID Term. COVID Term is a bilingual terminology
system including 464 bilingual COVID related concepts,
each with bilingual preferred term, concept ID, and
other alternative properties such as bilingual synonyms,
bilingual definitions, and semantic type. All terms were
accessible through the website, which provided search,
navigate, browse, download, and visualization services,
etc. COVID Term would promote knowledge dissemination
and contribute to advanced intelligent techniques
applications.