Kidney transplantation is currently the optimal kidney
replacement therapy for the treatment of patients with
advanced kidney disease compared to haemodialysis and
peritoneal dialysis [1]. In 2018, the annual number of kidney
transplant recipients in China was 13,029 [2]. After
kidney transplantation, patients should take medication
for their whole life, nevertheless, complex medication
regimens [3], medication-related side effects [4], and the
lack of professional self-care knowledge and guidance in
these patients [5], could lead multi-complications [6] and
increase readmission rates [5], furthermore, impair the
Quality of Life (QoL) [7].
Previous studies showed that transitional care could
reduce the complication rate and readmission rate and
improve the quality of life in kidney transplant [8, 9].
High-quality indexes for effectiveness evaluation could
promote quality of nursing care because it was not
only to assess the quality of transitional care but also
to identify the insufficiencies in existing transitional
care. However, at present, there are no standard evaluation
indexes and debatable scientific of existing indexes
in chronic disease transitional care in China [10]. Some
researchers have explored the construction of a standardized
evaluation index system in people with stroke
[11], coronary heart disease [12] and other diseases, and
some researchers have also explored the construction of
a transitional care evaluation index system for the entire
chronic disease population [13]. However, in the field
of kidney transplant recipients, a standardized and systematic
index system for evaluating the effectiveness of
transitional care has not been developed, and the index
system for evaluating the chronic disease population is
not disease-specific and lacks evidence-based studies.
Therefore, present study used the Omaha system as
the theoretical framework and Delphi method combined
with analytic hierarchy process (AHP) to construct an
index system for evaluating the effectiveness of transitional
care in kidney transplant recipients.
Methods
Objective
The objective of this study is to provide a reference for
scientific and effective evaluation of transitional care in
kidney transplant receipeints and promote the improvement
of nursing quality.
Description of a research group
There were six team members in the research group,
including two graduate nursing students, one associate
professor of kidney transplant nursing research, one
director of the kidney transplant unit, one head nurse of
the kidney transplant unit, and one expert related to scale
statistics. The main tasks of the research team included:
review of relevant literature, preliminary construction
of the evaluation index entry pool, selection of experts,
preparation and distribution of expert correspondence
forms, and collation and analysis of expert opinions.
Inclusion criteria of correspondence experts
Experts were selected by snowball sampling method
in China. Inclusion criteria for experts were: (1) Nursing
experts: Intermediate or above title, who have conducted
research related to kidney transplantation and/or
transitional care; 10 years or more in the field of nursing
clinical/management/psychology/education; bachelor’s
degree or above; (2) Clinical medicine experts: above
intermediate title, 10 years or more in kidney transplantation
clinical work; master’s degree or above; (3) All
included experts were interested in supporting the study
and could guarantee sustained attendance for the duration
of the present study.
Development of evaluation indicators system
An initial effectiveness evaluation index system consisting
of 5 primary indicators, 19 secondary indicators, and
61 tertiary indicators was developed through literature
review and patient interviews.
Systematic literature reviews
The keywords "renal transplant*/kidney transplant*/
renal transplant recipients/kidney transplant recipients,
transitional care/continuity of care/continuing nursing/
patient discharge planning/discharge planning/telemedicine/
comprehensive care/multidisciplinary care" were
searched in electronics database. Based on the systematic
literature review, the Omaha system was used as the
theoretical framework, and 42 questions in four major
domains were referred to the Omaha problem classification
system, which were combined with the effectiveness
evaluation indexes and disease characteristics in the literature
to form a preliminary pool of entries for evaluating
the effectiveness of transitional care for kidney transplant
recipients.
Patient interviews
A comprehensive understanding of kidney transplant
recipients’ experiences of transitional care and the indicators
of transitional care effectiveness that transplant
recipients consider important were obtained through
interviews with transplant recipients, and the views of
transplant recipients were considered in the construction
of the indexes of transitional care effectiveness. Patients
for this interview had to be 18 years or older. All patients
provided their written informed consent in accordance
with the Helsinki declaration.
Eleven selected patients were interviewed after their
clinic follow-up. The outline of the interview included:
(1) What is your current health status (physical symptoms,
mental status and social activities)? (2) What are
the indicators that concern you when you get the test
report at the follow-up? (3) What changes have occurred
in your habits, social activities, and perception of the
disease after the transplant? (4) What are the issues that
were important to you since your discharge from the hospital
but were ignored by the medical staff?
Correspondence from experts
Expert correspondence form included 3 parts. First, the
purpose, significance, theoretical basis and related concepts
of present study; second, content consultation:
consisting of indicators and scores, experts were invited
to rate the importance of the entries, based on the Likert
5-point scale, from "unimportant" to "very important".
Each level of indicators was left a blank column
for additional description and recommendations; third,
expert authority scale: including basic information of
experts, questionnaire of judgment basis and questionnaire
of content familiarity. The questionnaires were distributed
by both email and on-site research. Experts of
correspondence had to be 18 years or older.
In present study, indicators with a mean importance
assignment > 4 and a coefficient of variation < 0.2 [14]
were retained, and the indicators were selected by combining
both expert opinions and discussions of the project
team.
Statistical methods
SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was
used for data analysis. The general profile of the experts
was expressed by frequency. The degree of expert opinion
coordination was expressed as coefficient of variation
(CV) and coordination coefficient (Kendall’s W).
The expert positivity coefficient was expressed by the
questionnaire recall rate. The degree of expert authority
was expressed by the expert authority coefficient
(Cr), Cr = (familiarity coefficient + judgment basis coefficient)/
2 [15]. Familiarity was categorized as unfamiliar
(0.2 points), somewhat unfamiliar (0.4 points), somewhat
familiar (0.6 points), very familiar (0.8 points),
and proficient (1.0 points) [16]. Judgment score was
assessed according a previous study [17]. Yaaph10.0 software
(AHP program) was used to calculate the weight
and consistency ratio (CR) of each index. The combination
weight is calculated by applying the multiplicative
method, that is, the product of the original weight of the
indicator within the level and the combination weight
of its higher-level indicators. For a level 1 indicator, the
original weight is the combination weight.The weight of
the indicator represents the relative importance of the
indicator in the overall indicator system [18, 19]. Generally,
the more important the evaluation indicator is, the
higher the weight value is.
Results
Correspondence experts involved
Basic information
Twenty-one experts were initially selected as correspondence
experts, and after communication finally 19 experts
participated in the study. These experts were from 10
tertiary hospitals and 1 higher education institution in 8
provinces. Demographic data on gender, age, work experience,
academic degree, job title, and posts of participated
experts had been summarized in Table 1.
Positive level of experts
In the first-round, twenty-one (n = 21) questionnaires
were distributed and 19 were returned, with a recall rate
of 90.48%. In the second-round, nineteen (n = 19) questionnaires
were distributed and 19 were returned, with a
recall rate of 100%.
Degree of authority of experts
The coefficient of expert familiarity (Cs) was 0.89 ± 0.14,
the coefficient of judgment basis (Ca) was 0.90 ± 0.07,
and the coefficient of authority (Cr) was 0.90 ± 0.09.
The degree of expert coordination
The Kendall’s consistency coefficients of the first-round
experts for the primary, secondary, tertiary and overall
indicators were 0.20 (p = 0.004), 0.24 (p < 0.001), 0.27
(p < 0.001) and 0.25 (p < 0.001), respectively (Table 2). The
Kendall’s consistency coefficients of the second round
of experts for the primary, secondary, tertiary and overall
indicators were 0.24 (p = 0.001), 0.34 (p < 0.001), 0.24
(p < 0.001) and 0.24 (p < 0.001), respectively (Table 2).
Results of expert consultation
In the first-round of expert consultation, the mean of
the primary indicators was 4.26 to 4.84, and the coefficient
of variation was 0.10 to 0.17; the mean of the secondary
indicators was 3.89 to 4.95, and the coefficient of
variation was 0.05 to 0.24; the mean of the tertiary indicators
was 3.63 to 4.95, and the coefficient of variation
was 0.05 to 0.23.
According to the selection criteria and experts’ opinions,
after the discussion of the research group, 2 indexes
were revised in the first-level indexes. 2 indexes were
added, 5 indexes were deleted, and 2 indexes were revised
in the second-level indexes. 14 indexes were deleted,
5 indexes were added and 2 indexes were revised in the
third-level indexes (Table 3).
After the second-round of consultation, the mean of
primary indicators varied from 4.05 to 4.74 with coefficients
of variation of 0.10 to 0.15; the mean of secondary
indicators varied from 3.63 to 4.95 with coefficients
of variation of 0.05 to 0.25; the mean of tertiary indicators
varied from 3.95 to 5.00 with coefficients of variation
of 0.00 to 0.21. After the research group’s discussion, 2
indictors in the second-level indexes were added and 4
tertiary indicators were deleted (Table 4). Details of the
result of two rounds of correspondence refer to Additional
file 1.
The final evaluation index system of 5 first-level
indexes, 16 second-level indexes, and 48 third-level
indexes for the evaluation of the effectiveness of kidney
transplant recipients transitional care is shown in
Table 5. The consistency test CR values for the total ranking
of first-, second-, and third-level indexes ranged from
0.000 to 0.05, all < 0.1 [20].
Discussion
Analysis of the scientific and reliability of the evaluation
index system
The Omaha system is one of the standardized languages
of nursing recognized by the American Nurses Association
and includes three parts, which are an assessment
component (Problem Classification Scheme), a
care plan/services component (Intervention Scheme),
and an evaluation component (Problem Rating Scale
for Outcomes). Among them, the problem classification
scheme includes a total of 42 common problems
in four domains: environmental, psychosocial, physical
and health-related behaviors. Wong et al. (2004) found
that a health status record form of erminally ill patients
established by a modified Omaha’s problem classification
scheme could assess the effectiveness of care from
various aspects of environmental psychological and
physiological behaviors [21]. Wei et al. (2019) formulated
a transitional care evaluation system for breast
cancer patients based on literature research, combined
with Omaha’s system, expert meetings, and through
Delphi consultation [22]. The preliminary application
showed the practicality and scientific validity of the
system. Therefore, the Omaha system can be used for
the construction of the evaluation index system and
can reflect the problem more comprehensively, and
the choice of the theoretical framework of this study
is scientific. The scientific and disease-specific nature
of the index system was fully reflected through an
extensive literature review of literature related to transitional
care interventions for kidney transplant recipients,
extraction of effectiveness evaluation indicators,
semi-structured interviews with transplant recipients,
clarification of transplant recipients’ experiences and
expectations of transitional care, and supplementation
of the index system content.
In this study, based on modified Delphi method,
selected correspondence experts were from 8 provinces
across China, including nurse leaders/nurses of
kidney transplantation units, department vice directors/
directors, and professors of colleges, who had
unique insights into kidney transplantation transitional
care and follow-up work, and had more in-depth studies
on the Omaha system, with good representation
of experts; the recall rates of the two rounds of correspondence
questionnaires were 90.5% and 100%,
indicating that the experts were more active in this
study. The Cr value of the expert consultation was
0.90, reflecting the higher authority of the experts; the
experts in the two rounds of consultation had significant
agreement on the included indicators (all p < 0.05),
and the consultation results were credible. In order to
make the subjective data of expert judgment more scientific,
hierarchical analysis was used to statistically
process the expert judgment. Hierarchical analysis is a
multi-criteria decision-making thinking that combines
qualitative and quantitative wants, which could be
compatible with the Delphi survey technique to solute
problems in term of multi-level indicator systems or
decision that can not be soluted by quantitatively [23].
In this study, the consistency test was used to assess
the logical consistency of the judgment matrix and was
expressed as the CR. It was generally considered that if
CR < 0.1, the degree of inconsistency of the judgment
matrix was within the accepted range, indicating that
the weights of indicators at all levels were acceptable.
Content analysis of the evaluation index system
The final evaluation index system of the effectiveness
of transitional care for kidney transplant recipients
in this study included 5 first-level indexes,
16 second-level indexes, and 48 third-level indexes.
The primary indicators are ranked by weight: physiological
domains = psychological domains > health
behavior-related domains > social environment
domains > satisfaction.
The highest weight coefficients of 0.30 were assigned
to the physiological and psychological domains, indicating
that experts considered the physiological and psychological
domains to be equally important in evaluating the
effectiveness of transitional care in kidney transplantation.
Wang et al. (2017) found that the health outcomes
of patients with chronic diseases were the most important
evaluation index of the effectiveness of transitional
care. The indexes of both physical and psychological
domains constructed in present study were health outcomes,
which are consistent with their findings [13].
In the physiological domains, the weight of secondlevel
indexes "transplant kidney function" (weight = 0.13)
and "infection status" (weight = 0.10) were the highest
two indexes, indicating that these two indexs are critical
to the physical health outcomes of transplant recipients.
Transplant kidney function directly associated with
the condition of the transplanted kidney and predict the
survival of the transplanted kidney [24], therefore, maintaining
transplanted kidney function was the primary
objective of transitional care and transplant kidney function
was the indicator of evaluating the effectiveness of
transitional care. Transplant recipients were highly susceptible
to infections due to the effects of immunosuppression.
Studies had shown that approximately 80% of
recipients had at least one infection within 1 year after
kidney transplantation, with pulmonary and urinary tract
infections being the main types of infections [25, 26]. It
is suggested that the education of transplant recipients
on the recognition of early symptoms of infection and
infection precautions in the transitional care should be
strengthen.
The highest weight value (weight = 0.22) was assigned
to the secondary indicator "positive psychological state"
in the psychological domains, indicating that the experts
considered the positive psychological state of the transplant
recipient to be important. The postoperative psychological
state of kidney transplant recipients was
greatly influenced by the functional state of the transplanted
organ in vivo and was prone to more psychological
problems [27]. Along with the development of
positive psychology, the guidance of positive emotions
in transplant recipients should be strengthened in transitional
care, and the development of positive psychological
qualities in kidney transplant recipients should be
emphasized to promote physical and mental health [28].
The weighting coefficient of the health behavior-related
domains was 0.20, which play an important role in the
evaluation of the effectiveness of transitional care. In present
study, the health-related behavior domains of the
Omaha problem classification system were adjusted and
integrated with disease characteristics, and the results
showed that the secondary indicators "medicationrelated
adherence" (weight = 0.07) and "regular follow-up
and self-monitoring" (weight = 0.07) were equally important
in the health-related behavior domains. The regular
long-term administration of immunosuppressive drugs
and regular outpatient follow-up in kidney transplant
recipients are the two main features that distinguish
them from other surgical patients [29]. Kidney transplant
recipients need to take immunosuppressive drugs for life,
and the study has shown [30] that the longer the posttransplant
period, the poorer the adherence to immunosuppressive
drugs in kidney transplant recipients, and
that poor adherence can lead to rejection and failure of
the transplanted kidney. Therefore, improving medication
adherence in transplant recipients is an important
goal of transitional care and medication adherence is an
important indicator of outcome evaluation. Long-term
use of immunosuppressive drugs is a risk factor for new
complications such as diabetes and pulmonary infections
after transplantation [26, 31], and regular follow-up
and self-monitoring of transplant recipients should be
emphasized to achieve early detection and diagnosis as
well as early treatment. It was reminded that we should
strengthen the education and training of transplant
recipients’ self-monitoring ability to improve their selfmanagement
awareness and ability in the transitional
care.
The present study was combined the assessment of
social health and the assessment of the environment,
which was different from Omaha system. After discussion
with experts and reviewing the literature, it was
concluded that the first-level index of social environment
could include the living environment, health care
resource utilization, and social function [32, 33]. In this
study, the former secondary indicator "social activities"
should have been removed according to the screening
criteria. However, drug side effects and complications
can impair a kidney transplant recipient’s ability to participate
in daily social and recreational activities, so
social activity is a crucial outcome for kidney transplant
recipients because it is a predictor of kidney transplant
recipients’ ability to return to daily life [34]. Two clinical
care specialists were called for further consultation and
agreed to retain and recommend modification to social
function. This indicator was retained and renamed to
"social function" in accordance with the experts’ opinion.
The weighting coefficient of satisfaction was 0.06,
indicating that experts considered satisfaction to be
less important than other level 1 indicators, which may
be related to the subjective nature of satisfaction. One
expert stated that patient experience should be distinguished
from quality of care and that the level of care
should not be too dependent on the subjective feelings
of patients.
In addition, present study was constructed as a gross
indicator, and the appropriate indicators or weights
should be adjusted for transplant recipients of different
ages. For example, elderly transplant recipients have
a higher incidence of post-transplant diabetes mellitus
[35], lower medication adherence [36], and greater
susceptibility to infection [37] compared to young and
middle-aged transplant recipients, so the weight of
indicator "blood glucose" may need to be higher for
elderly transplant recipients, and the weight of indicators
related to medical resource utilization, family
and social support, and medication adherence may
be higher. Also, indicators related to the assessment
of frailty and cognitive impairment may be increased.
Based on the present study, the weighting of the indicators
may be increased or decreased for different age
groups in order to better match the clinical application.
Limitations
Expert consultation has the limitation of population
selection, and this study has tried to select representative
experts as much as possible, but it is undeniable
that a different group of experts may get different
results. This study can only represent the importance of
the selected experts for the indicators considered.
Conclusion
This study used the Omaha system as the theoretical
framework, combined with literature review, semistructured
interviews, expert consultation and hierarchical
analysis to construct a scientific and systematic
index system for evaluating the effectiveness of transitional
care for kidney transplant recipients. This index
system also provides the evidence for nursing staff to
determine the priority of transitional care when making
decision. In future, a preliminary clinical experiment
is going to be conducted to examine the effects of this
index system on transitional care in kidney transplant
recipients.
