Background
Congenital scoliosis is caused by spine abnormalities
that lead to imbalanced growth. A frequent cause
is a single hemivertebra as a unilateral failure of formation.
Because of local deformity and asymmetric
loads, unaffected neighboring vertebrae subsequently
show asymmetric growth. This congenital anomaly,
apart from causing adverse effects on cardiopulmonary
function, also causes psychological distress [1].
Nonsurgical treatment for hemivertebra is seldom
successful; 75% of the curves are progressive and only
5–10% can be treated with bracing [2]. Early surgical
intervention can mitigate deformity progression and
psychological stress [3]. Surgical treatment modalities
include in situ posterior spinal fusion, combined anterior
and posterior in situ spinal fusion, hemivertebra
resection [4], and guided growth procedures such as
growing rods [5], Vertical Expandable Prosthetic Titanium
Rib (VEPTR, SYNTHES Spine) [6], and Shilla [7]
procedures.
Posterior thoracolumbar hemivertebra resection and
short-segment fusion provides satisfactory deformity
correction and rigid stabilization, with markedly
less surgical time and fewer complications than other
procedures [8]. The first long-term follow-up of postsurgical
outcomes for this treatment was reported by
Chang et al. in 2015 [9], for 18 congenital scoliosis
patients with a mean follow-up of 11.4 years; however,
the hemivertebrae location was not reported. Overall,
long-term follow-up data are limited for this surgery.
Thoracolumbar region was the transition area between
fixed thoracic segment and relatively motional lumbar
segment, where facet joints change from coronal to
sagittal plane and the spine alignment change from lordotic
to kyphotic form. Therefore, this study aimed to
determine surgical outcomes of posterior thoracolumbar
hemivertebrae resection and short-segment fusion
with pedicle screw fixation for treatment of congenital
scoliosis with a minimum of 5-year follow-up. Radiographic
outcomes as well as intraoperative and postoperative
complications were recorded. We believe
that our study of the clinical efficacy of thoracolumbar
hemivertebra resection and short segment fixation is
of guiding significance for clinical treatment.
Methods
This retrospective study analyzed 27 consecutive patients
with congenital scoliosis secondary to thoracolumbar
hemivertebra who underwent posterior thoracolumbar
single hemivertebra resection; transpedicular, shortsegment
fixation; and fusion from January 2007 to January
2015 with over 5-year follow-up. The corresponding
author performed all surgeries. All patients were advised
regarding possible surgical outcomes and signed written
informed consent before surgery. The institutional review
board of the authors’ hospital approved this study.
Inclusion criteria were (1) congenital spinal deformity
caused by a single hemivertebra requiring surgical treatment
(curve magnitude: > 25° and/or with fast progression,
defined as documented progression of the curve
of > 5° in 6-month follow-up and/or failure of conservative
treatment); (2) hemivertebra located in thoracolumbar
(T–L) region (T11–L2); (3) short-segment fixation
and fusion (≤ 6 levels); and (4) > 5 years of radiographic
follow-up after initial surgery. Exclusion criteria were (1)
anterior approach, (2) operative approach using hooks
as anchors, (3) > 1 hemivertebra or in combination with
other congenital spinal deformities, (4) congenital kyphosis
without scoliosis, and (5) previous spinal surgery.
Standard standing long-cassette anterior–posterior and
lateral radiographs were performed preoperatively, postoperatively,
at 2-year follow-up, and at final follow-up
(minimum of 5 years postoperatively) (Fig. 1). Operative
reports and medical records were reviewed for operative
and demographic data and any complications.
Radiographic assessment
Whole-spine radiographs were reviewed by an independent
observer to measure deformity. Curves measured in
the coronal plane (Figs. 2 and 3) included segmental scoliosis,
total main scoliosis, compensatory cranial curve,
compensatory caudal curve, trunk shift, and shoulder
balance. Segmental scoliosis was measured from the
upper vertebral endplate above the hemivertebra to the
lower endplate below the hemivertebra. Total main scoliosis
was the maximum scoliosis angle between the two
most tilted vertebrae. Compensatory cranial curve and
the compensatory caudal curve were also measured.
Trunk shift was measured as the perpendicular distance
from the sacrum center to the plumb line drawn from the
midpoint of the seventh cervical vertebra (C7). Shoulder
balance was evaluated using radiographic shoulder
height, defined as the difference in soft tissue shadows
directly superior to acromioclavicular joints on both
sides, designated positive (+) when the left shoulder was
higher and negative (−) when the right shoulder was
higher.
Segmental kyphosis (SK) and sagittal balance were
measured in the sagittal plane (Fig. 4). SK was measured
from the upper endplate above the hemivertebra to the
lower endplate below the hemivertebra. Sagittal balance
was measured as the distance from the C7 plumb line to
a perpendicular line drawn from the posterosuperior corner
of the sacrum, designated as positive (+) when the
plumb line was anterior and negative (−) when posterior
to the posterosuperior corner of the sacrum [10].
Surgical technique
Hemivertebra resection was by the single-stage posterior
approach with fusion of the immediately adjacent
vertebrae using transpedicular instrumentation [10]. A
standard midline incision was created with patients in
the prone position. Pedicle screws were inserted into
normal upper/lower vertebrae. A pre-contoured rod
was connected to the screws on the convex side. Posterior
hemivertebra elements and adjacent levels were
removed to expose the pedicle and nerve roots above
and below. Resection of posterior elements was performed
at the end to protect the dural sac and cord.
The anterior hemivertebra was exposed using blunt dissection.
A wedge osteotomy was performed from the
convex to concave side. Using a rongeur, osteotome,
curette, and abrasive drilling, the anterior vertebral
body was hollowed. Upper and lower discs, including
cartilage endplate, were removed from the bleeding
bone. Gradual compression was applied while leaving
the concave rod unlocked until the gap was closed.
Anterior reconstruction with a titanium mesh cage was
performed if large hemivertebra complicated the gap
closure by compression. If high compressive force was
necessary to correct deformity, especially pronounced
kyphosis, one to two additional segments were permanently
or temporarily included in instrumentation
to avoid overloading the pedicles and thereby causing
pedicle fracture. Caution was taken to ensure that exiting
nerve roots and dura were not impinged. Finally,
decortication of posterior elements was performed.
Autologous bone from the hemivertebra was used for
posterolateral fusion.
Curve progression was defined a curve newly developed
with a > 20° increase in the Cobb angle, with the
apical vertebra located ≥ 2 levels from the lower instrumented
vertebra. The most common diagnostic criteria
of adding-on were (1) progressive increase in the number
of vertebrae included within the distal curve, (2)
with either > 5 mm increase in the first vertebra deviation
below the instrumentation from the center sacral
vertical line (CSVL), or (3) > 5° increase of angulation of
the first disc below the instrumentation [11]. Another
study considered that diagnostic criteria for adding-on
phenomenon should include the Cobb angle increase
in the lumbar curve and a minimum 1 year follow-up
[12]. Proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) is defined as
a proximal junctional sagittal Cobb angle of ≥ 10° or a
proximal junctional sagittal Cobb angle ≥ 10° than the
preoperative measurement [13].
Statistical analysis
One author was an independent observer who completed
the evaluation procedure in a blinded manner.
Statistical data were analyzed using the Statistical Package
for Social Sciences (SPSS, version 20, IBM) software.
Continuous data were expressed as mean and
standard deviation. Correction rates were expressed
as percentages. Hypothesis testing relied on repeated
measurement design data variance analysis.
Results
The study included 27 patients: 11 male and 16 female. The
mean age at the time of surgery was 11 years (5–16 years).
The average follow-up period was 68 months (60–
122 months). All patients reached skeletal maturity at the
final follow-up. The mean operative time was 161 min
(60–300 min), and the mean volume of intraoperative
blood loss was 450 mL (300–750 mL). Blood volume was
calculated at 80 mL/kg body weight. The mean blood loss
as percentage of total volume was 18.0% (12.4–25.2%). The
hemivertebrae types were 14 fully segmented, 10 semisegmented,
and three unsegmented (Table 1). None of
the patients had preoperative neurologic dysfunction. Of
the 27 patients, seven had open triangular cartilage, and
20 patients had closed triangular cartilage. The shortest
fusion segment was three, the longest fusion segment was
six, and the average fusion segment was 4.4.
Radiographic deformity correction
The corrections in the coronal and sagittal planes are presented
in Table 2.
Main curve correction
A significant correction (p < 0.001) in segmental scoliosis
was observed from preoperative [40.35° (19.3°–69.6°)]
to the final postoperative follow-up [11.94° (1.0°–28.8°)],
with a correction rate of 65.9%. The total main scoliosis
curve was corrected from 43.39° (15.0°–71.7°) to 16.06°
(4.0°–51.4°) at the final follow-up with a correction rate
of 60.2% (p < 0.001).
Compensatory curve correction
The compensatory caudal curve was corrected from
15.78° (0°–67.7°) preoperatively to 3.57° (0°–14.5°)
postoperatively. The correction was maintained at the
final follow-up 4.38° (0°–14.2°), with a correction rate
of 69.2% (p < 0.001). The compensatory cranial curve
was corrected from 13.21° (0°–50.4°) preoperatively to
6.83° (0°–36.4°) postoperatively. The value at the 2 year
and final follow-up was 7.43° (0°–45.3°) and 7.65° (0°–
45.3°), respectively, with a correction rate of 30.3%. The
correction in the compensatory cranial curve was significant
between preoperative and postoperative and
2-year follow-up (p < 0.001), but a statistically significant
difference was not observed between the preoperative
and final follow-up (p > 0.001).
Sagittal plane correction
The SK corrected from 34.30° (2.0°–83.7°) to 15.88° (0°–
41.7°) postoperatively, and the correction was maintained
at the final follow-up, with a correction rate of
61.9% (p < 0.001).
Coronal and sagittal balance
The change in trunk shift from 8.45 mm (− 28.37
to 48.72 mm) preoperative to 3.78 mm (− 27.98 to
25.70 mm) at the final follow-up was not significant
(p > 0.001). The sagittal balance improved from
− 16.98 mm (− 75.90 to 59.88 mm) preoperatively to
− 8.71 mm (− 62.91 to 32.00 mm) at the final follow-up,
although the change was not significant (p > 0.001). The
change in shoulder balance from 3 mm (− 20 to 20 mm)
preoperatively and 2 mm (− 16 to 17 mm) at the final
follow-up was not significant (p > 0.001).
Postoperative complications and additional surgery
The mean length-of-stay in hospital was 7 days postoperatively,
and all patients did not require pediatric
intensive care. The postoperative complications were
shown in Table 3. No major intraoperative complications
were noted. No wound infection, major vascular
injuries, pedicle fractures, or neurologic complications
occurred in any patient. Implant migration occurred
in two cases at the 2-year follow-up and required
additional implant removals. During follow-up, two
patients encountered postoperative curve progression.
At 2-year follow-up, five patients developed PJK and
four patients showed asymptomatic. Furthermore, two
patients showed both PJK and adding-on phenomena
(Table 3). These patients were treated with braces and
did not require reoperation.
Discussion
This study is the first retrospective evaluation of posterior
thoracolumbar hemivertebrae resection and
short-segment fusion for the management of congenital
scoliosis. All patients achieved satisfactory outcomes.
Significant corrections were documented in segmental
scoliosis and kyphosis of 65.9% and 61.9% at final followup,
respectively, and were maintained during the final
follow-up. The overall complication rate was 40.7%, with
only two patients requiring additional surgery secondary
to implant migration.
For surgical treatment of patients with scoliosis, we
usually consider fusion within six segments as short-segment
fixation, and fixation with more than six segments
as long-segment fixation. Usually, the short-segment fixation
is necessary, but it increases the risk of postoperative
scoliosis progression and adding-on phenomenon.
The first case of hemivertebra resection was reported by
Royle in 1928 [14]. More recently, in 2001, Shono et al.
reported 12 hemivertebra resection using single posterior
approach with a correction rate in segmental scoliosis of
63.3% [15]. For patients with thoracolumbar hemivertebrae,
Bollini et al. reported a mean postoperative
improvement of 69.3% [16]. Nakamura et al. reported five
cases of hemivertebrae resection with an improvement of
55.1% for three thoracolumbar hemivertebrae [17]. Ruf
et al. reported posterior only resection of 12 thoracolumbar
hemivertebrae as early as 2003 [16]. In this study, the
segmental scoliosis correction rate (65.9%) was similar
to those of previous studies. Deformities were satisfactorily
corrected, and no significant losses occurred during
follow-up, suggesting that short-segment pedicle screw
fixation provides sufficient force for correction.
Statistically significant differences between preoperative
and postoperative measurements was noted in the
compensatory cranial and caudal curve corrections,
however, no significant difference was evident at the final
follow-up. The corrections were 62.9% postoperatively
and 30.3% at the final follow-up, showing some loss of
correction. However, the compensatory caudal curve
corrections of 78.9% were maintained at the final followup
(69.2%). Compensatory cranial curve correction has
been reported from 64.1 to 80% and from 66.9 to 79.0%
for compensatory caudal curves [18–21]. The final correction
rate for compensatory cranial curves in this study
was lower than that reported in previous studies and can
correlated with the levels of hemivertebrae. In the thoracic
region, the deformity correction was resisted by the
presence of deformed ribs and chest wall, whereas in the
lumbar region, the vertebrae and ligaments were unable
to resist the correction.
Hemivertebrae usually result in kyphotic deformity.
The correction of the sagittal profile is as important
as the correction in the coronal plane. Ruf et al. studied
patients with congenital scoliosis who were treated with
hemivertebra resection [18]. The SK improved from 22°
to 8°. The correction rate of SK was 63.6%. In other studies,
the correction rate of SK ranged from 63 to 81.9% [6,
8, 20, 22]. In this study, SK improved with a correction
rate of 61.9% at the final follow-up, which was consistent
with the findings of previous studies. These data suggest
that the posterior hemivertebra resection and short-segment
fusion reliably correct SK.
Coronal and sagittal balance are also major concerns in
scoliosis. Corrections of trunk shift and sagittal balance
have been reported variably in the literature. In this study,
no significant differences between preoperative and final
follow-up measurements were noted in the trunk shift
and sagittal balance. Guo et al. [20] and Huang et al.
[21] reported improvements in Coronal and sagittal balance,
however, statistically significant difference was not
observed. Li et al. [23] and Zhuang et al. [24] reported
significant improvement in both coronal and sagittal balance.
The reason for this difference is that the hemivertebrae
in the studies by Li and Zhuang were located in the
lumbosacral region [22, 23]. At the lumbosacral level, a
minimal scoliosis curve can generate a substantial trunk
shift. In the present study, the values of coronal and sagittal
balance were less influenced by the thoracolumbar
hemivertebrae and surgery. Posterior thoracolumbar
hemivertebra resection and short-segment fusion gave
limited improvement on coronal and sagittal balance.
Shoulder balance is an important index for evaluating
coronal balance. To these authors’ knowledge, only
one study evaluated shoulder balance after hemivertebra
resection. Ruf et al. reported the shoulder imbalance of
9 mm preoperatively, 7 mm postoperatively, and 5 mm
at final follow-up [10]. In this study, shoulder balance
improved from 3.36 mm preoperatively to 1.65 mm at
final follow-up; however, no significant differences were
noted. The present study patients had better shoulder
balance than in the Ruf study because their hemivertebrae
were thoracolumbar, so the proximal hemivertebra
compensation avoided the appearance of severe shoulder
imbalance. These results showed limited improvement in
shoulder balance following thoracolumbar hemivertebra
resection.
Despite successful results of surgery, postoperative
complications pose substantial concerns for this patient
population. In this study, two patients (7.4%) experienced
postoperative curve progression during followup.
Bollini et al. [16] and Holte et al. [4] reported curve
progression of 17.6% and 16.2% after hemivertebra resections,
respectively. Short-segment fixation corrected the
deformity and reduced the influence of adjacent vertebral
growth. However, if the fusion segments are too short,
curve progression may occur postoperatively. Incomplete
hemivertebra resection is also associated with the main
curve progression. Congenital anomalies have the potential
for abnormal growth of vertebra and progress despite
removal; these factors may in turn influence the structural
differentiation into the adjacent vertebra. For these
reasons, the remnant hemivertebra after operation may
influence the main curve primarily and compensatory
curves. The hemivertebra should be completely excised,
and the appropriate fusion segments should be selected
during surgery.
The main complication in this series was PJK, which
often occurs in adults and adolescents following spinal
fusion. In patients who are treated with posterior
hemivertebra resection, PJK remains a major concern.
Zhang et al. reported that one of 56 patients experienced
PJK among those who underwent a one-stage posterior
hemivertebra resection [25]. Wang et al. reported that
18.9% of patients (seven of 37) who underwent posterior
hemivertebra resection and short-segment fusion experienced
PJK [26]; Chen et al. reported a rate of 11.6% (22
of 189 patients) [27]. In the present study, the incidence
of PJK was 18.5% (five of 27). This result was similar to
those of previous studies.
Wang et al. analyzed the possible causes of PJK; the first
and main point is that the misplaced screws in the upper
instrumental vertebra may have disturbed the normal
growth on the endplate [26]. The second point is that the
excess damage caused in facet capsules or supraspinous
ligaments above the fusion segments during exposure
may be directly related to PJK. We also concluded that
PJK was more common in patients with hemivertebra
located in the lower thoracic or thoracolumbar regions.
Taken together, these findings suggest that for patients
with thoracolumbar hemivertebra, surgeons should pay
more attention to the accuracy of screw placement and
minimize damage to the surrounding soft tissues during
surgery.
At 2-year follow-up, two patients were fixedly transferred
within the patient’s appearance, and the imaging
examination results showed that the patient’s hemivertebral
resection segment had reached bony fusion,
so internal fixation was taken out of the patient. The
patient’s deformity did not progress further after the
internal fixation was removed. Adding-on phenomenon
is common in patients with adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis. However, it can also occur after surgery for
congenital scoliosis. Only two studies reported the
adding-on phenomenon after hemivertebra resection.
In 2015, Chang et al. first reported the adding-on
phenomenon after hemivertebra resection, in which
11.1% of patients (two of 18) showed distal adding-on
phenomenon [9]. Subsequently, in 2016, they reported
11.1% of patients (five of 45) showed distal adding-on
phenomenon after hemivertebra resection [28]. In the
present study, the incidence of adding-on was 14.8%
(four of 27 patients), which was slightly higher than
reported in these previous studies. The cause of the
distal adding-on phenomenon is unclear. It may be a
compensatory change for maintaining a well-balanced
spine such as a balanced shoulder level, truncal shift, or
listing. For patients with thoracolumbar hemivertebra
after hemivertebra resection and short-segment fusion,
the high mobility of the lumbar region makes this compensatory
change more likely to occur.
The goal in the treatment of congenital scoliosis is to
achieve a straight spine with a physiologic sagittal profile
with as short a fusion segment as possible. Delayed
treatment of an advanced deformity in older children or
adults, however, must include the secondary structural
curves and therefore requires long fusion segments.
Furthermore, correction of these rigid curves is more
difficult and associated with a higher risk of neurologic
compromise. Progression of the curve is most rapid during
the adolescent growth spurt, and progression stops
only at skeletal maturity. Spontaneous neurologic deterioration
due to compression of the spinal cord may occur
in the case of congenital kyphoscoliosis, which generally
manifests during the adolescent growth spurt at a mean
age of 13.7 years [29]. Early and complete correction of
the local deformity mitigates the development of secondary
changes. Delayed treatment of an advanced deformity
always requires an extensive and complex correction procedure.
To date, however, there is no agreement regarding
the appropriate surgical window, despite the fact that
most clinicians suggest surgery as early as possible after
1 year of age. However, patients with congenital scoliosis
who visited our spine center for the first time are often
over 7 years old. For these patients, after the diagnosis
of scoliosis, we performed the surgical treatment [30].
Although they are older, they were satisfied with the
clinical efficacy. In this study, eight patients were younger
(age < 7 years) and 19 patients were older (age > 7 years).
This study has several limitations. Follow-up did not
include quality of life. Further trials are needed to analyze
a correlation between radiological correction and clinical
outcome (Scoliosis Research Society scores-24, Oswestry
Disability Index). All radiologic measurements were performed
by one independent radiologist; although this
design may introduce single observation error, the results
were consistent with values in the literature. This study
reviewed only postoperative complications, and the small
number of study patients may overestimate the rate of
complications. Further studies are needed to analyze the
causes and risk factors of these complications.