Validation of numerical predictive andmonitoringmodels
is carried out against experimental results. This validation
process determines how accurate a model can mimic
reality [1, 2]. Image-based methods, such as CT-based
finite element (FE) models, have become state-of-the-art
in biomechanical bone research, with clinical use cases
[3–7]. Using these models, the risk of fracture in patients
with underlying conditions, such as osteoporosis, can be
non-invasively estimated to guide treatment efforts and
lessen the consequent immobilization burden.
The most prevalent site in orthopedic biomechanics
studies is the hip or proximal femur. Hip fractures account
for the majority of fracture-related disabilities [8, 9].
Osteoporosis and fall are the two leading causes of hip
fractures [10, 11]. Many biomechanical experiments done
on femur are based on single tests per sample [12–18].
To measure the strength of the bone, samples are loaded
until failure. FE models validated against such experimental
data are at risk of being biased towards those specific
experimental load cases.
There has been growing evidence that considering multiple
loading directions in the experimental and numerical
studies might improve the predictive ability of FE models
[5, 19–21]. In one study [19], using nonlinear CT-FEmodels,
the effect of loading direction on the fracture load and
location of the proximal femur was investigated. However,
the employed FE model was only validated against a single
stance load case [22]. In other studies [23, 24], samples
were loaded in multiple fall load cases to determine the
accuracy of the FE-predicted strains related to the sideway
fall incidents. Although one FE technique [23] was
previously validated against quasi-axial load cases as well
[2, 7, 25], the two studies were done on different sample
groups, one for stance and one for the fall. To our knowledge,
there are no studies with multiple loading directions
applied in both stance and fall configurations on the same
samples.
In order to perform multiple mechanical tests on each
sample, structural damages should be avoided through
non-destructive loading regimes. This imposes two
restrictions: First, the load amplitude should be restricted
to much lower values compared to fracture loads. Second,
a surrogate measure for the sample strength should
be employed. A widely used criterion to address the former
is conducting non-destructive tests on the femur by
applying a fraction (75%) of the donor’s body weight as
the maximum load [26]. With regards to the latter, the
apparent stiffness, a frequently reported surrogate bone
strength measure, can be used as the outcome variable
[27]. Despite the above-mentioned restrictive circumstances,
using elastic structural metrics (i.e., apparent
stiffness) might still seem like a step backward.However, if
the apparent stiffness shows significant alterations, it will
point to the direction of a change in the tested material
itself, which in turn would affect the strength [28, 29].
To compare the apparent stiffness of the samples under
different loading conditions, other unwanted experimental
sources of alteration in sample stiffness must be determined.
These uncertainties often arise from simplifications
introduced during the experimental procedures and
can be investigated using a parametric approach. This
study design is a powerful tool to isolate the influence
of all players and compare their relative significance systematically
[30, 31]. Most studies have only reported the
repeatability measures of the experiments via repeating
each test case multiple times [2, 32] or by re-orienting and
re-installing the setup between each test [26]. Others have
studied the effect of FE modeling methodological determinants
on predicted femoral strength [3]. To our knowledge,
there are no studies investigating the effect of typical
experimental parameters on the structural properties of
the samples using a systematic approach.
The aim of this study was to parametrically determine
the influence of common steps involved in an experimental
validation study on the apparent stiffness of the proximal
femur under multiple loading directions, namely:
repetition, pre-loading, re-adjustment, re-fixation, storage,
μCT scanning, and loading direction (15° deviation
from neutral alignment) in stance and side-fall configurations.
To our knowledge, this is the first study in which
both stance and fall configurations have been tested on
every sample. These results could add an aggregated reference
to the currently scattered pool of data required for
planning experimental protocols with reduced uncertainties
affecting the measured structural properties of bone
samples.
Methods & materials
Samples
Ten proximal femoral samples from five donors (Table 1)
were harvested and kept frozen in -23° (Center for
Anatomy and Cell Biology,Medical University of Vienna).
The specimens originated from voluntary body donations
for scientific and teaching purposes to the Center
(According to protocol accepted by the ethics committee
of Karl Landsteiner University of Health Sciences). Samples
were screened for lack of any pathological disease. All
procedures were performed in accordance with relevant
guidelines.
Experimental setup
To perform a parametric study, we developed a new
femoral experimental setup based on two main criteria:
1. possess fully defined boundary conditions, and 2. provide
the means for fast multiple non-destructive tests in
stance and fall configurations with variable loading direction.
The test setup was comprised of the following main
components: Alignment setup, embedding components,
testing apparatus, scan chambers, and DIC setup.
Alignment setup: A custom-made alignment setup was
used to maintain the femur’s physiological neutral stance
alignment in the final prepared sample. It was comprised
of two cross lasers, in-house 3D printed holder devices,
and manufactured POM (Polyoxymethylene) supports
(Fig. 1). The intact femur was laid down on two distal
and proximal supports. The bone was axially tilted
until the neck axis, passing through the femoral head
center and middle of the femoral neck, was coincident
with the horizontal line of a cross laser (Fig. 1a). Metal
spacers with various thicknesses were placed between the
condyles of the femur and the distal support to maintain
the torsional alignment. Then, the proximal support was
elevated using a screw mechanism so that the femoral
head center and the distal mid-condylar line were coincident
with the horizontal laser line (Fig. 1b). Finally, using
the second cross lasermounted above the dissection table,
a 3° adduction angle with the reference line of the alignment
supports was formed. The femoral head center and
the femoral intercondylar fossa, hence the mechanical
axis, were aligned with the laser line (Fig. 1c). Once all
angles were determined, a custom-made C-shaped device
was used to fix the alignment on the proximal portion of
the bone making it ready for the cutting and potting steps.
This device was fixed 105 mm below the bounding plane
coincident to the most proximal point of the femoral head
(Fig. 1e). The proximal portion of the bone was cut using
a bone saw 45 mm below the fixed device, resulting in a
total sample length of 150 mm (Fig. 1f). The total sample
length was restricted by the maximum field of view from
the μCT scanner, which was necessary for future studies
using the micro-FE models of the samples.
Embedding components: The proximal femoral samples
were held in their neutral stance alignment on the
potting block, and their shaft was embedded in a 50 mm
diameter cylinder. A 5-mm gap was left between the bottomof
the sample and block to account for uneven cutting
surfaces. Two pins were attached to the walls of the potting
block to prevent the shaft from rotating in the holder
(Fig. 2a). The trochanter and the head were embedded in
spherical segments to provide defined boundary conditions
at the contact points and avoid local crushing. The
alignment was done using 3D printed adapters (Fig. 2).
Using printed holders and pins, 4-marker clusters were
later attached to the femoral head, major trochanter, and
shaft of the samples for displacement tracking.
Testing apparatus: A 25 kN load cell with 6 degrees of
freedom (DOF) (Hottinger Baldwin Messtechnik (HBM)
GmbH, Germany) was mounted on the 30 kN electromechanical
axial testing machine (Z030, ZwickRoell Ulm,
Germany). Hardened iron disks were manufactured and
used with ring ball-bearings to apply a purely axial load
(Fig. 3). A rotating milling machine table was equipped
with a hinge bearing to hold the shaft of the sample and
allow for 5 degrees of freedom for the sample alignment
(X, Y, Rx, Ry, Rz). An additional uni-axial 25 kN load cell
(see Fig. 3) was used in the fall configuration to support
the head while the trochanter is loaded (HBM, Germany).
In the stance configuration, the shaft block was fixed on
the rotating table. The abduction\adduction angle was
adjusted on the table. The table was fixed on the testing
machine. In the fall configuration, the shaft block was free
to rotate in the abduction\adduction direction while the
head was resting on the support load cell. The table was
fixed on the machine as well (Fig. 3).
Scan chambers: μCT: A custom-made chamber was
manufactured using POM (Polyoxymethylene) and Plexiglas
(Fig. 4). The cylindrical chamber was 15 cm in
diameter and 17 cm inner height. A clamping mechanism
was fitted in the chamber so that the femur could be stood
upright and fixed to avoid movement artifacts during the
scan. A sealing cap with a pressure valve was used tomake
sure the sample is not dehydrated during the scan while
the heated air can escape the chamber.
CT: To mimic the clinical conditions in which two legs
with surrounding soft tissues are present in scanner’s field
of view, wemodified a rectangular translucent storage box
(polypropylene) using embedding material, 3D printed
adapters, and ready-made PVC holders. Each pair of samples
were fixed side-by-side, in their neutral alignment, 20
cm apart, and fully submerged in saline solution (Fig. 4).
DIC setup: Digital Image Correlation (DIC) system
(ARAMIS 3D Camera, GOMGmbH, Braunschweig, Germany)
with two CCD cameras was used for optical displacement
tracking. The 6-megapixel cameras were 150
mm apart and positioned at a perpendicular distance of
350 mm from the sample, capturing images at a 10 Hz
rate from a measurement volume of 160 x 130 x 95 mm
(LxWxD). All measurements were done according to the
manufacturer’s standard protocol (GOM GmbH, Braunschweig,
Germany). The system was calibrated before
beginning of each session using the standard calibration
plate and according to the manufacturer’s protocol
keeping the calibration deviation below 0.05 pixels. Clusters
of markers comprised of four markers (GOM GmbH,
Braunschweig, Germany) attached to a 3D printed holder
were placed on the head, trochanter, and shaft of the samples
in order to measure the apparent stiffness of the bone
(Fig. 2). Additional markers were placed on the loading
plate and holder block in order to be able to measure the
apparent stiffness of the full specimen as well (Fig. 5). All
markers were covered within the measurement volume at
all time. There was a 1 micron displacement noise in the
marker displacement data at zero load.
Parameters
While all steps involved in our experimental validation
study are described below, not all the acquired data were
relevant and hence presented in this manuscript’s scope
(e.g., scan data acquired for the FE modeling phase elsewhere).
The following parameters were tested for stance
and side-fall configurations:
• Repetition: Repeating a test five times without
touching any parts of the setup or sample.
• Pre-loading: Testing a load case once right after
fixing the sample into the desired place and
alignment and comparing the results with the average
of the immediately following five repetitions, without
touching the sample or setup in between.
• Re-adjustment: Distorting the sample configuration
and placement on the machine and re-adjusting it
back to the initial condition without taking the
sample out of the setup.
• Re-fixation: Taking out the sample and distorting the
setup adjustments, then putting everything back to
their initial condition.
• Storage: Storing samples in a -23°C freezer for four
weeks.
• μCT scanning: μCT scanning the sample.
• Loading direction: Tilting the samples for ± 15
degrees along the abduction-adduction axis from
their neutral stance or fall alignments.
Study design
Three sets of biomechanical testing were carried out
according to the following plan (Fig. 6). For each test, samples
were loaded up to 75% of the donor’s body weight
(BW) to avoid any damage or destruction [26]. Loading
was applied at a 5 mm/sec rate. There was a minimum
of 1-minute pause between each consecutive tests (3 or 6
minutes for tests requiring switching between the direction
or configuration of the sample, respectively):
1. Fresh frozen samples were taken from the freezer
one-by-one, and the excess muscle and fat tissue was
cut from their proximal half using a knife and scalpel.
The periosteum was carefully scraped from the
femoral neck region as well as the shaft using bone
scraper. The greater trochanter surface was scraped
to remove cartilaginous tissues, but the femoral head
cartilage was kept intact to avoid damaging the thin
cortex at that region. The clean sample was then
aligned, cut, and embedded in a span of 3 hours, and
stored back in the freezer until all samples were
processed. The process was done on frozen samples
since the soft tissue removal was easier than the
thawed bone, and the bone marrow could be sealed
inside the bone, avoiding large air cavities in the bone
for better scan qualities.
2. On the day of the CT scanning, all samples were
submerged in 0.9% PBS (Phosphate-buffered saline)
solution filled plastic bags and placed in the vacuumdesiccator
(Trivac D8B; OC Oerlikon Management
AG, Pfäffikon, Switzerland) for 30 minutes at room
temperature to thaw and extract the air bubbles. The
samples were then carefully transferred in their
submerged condition into their corresponding
room-temperature PBS-filled CT chambers and
fixed. After scanning (Toshiba Aquilion Prime, res:
0.625x0.625x0.25 mm3), samples were wrapped in
soaked towels and stored at -23°C for one week. CT
data is necessary for the CT-based FE modeling
phase following this study. Given the relatively short
scan time (13 secs compared to 5 hrs for μCT) and
ideal submerged sample conditions throughout the
process, it was not included as a parameter in the
study (to reduce the number of test rounds).
3. Set I: Frozen samples were thawed in a room
temperature PBS solution bath for 4 hours. The
posterior femoral neck area was pat dried and
degreased using ethanol pads. Speckle pattern was
sprayed. Each sample was tested in stance and
side-fall configurations for each of the three loading
directions (neutral, 15° abduction, 15° adduction).
These six load cases were repeated twice to examine
the effect of re-adjustment for all samples.
Additionally, for one sample all 6 load cases were
repeated once more to check the re-fixation effect
(due to the time consuming nature of removing the
sample from the setup for every test, this parameter
was limited to only 1 sample).
4. Samples were wrapped in soaked towels and stored
for four weeks in a -23°C freezer.
5. Set II: Frozen samples were fully thawed in room
temperature PBS bath. Marker clusters were pinned
on the head, trochanter, and shaft of the sample on
the posterior side. Each sample was tested in stance
and side-fall configurations for each of the three
loading directions. Tests were done only once.
Markers were tracked using stereo cameras.
6. μCT scanning: Samples were taken out of the testing
setup, submerged in PBS solution bath for rehydration,
clamped in the scan chamber, with soaked
towels placed at the bottom of the sealed (with a
pressure valve) chamber to avoid dehydration. The
full sample length was scanned in a 5-hour session
(Skyscan 1173, Bruker, Belgium) (field of view: 120 x
150 mm, resolution: 30 μm, voltage: 130 kV, current:
60 mA, exposure: 580 ms, filter: Al 1.0 mm).
7. Set III: It was done immediately after the μCT
scanning and on the same day as set II. Each sample
was tested in stance and side-fall configurations for
all three loading directions. Each test was repeated 6
times (with a one-minute resting period in between)
to examine the repeatability of the tests as well as the
pre-loading effect. Samples were frozen at the end.
A total of 180 tests (and an additional 66 and 300 repetitions
in set I and set III, respectively) were performed.
Data was captured at 100 Hz and 10 Hz by the testing
machine and stereo cameras, respectively.
Data analysis
Collected raw data was comprised of: axial and shear
loads as well as moments at the load introduction site,
femoral head support force in side-fall load cases, vertical
displacement of the machine head, and marker displacements
at the five locations of : loading plate, femoral
head, major trochanter, shaft, holder block. The support
load, shear loads, and moments were used to check the
boundary conditions of the setup. Analytically, we should
expect zero shear forces at the load introduction location
to match the free horizontal translation DoFs. Furthermore,
the maximum moment at the loading plate should
match the values calculated using the maximum load
and the distance between the center of contact surface
between the femoral head/trochanter cap (in stance and
side-fall configurations, respectively), and the center of
the load cell. A significant difference between the experimental
and analytic results would point into direction of
unwanted bendingmoment on the femoral head, negating
free rotational DoFs. Finally, the reaction force at the support
plate in side-fall configuration is calculated using the
distances between the loading and support contact points
and the shaft bearing axis. Significant deviation from this
value would contradict with free rotation DoF at the shaft
(Fig. 3a)
Outcome variables: The apparent stiffness was defined
as the slope of the linear section of the load-displacement
curve (Fig. 7). Based on some preliminary tests, the linear
section was defined between 200N and 400N. The
load came from the axial component recorded by the 6
DOF load cell. Depending on the stiffness measurement
criteria, displacement was based on (Fig. 5):
• Sample stiffness (Kz): the moving head of the
mechanical testing machine.
• Bone stiffness (Kb): the relative vertical displacement
of the femoral head and shaft (for stance) or
trochanter and femoral head (for fall) markers.
The stiffness of the embedding segments and themachine
components (Ke and Km, respectively) were calculated
using the spring theory.
Markers were tracked by the DIC cameras and loaddisplacement
plots were evaluated. Tests with highly linear
load-displacement plots (R2 > 0.95) were considered
for further analysis. Kz was validated against the corresponding
Kb data and used as the main outcome variable
(Fig. 8).
Statistical Analysis: To report the tests’ repeatability, we
used the coefficient of variation or CV% by dividing the
standard deviation by the average of the five repeated
measurements of each load case in set 3:
CV% = Standard Deviation
Average
Based on the normality test on the data sets, either the
Wilcoxon t-test or Student’s t-test were used to determine
the significance of the difference between paired groups,
validity of the t-tests, we imposed a minimum requirement
of 6 data points per parameter. Where data from
set III was involved, the average of the five repetitions
was considered for the analysis. For the re-fixation parameter,
where only one case was tested multiple times, a
percent difference (%Diff) between the average of the
five repetitions before and after re-fixing the sample was
reported.
Results
Boundary conditions: No substantial peak shear forces
(<2N) at the load introduction site were recorded across
all tests. The calculated and measured support reaction
forces for the fall configuration were matching. These
findings validated the defined boundary conditions of the
setup.
Repeatability parameters: The average repetition error
(CV%) in Kz measurements for all load cases was 1.53%
(95% confidence interval [0.32, 2.75]). Re-fixation, Preloading,
and Re-adjustment did not affect the Kz significantly
(Table 2).
Sample manipulation effects: The storage cycle significantly
reduced the Kz of the samples (p-value<0.01, avg.
% Diff ≈ 25%). The Kz showed no significant effect from
performing μCT scanning on the samples (p-value=0.92).
Test configurations: The measured Kz for the neutral
stance alignment was 27% larger compared to the neutral
fall (p<0.01). The samples were, on average, 33% and 13%
less stiff when abducted for 15 degrees in the stance and
fall cases, respectively (p<0.02) (Table 2). Deviation of the
load direction by 15 degrees in the adduction direction
did not alter the apparent stiffness significantly. The overall
trend of stiffness values for each load configuration can
be seen in Fig. 9.
Stiffnessmeasurement: To validate the Kz values, which
are based on the machine displacement data, we plotted
load-displacement graphs using marker tracking data
(Fig. 8). Among all load cases, stance-abduction configuration
produced highly linear results (R2 > 0.95) for all
ten samples followed by stance-neutral with 7 viable data
points. There were a total of 11 fall configuration tests
falling into this criteria as well. There was a strong correlation
with an R2 ≈ 0.92 and 0.82 between the machine and
marker data for stance and fall, respectively (Fig. 8(d,e)).
Furthermore, the sample stiffness, Kz, was decomposed
into its constituent elements using the spring theory
(Fig. 5). The bone and full specimen values, Kb and Ks,
were measured using marker tracking. The machine and
embedding stiffness values, Km and Ke, were calculated
accordingly (Fig. 10):

Looking at the percent coefficients of variation (CV%),
the variation in Kz appears to be mostly stemming from
the relatively high variability of Kb, with the mechanical
components showing fairly consistent stiffness measurements.
In the given load case, the Kz was three times softer
than the Kb, influenced largely by the Ke.
Discussion
In this study, we aimed at using a systematic approach
to find which experimental parameters affect the apparent
stiffness of the proximal femur. Our results indicate
that among the sources of uncertainties, the storage of
the samples significantly alters their apparent stiffness.
Moreover, controlled parameters, i.e., loading direction,
also has significant effects on the apparent stiffness of
the proximal femoral samples. Other sources of random
effects pertaining to the repeatability of the mechanical
tests proved negligible.
According to our findings, a freezing and storage cycle
would significantly affect the apparent stiffness (p<0.05).
A 25% alteration in the Kz wasmeasured. A cycle included
storing wrapped and sealed samples in a -23°C freezer
for four weeks. This could potentially mean that comparisons
between stiffness measurements before and after a
storage cycle might be critically compromised and should
be ideally avoided in experimental validation studies. Our
results are different from previous reports on the subject.
Some earlier research on the effect of storage methods on
trabecular bone [33] or skull [34] reported no change in
the stiffness of their specimens after several freezing and
storage cycles. The inconsistencies between these outcomes
might have roots in the sample choices. We have
tested full proximal femur samples, meaning the embedding
caps and cartilage layers were also frozen and tested
attached to the bone, while the aforementioned studies
used bare bone samples. Among possible pathways
for the observed structural behavior, incomplete thawing
or dehydration of the samples during the tests could be
readily rejected given the insignificant difference between
set II and set III and the samples’ hydrated conditions
throughout storage and tests. Another hypothesis is that
the freezing cycle might affect the embedding-cartilage or
cartilage-bone conjunctions rather than the bone structure.
To check the effect of similar storage cycles on the
embedding material, three groups of 10 standard tensile
test specimens (DIN ISO 527-2 b) were produced using
a 3D printed cast. They were stored a) in a dry container,
b) submerged in 0.9% PBS bath, and c) wrapped
in soaked paper towels and sealed in the -23°C freezer
for 10 days. Afterwards, frozen samples were thawed in
room temperature PBS bath and all samples were tested
to measure their tensile E-modulus (DIN ISO 527-2).
Student’s T test was used for comparing the groups.
There was no significant difference between the dryfrozen
and wet-frozen groups. There was an 8% decrease
in E-modulus of the wet samples compared to the dry
group (Fig. 11). Since according to the average stiffness
values in Fig. 10, a 40% increase in Ke is required to
account for the observed 25% increase in the Kz post
storage cycle, the embedding material seems an unlikely
candidate. Based on the available data from these experiments,
we are unable to confidently pinpoint the mechanism
through which the stiffness of the samples were
affected.
There was a significant alteration in the Kz following tilting
the loading direction for 15°. The significantly lower
stiffness of the samples in 15° abduction load cases is in
line with reported lower fracture loads under similar conditions
[22–24]. An interesting observation is that switching
the loading configuration between neutral stance and
neutral fall affects the Kz to the same extent as the 15°
abduction. More importantly, this effect is comparable
to that of the storage cycle. Aside from its more obvious
implications in multi-directional mechanical testings,
it is also noteworthy that sample misalignment of this
range might significantly jeopardize the mechanical test
outcomes.
Our results show that all other experimental sources of
uncertainties, i.e., re-fixation, re-adjustment, pre-loading,
and μCT imaging had insignificant effects on the Kz.
In other words, replacing the samples or reassembling
the testing setup are safe for the stiffness measurements.
Furthermore, in the absence of standard protocols for
pre-loading regimes and the possible damage they might
induce in the sample, using a well-constrained setup
with fully defined boundary conditions could reduce the
effect of initial maladjustment between the sample and
setup components, as the common reason for pre-loading
cycles, and potentially alleviate the need for them. Lastly,
since the popularity of μCT imaging as a strong tool for
hierarchical tracking of the effectiveness of in-vivo and
in-vitro studies is constantly on the rise, this result could
be taken as a safety indicator in terms of preservation
of the structural integrity of scanned bones. It should be
noted that the negligible scanning effect comes despite
the 4-hour long scanning time and a moderate rise in the
temperature of the chamber and sample.
Choosing the apparent sample stiffness, Kz, as the main
outcome variable instead of more prevalent measures of
strength is adequately justifiable. Direct measurement of
the bone strength, a.k.a. failure load, involves destroying
the samples per test. The non-destructive alternative
outcome variable to characterize a mechanical structure
is its apparent stiffness (K) [27]. There has been
shown to be a strong correlation between the stiffness
and the strength of bone samples [28, 29, 35, 36]. The
apparent stiffness of the bone is calculated based on
the deformation of the region of interest. Strain gauges
can only measure local strains, and their preparation
requires substantial time and treatment of the site with
possible structural damages. Full-field surface strain measurements
with DIC techniques are favorable alternatives.
However, with the selected maximum load threshold
of 75% BW [26], at the chosen region of interest
of posterior femoral neck, the noise levels proved to be
high enough to prevent us from having a viable strain
measurement. The same limitation resulted in limiting
the number of successful marker tracking measurements
and the resultant Kb values. This is in line with the
reported results regarding the better performance of the
DIC method in higher loading regimes and fracture tests
on longer samples and at superior or inferior regions of
the femoral neck, compared to <1 BW loading cases
[13, 37]. Nevertheless, there was a significant correlation
between the Kb and Kz for all viable tests spanning across
all load cases to merit relying on the statistical analyses
of the Kz (R2 ≈ 0.92 and 0.82 for stance and fall, respectively)
(Fig. 8). Given the higher sensitivity of the stiffness
to structural alterations compared to the strength, which
can be inferred fromthe lower predictive ability ofmodels
for K [14, 29, 38, 39], deducted conclusions on parameters
with significant effects could even be considered as
“conservative”.
There are limitations in this study that require discussion.
The sample size of 10 specimens from 5 donors is
relatively small. Although smaller sample sizes have been
used in various studies [13, 22–24, 40], it might limit
our ability to generalize the outcomes of this study to
broader cases. Furthermore, pure isolation of the effects
of single parameters proved to be challenging. In between
the testing sets, the samples had to be taken out of the
setup and put back in, resulting in the potential compound
influence of the re-fixation and re-adjustment parameters
in addition to those of the storage and μCT scanning.
However, the order-of-magnitude difference between the
effect size of the storage parameter compared to those
two and the similarly insignificant effect of the μCT scanning
leads us to deem our derived conclusions unchallenged
by the interaction effect. Finally, the 5 mm/s loading
rate is not representative of physiological side-fall
scenarios. Although repeatedly used in relevant studies
[23, 24, 41], the effect size of different studied parameters
could differ under higher rates and requires further
investigation.
In conclusion, the loading direction, as well as intermediary
storage of the frozen samples, affect the apparent
stiffness of proximal femoral samples significantly. Using
a highly repeatable parametric approach, we showed that
the random effects of setupmanipulation and intermittent μCT scanning are negligible. For multi-directional validation
of FE models, a similar testing setup could be
effectively used if there are no storage intervals between
the different load cases on the same samples.