Background
In the past decades, multidisciplinary and innovative
therapeutic concepts have revolutionized the treatment
of complex extremity defects, thus successfully averting
limb amputation in many cases. Depending on the
defect size and localization, involvement of tissue components,
and presence of infection, the reconstructive
approach can range from simple to complex procedures.
Large osseous defects may necessitate cryopreserved
allogeneic or microvascular autologous bone transplants,
bone prostheses, or bone transport via Masquelet technique
[1–3]. Concomitant or extensive soft tissue defects
may require microvascular free flap coverage and severe
damage to muscle groups may indicate complex tendon
transfer or muscle neurotization [4–6].
In addition, depending on the underlying disease,
optimization of the vascular status might be necessary.
Finally, patient-related factors such as comorbidities,
patient preferences, and functional status influence
the treatment plan, making a multidisciplinary team
approach mandatory in the successful treatment of complex
extremity defects [7, 8].
Multidisciplinary team (MDT) meetings are wellestablished
for treatment recommendations in patients
with cancer. They serve as a platform to provide expert
reviews on patient cases, according to clinical practice
guidelines and beyond, ensuring well-coordinated and
multi-professional patient care [9]. Similarly, regularly
scheduled MDT meetings, comprising professionals
from trauma and orthopedic, plastic-, and vascular surgery,
can formulate individualized treatment recommendations
for patients with complex extremity defects.
Thus, in 2015, an MDT meeting for patients with complex
extremity defects—the so-called extremity board—
was established in our unit. However, MDT meetings
require significant time resources and finances. Thus,
it is reasonable to question their impact on patient outcomes
and evaluate their quality. An excellent method to
analyze MDT performance is to assess implementation
of the formulated treatment plan along with the clinical
outcome. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate
the implementation of treatment decisions reached in
the MDT meeting for patients with complex extremity
defects and determine factors associated with non-implementation
of the recommendations. The secondary aim
was to evaluate all implemented board decisions’ clinical
outcome as a criterion for the quality of the reached multidisciplinary
treatment decision.
Patients and methods
MDT meetings for patients with complex extremity defects
MDT meetings were held monthly at the facility of the
senior author. Meetings were certified for continuous
medical education credit points and announced biannually
in print and via email to physicians of surrounding
hospitals and private practice. The MDT consisted of
trauma, orthopedic, plastic and vascular surgeons. Professionals
of other disciplines (rehabilitation therapy,
radiology, critical care, geriatrics) were invited if indicated.
The treating physician submitted cases for presentation
to the coordinator of the MDT meeting (first
author DK) for review and acceptance. Submissions
included a check-list that ensured medical history, relevant
images (X-ray, computed tomography, magnetic
resonance imaging, angiography), clinical findings and
microbiological results were available [10]. Registration
of cases ended two days before the next meeting to provide
sufficient time for acquiring further documents or
invitation of professionals of other disciplines. In the case
of vascular pathologies, all relevant angiographies were
transferred to a vascular surgeon before the upcoming
meeting with means of teleradiology. During the MDT
meeting, patient cases were presented summarizing all
relevant clinical data and demonstrating all relevant
imaging. After the MDT meeting, the reached treatment
decision was documented in the electronic patient file.
The treating physician informed the patient of the treatment
recommendation. Figure 1 displays the workflow of
the MDT meetings for patients with complex extremity
defects.
Study design
The local ethics committee of Rhineland palatinate (no.
2020-15004) Mainz Germany approved the retrospective
study, which was designed in accordance with the ethical
standards laid down in the Declaration of Helsinki and its
later amendments. Since the study protocol included only
a retrospective, epidemiologic evaluation of anonymized
and routine patient data, informed consent was waived
by the local ethics committee of Rhineland palatinate.
All medical records from patient cases presented in the
MDT meetings for complex extremity defects between
September 2015 and December 2017 were retrospectively
studied. Epidemiologic data, such as age, gender,
comorbidities, American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) physical status classification system, defect localization,
extent of defect (bone, soft tissue, combined bone
and soft tissue defect) and vascular status at the time of
the MDT meeting were identified. Furthermore, MDT
treatment decision and implementation were evaluated
and classified as implemented (MDT treatment decision
and treatment received were the same) or as non-implemented
(MDT decision differed from final MDT treatment).
Furthermore, reasons for non-implementation of
MDT treatment decisions were gathered (patient’s preference,
comorbid conditions, or new clinical information).
Last, but not least, the clinical course of all patients
who adhered to the MDT treatment recommendation
was analyzed. This included stump healing and regained
mobility in patients with limb amputation, as well as the
success or failure of the surgical intervention in patients
with limb reconstruction.
Statistical methods
Data are presented as frequencies (percentages) for the
categorical variables and means—standard deviation
(SD) for the continuous variables. A multivariable logistic
regression model was performed to identify factors associated
with the non-implementation of MDT treatment
decisions. Hosmer/Lemeshow (HL) tests for calibration
were computed to assess the goodness of fit. The odds
ratios (OR) with their corresponding 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were calculated. Statistical significance
was defined as p < 0.05. Data were analyzed using the
GraphPad Prism version 8.4.0 for MAC (GraphPad Software
San Diego, CA).
Results
Demographic data
During the study period, 27 MDT meetings were held,
in which 51 patients with complex extremity defects
were presented. Representatives of trauma surgery and
orthopedics, as well as plastic surgery, were present in all
MDT meetings. Vascular surgeons were present in 19.6%
(10/51) of cases. In the remaining 80.4% (41/51) of the
cases, telemedicine consultations were performed with
vascular surgeons. Forty-one patients were male and ten
female. The mean age was 54 years, ranging from 21 to
81 years. Twenty percent of the presented patients were
active smokers and 43.1% suffered from hypertension.
Furthermore, diabetes mellitus was present in 23.5% of
the patients.
The majority of patients had lower limb defects (88.2%,
45/51). Upper extremity defects were less common
(11.8%, 6/51). Thirty-six patients (70.6%, 36/51) had
combined bone and soft tissue defects. Isolated soft tissue
defects occurred in 22% of cases (11/51) and isolated
bone defects in 8% of cases (4/51). Of the 40 patients
with bone defects (combined + isolated), segmental
bone defects (defect size > 2 cm) were present in 27.5%
of patients (11/40), complex multi-fragmented fractures
in 27.5% (11/40) and osteomyelitis in 27.5% (11/40). Furthermore,
periprosthetic joint infections were apparent
in three patients (5.9%). The majority of defects were due
to acute trauma (56.9%, 29/51). Rarely, peripheral vascular
disease (7.8%, 4/51), tumors (3.9%, 2/51), or infection
(30%, 1/51) were responsible for the extremity defect.
Almost one third of patients (27.5%, 14/51) had previously
received a peripheral vascular surgery and 17.6%
(9/51) had pathologies in angiography at the time of
the MDT meeting. Epidemiologic data are presented in
Table 1.
Outcomes
The follow-up amounted to 47.1 ± 8.6 months. Agreement
in MDT treatment decisions was reached in all presented
cases. Limb salvage was recommended for 37/51
(72.5%) patients, and limb amputation for 14/51 (27.5%)
patients.
In over half of the patients (56.9%), a plastic surgery
intervention was recommended, most commonly with
free flaps (51%). When free flaps were necessary to close
the defect, complex chimeric flaps were predominantly
recommended, such as the combined parascapular and
latissimus dorsi free flap. In over 20% of the patients, a
vascular intervention or additional radiologic analyses
were proposed. Furthermore, in 39.2% of patients, complex
bone reconstructive options were recommended.
These included avascular and vascularized bone grafting
and staged procedures, such as antibiotic spacer implantation
and distraction osteogenesis. MDT treatment
decisions for limb reconstruction are presented in detail
in Table 2.
Overall, 78.4% (40/51) of the MDT treatment decisions
were implemented. In the remaining cases (21.6%; 11/51),
in which MDT treatment decision was not implemented,
the main reason for discordance was the patient’s preference
(6/51, 11.8%); in these cases patients chose limb salvage
or no treatment instead of the recommended lower
leg amputation. Further reasons for non-implementation
of MDT recommendations included comorbidities
(2/51, 3.9%) and new clinical information (3/51, 5.9%),
which were not available at the time of MDT meeting,
made limb salvage impossible, and led to discordance
to the MDT treatment recommendation (Tables 3 and
4). Underestimation of the severity of peripheral vascular
disease as well as progression and detoriation of the
wound status made limb preservation in most of the
cases impossible (Table 4).
Multiple logistic regression analysis exploring factors
that might influence the implementation of the MDT
meeting decision showed that amputation intent was an
important reason not to follow the recommendation with
sixfold greater odds (CI 1.4–29.4; p = 0.021). Gender, age,
and physical status (ASA-classification) did not influence
the implementation of MDT treatment decisions
(Table 5).
To evaluate the quality of the MDT treatment recommendations,
the final clinical outcome of all patients, who
adhered to the MDT treatment recommendation (78.4%;
40/51), was followed. Limb salvage was recommended
for 80% (32/40) of the patients and successfully achieved
in 90.6% (29/32) of the cases. Failed limb salvages were
due to flap failure (33%; 1/3), recurring periprosthetic
joint infections (66%; 2/3), and concomitant reconstructive
failure. Of note, in all patients with failed limb
salvage, vascular interventions had been performed (one
patient with arteriovenous loop and two patients with
vessel extensions by vein grafts). All three patients with
failed extremity reconstructions were debriefed in the
following MDT meeting for extremity defects. Patients
with amputations (20%; 8/40) showed proper stump
healing and regained mobility with a prosthesis. Overall,
the MDT treatment plan was effective in 92.5% (37/40)
of the patients, who adhered to the MDT treatment
recommendation.
Furthermore, we followed the clinical outcome of all
patients who did not adhere to the MDT treatment recommendation
due to patients’ preference (6/11). Sixtyseven
percent of the patients (4/6) chose a conservative
wound therapy with negative pressure wound therapy
instead of limb amputation. Two patients were lost to follow
up, and the remaining two showed persistent symptoms
with pain due to pseudarthrosis and persistent
open wounds. The two patients who received complex
reconstructions (ilizarov bone transport and free flap
reconstruction) healed uneventfully and regained their
mobility.
Case presentation
A 66-year-old male patient presented with a chronic open
wound of the calcaneus after multiple Achilles tendon
lesions. We performed computed tomographic imaging
of the right foot, which showed subtotal bone resorption
of the calcaneus due to chronic osteomyelitis (Fig. 2a).
Multiple osseous and soft tissue debridements with the
application of negative pressure wound therapy followed,
which showed a significant soft-tissue defect of 7 cm
diameter in the right weight-bearing heel and a major
osseous defect (Fig. 2b). Microbiological analysis of soft
tissue and bone samples showed Staphylococcus haemolyticus
and Citrobacter amalonaticus. The patient was
put on meropenem and fosfomycin therapy for six weeks.
The bone defect was reconstructed with a free vascularized
iliac crest flap. Wound coverage was achieved
with a free groin flap (Fig. 2c). In-flap anastomoses
were performed between the nutrient vessels of the iliac
crest and groin flap, and further anastomoses were performed
to the A. tibialis posterior. Furthermore, a 15 cc
bioactive glass scaffold was implanted. The postoperative
course was uneventful. X-ray analyses 21 days after
internal fixation of the iliac crest bone segment by two
k-wires showed a good iliac crest position (Fig. 2d). In the
longterm, the patient showed full weight-bearing after
one year (Fig. 2e). Furthermore, X-ray analysis revealed a
sufficient consolidated right calcaneus (Fig. 2f).
Discussion
This consecutive series of treatment recommendations
made within an MDT meeting for patients with complex
extremity defects found that the formulated treatment
plan was effective in 92.5% of the patients who adhered
to the MDT treatment recommendation. Limb salvage
was recommended with a complex reconstructive procedure
for 72.5% of the patients and limb amputation in
27.5% of the cases. However, in 21.6% of the cases the
MDT treatment decision was not implemented and a discordance
to the initial MDT treatment recommendation
detected. Of the decisions that changed after the meeting,
the most common reason was that it was unacceptable
to the patient. In particular, the decision to amputate
an extremity was significantly associated with the nonimplementation
of the MDT treatment plan.
MDT meetings are nowadays mandatory for treatment
decisions in patients with malignancies. Interestingly,
recent studies show that a discordance from the initial
tumor board decision in patients with breast cancer is
found in 8% of cases [11]. In patients with colorectal or
gastrointestinal tumor, the therapy can differ in as much
as 10% to 40% cases from the initial tumor board decision
[12]. It should be borne in mind that there are better
data and evidence in oncology and well-developed treatment
guidelines. In contrast, no specific guidelines exist
for the treatment of devastating or composite soft-tissue
and bone defects. Each case is unique and necessitates an
individualized therapeutic approach. We detected a moderate
rate of discordance (21.6%) between the initial MDT
treatment decision and final treatment plan. The key reason
for non-implementation of MDT recommendations
in 11.8% of the cases was that the MDT treatment decision
was not acceptable to the patient. Final treatments
were more conservative than initially planned, choosing
no therapy or limb reconstruction instead of amputation.
Similarly, in oncology, the patient’s preference is one of
the most important factors for a discordance between the
treatment decision of the MDT meeting and final clinical
outcome [13]. An option to increase patient’s adherence
patients in the treatment decision process by including
them in the MDT meeting. This topic has caused controversy
in several previous studies focusing on multidisciplinary
breast cancer conferences [14, 15]. However,
research on the risks and benefits of patient participation
has not provided substantiated findings yet [14].
Furthermore, Hamilton et al. showed recently that MDT
decision-making process needs a substantial review if
patients are to be effectively involved [16].
Further reasons for non-implementation of treatment
plans were comorbidities (3.9%) and new clinical
information (5.9%), which made it impossible to implement
the board’s decision, including periprocedural risk
factors. This is an important finding, which has to be
addressed in order to improve the quality of the MDT
extremity board. In particular since underestimation of
the severity of the peripheral vascular disease or progress
and detoriation of the wound status made free flap reconstruction
and limb preservation impossible.
However, the lack of consideration of the patient’s
comorbidities during multidisciplinary tumor conference
decision-making has also been demonstrated in previous
studies [13]. One strategy to improve MDT meetings’
structural quality is to use checklists for patient case
preparations [17]. Although our MDT meeting checklist
tool did include a section for patient’s comorbidities, new
clinical information or worsening of a clinical diagnosis
may inhibit the implementation of a treatment decision.
This study also identified factors associated with the
non-implementation of the MDT treatment plan. As
expected, the MDT treatment decision for limb-amputation
was a significant factor in not adhering to the
treatment decision (p = 0.029). Patients preferred to get
no therapy or insisted on the attempt of complex reconstructive
procedures in the view of a rather low chance of
success instead of limb amputation. However, postoperative
functionality and survival benefit were critical factors
in the decision-making process [18, 19]. Thorough
patient education is urgently needed to increase therapy
adherence. Furthermore, debriefing of changed therapeutic
plans is necessary when the MDT treatment decision
is not followed.
The concept of MDT meetings for patients with complex
extremity defects is still relatively new [10]. In 2015
we established these MDT meetings comprising experts
from orthopedic and trauma, plastic and vascular surgery
analogous to multidisciplinary tumor board meetings.
The aim was to find a treatment plan for challenging
cases, in which patients presented with complex defects
of the extremities, involving at least two surgical disciplines
for limb salvage (Fig. 2). Furthermore, patients
with limb-threatening diseases in whom the feasibility
and sense of limb preservation was insecure were presented.
Of note, approximately 300 free flap extremity
reconstructions are performed annually in our clinic,
of which only 5–6% were presented in the MDT meeting
for extremity defects. Patients with simple soft tissue
defects of the extremities, necessitating all kinds of free
flaps (fasciocutaenous-, musculocutaneous-, osseous- or
composite free flaps), were not presented in the MDT
meeting.
The complexity and severity of the cases presented
in the MDT meeting are further reflected by the high
number of patients with combined bone- and soft tissue
defects (70%) as well as extensive skeletal defects, multifragmented
fractures, or infected bone (64.7%). Furthermore,
45.1% of the patients had a pathologic vascular
status, complicating the therapy.
Although 70.6% of the patients from this study suffered
from extensive, combined bone and soft tissue defects,
the decision to restore the extremity was reached in
almost two-thirds of the patients. When the MDT treatment
plan for limb reconstruction was followed, limb
salvage with proper weight-bearing was achieved in 91%
of cases. This high percentage of weight-bearing patients
is quite satisfying, taking into consideration the severity
of limb-threatening diseases. In patients, in which limb
amputation was the only viable option, the MDT meeting
provided a platform to define the optimal limb length.
Our outcome analysis showed that patients with recommended
limb amputation showed a proper stump healing
and regained the ability to walk with prosthesis. Telemedicine
was used in quite a high percentage of patients
(80%) to ensure all participating disciplines’ input and
presence for effective decision-making. In this context, a
recent study from Endean et al. showed that telemedicine
evaluation of patients with vascular pathologies is accurate
and effective, and compares to on-site evaluations
[20].
The requirements for a functioning MDT meeting
for patients with complex extremity defects were comparable
to those of cancer MDT meetings [13, 17]. The
MDT meeting had a sensible team structure and was
managed by an integratively-acting expert in extremity
reconstruction. Structured presentations were adapted
to standardized checklists, including complete diagnosis,
as well as patient-related factors such as psychosocial
factors and patient preferences regarding the
treatment recommendation. For the MDT treatment
decision, an expert committee consisting of decisionmakers
from all surgical disciplines was present. Auditing
of non-implementation of MDT treatment decisions
and studying reasons for changed decisions provided
us useful feedback. To maximize MDT meeting performance
and to achieve patient-centered decisions,
should be provided in every patient presentation.
This study has some limitations. Although this is
the first study of MDT treatment implementations in
patients with complex extremity defects, the main limitation
of this study stem from its retrospective observational
study design -specifically, the potential for
confounders, lack of clinical detail, and selection bias.
Furthermore, the small sample size may limit the generalizability
of our findings. Therefore, further prospective
studies are necessary to analyze if the quality of
care improves with MDT extremity boards in this challenging
patient population.
Conclusions
MDT meetings for patients with complex extremity
defects offer a platform to formulate individual treatment
plans and to avoid limb amputation in the majority
of cases. Patient preferences and patient-related
factors are crucial and must be considered to successfully
implement the reached MDT meeting decision.