Background
Dysphagia is a priority issue in Head and Neck cancer
(HNC) survivorship. Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) is
a common and potentially life-threatening chronic toxicity of radiotherapy (RT) for HNC. While an independent predictor of quality of life (QOL) in HNC
survivorship, dysphagia can also have a devastating impact on the health of patients. The lifetime risk of aspiration pneumonia is 20–24% after chemoradiation for
HNC [1, 2], representing a 2.7-fold elevated risk of
pneumonia in HNC survivors (age ≥ 65 years) over
matched non-cancer controls in the United States population. Aspiration pneumonia also confers a 42% excess
risk of mortality among HNC survivors who develop
pneumonia relative to those who do not [1]. Moreover,
dysphagia predisposes to malnutrition and nutritional
deficiencies. Despite treatment advances, up to 70% require tube feeding, typically for a minimum of several
months during and immediately following RT [3]; feeding tube dependency persists in approximately 45% of
patients 3 months after finishing cancer treatment [4–9].
Despite improvements in conformal planning techniques to lessen normal tissue injury from RT [10], almost all patients experience some degree of early
dysphagia. RT dose thresholds for dysphagia suggest that
risk persists even with emerging investigational efforts in
swallowing optimized RT planning [11]. While acute
dysphagia improves for the majority of patients in the
early months after RT ends, many survivors suffer
chronic or progressive radiation-associated dysphagia
years after treatment. In fact, among those with late (beyond 5 years) toxicities, 66% have severe dysphagia requiring lifelong feeding tube dependence [12]. Recent
work highlights the severity of this endpoint to cancer
survivors, who ranked feeding tube dependency as one
of 6 outcomes of their cancer treatment that were worse
than death [13].
There is a rapidly growing pool of HNC survivors at
risk for chronic dysphagia, with 68,785 incident cases
annually in the USA and Canada [14, 15]. A large proportion of HNCs are now human papillomavirus (HPV)-
driven oropharyngeal cancers, the incidence of which is
expected to sharply rise through 2030 [16]. Almost all of
this fast growing, large subgroup of HNC survivors have
been treated with curative RT at doses ≥60 Gray, sufficient to induce chronic dysphagia. HPV-associated HNC
is diagnosed younger (median age: 54 years) [17] than
tobacco-related HNC with excellent five-year survival
probability of 79% [18]. As such, survivors have the potential to live many active years (even decades) with toxicities of RT including dysphagia.
Oncologists commonly refer patients for swallowing
therapy with a speech language pathologist to lessen risk
or severity of radiation-associated dysphagia, but best
practice is not established using prospective evidence.
Some patients are monitored and referred for dysphagia
interventions only in response to a swallow problem (REACTIVE therapy), a so-called “wait and see” approach.
Thus, RE-ACTIVE therapy aims to reverse an already
impaired swallow back to its functional pre-morbid state,
typically with exercise and mealtime adjustment [19]. In
contrast, other patients are referred pre-emptively for
prophylactic “PRO-ACTIVE” swallowing therapy that
aims to prevent or lessen the severity or duration of dysphagia. PRO-ACTIVE interventions are prescribed early
– before the swallow problem begins – in an effort to inhibit disuse atrophy and fibrosis [19]. PRO-ACTIVE
therapy can vary in intensity. Some receive PROACTIVE therapy focused on keeping them eating to
keep muscles active (our PRO-ACTIVE EAT group)
[20], while others are also prescribed swallowing exercise
between meals (our PRO-ACTIVE EAT+EXCERCISE
group) [21]. The two broad categories, PRO-ACTIVE
versus RE-ACTIVE, as well as the variation in intensity of PRO-ACTIVE therapy (‘EAT versus ‘EAT+EXERCISE’), represent the most common therapy models in
North America [19] and the UK [22].
The benefits of swallowing therapy in ideal settings,
regardless of its timing and intensity, are suggested by
many single institution observational and controlled efficacy trials. Two recent systematic reviews (one from the
PRO-ACTIVE investigators) showed benefits to various
outcomes, including feeding tube dependence, QOL,
swallow efficiency, function, and swallow physiology
from both PRO-ACTIVE (early) and RE-ACTIVE (delayed) therapy [21, 23]. Specifically, pooled data from efficacy trials suggested lower feeding tube dependence
among those who received PRO-ACTIVE therapy with
exercise relative to either RE-ACTIVE or lower intensity
PRO-ACTIVE therapy (odds ratio [OR]: 0.53, 90% CI:
0.29, 0.97, 21). Likewise, our meta-analysis identified
equally convincing benefit to swallow function from REACTIVE therapy (OR: 3.70, 95% CI, 1.53, 8.94) compared to either no therapy or less intensive therapy [21].
Unfortunately, no review to date has identified the timing (PRO-ACTIVE versus RE-ACTIVE) or intensity (less
versus more) most effective when applied in a real-world
setting. Despite several meritorious efforts using small
efficacy trials and even more robust meta-analysis, the
decisional dilemma regarding what is the best timing
and intensity of behavioural swallowing interventions
during RT remains, precluding evidence-based prescription and effective health system resource allocation.
The chief dilemma for therapy providers centers on
when swallowing therapy should begin. The investigators’ survey [19] of North American speech language pathologists reported an even distribution among these
therapies, with 48% of respondents practicing PROACTIVE therapy versus 52% who used RE-ACTIVE
therapy. Clearly clinical equipoise exists and contributes
to variation in our practice. The dilemma is further
heightened considering the target population comprises
rapidly growing numbers of younger HNC survivors
who face considerable competing toxicities during RT,
of which dysphagia registers the among the most impactful [24]. This growing prevalence of HNC survivors
with dysphagia makes it even more imperative to identify the most effective therapies, so that healthcare systems can allocate limited resources to optimize
functional recovery after curative oncologic treatment.
Aims and hypotheses
To address this evidence gap, the primary aim (Aim 1)
of the PRO-ACTIVE trial is to compare the effectiveness
of PRO-ACTIVE versus RE-ACTIVE swallowing interventions among patients with HNC planned to undergo
RT. We hypothesize that at 12-months post radiotherapy
the combined PRO-ACTIVE therapies are more effective
than RE-ACTIVE therapy (Hyp 1.1); and, if so, that
more intensive PRO-ACTIVE (EAT + EXERCISE) is superior to less intensive PRO-ACTIVE (EAT) (Hyp 1.2).
Effectiveness will be measured based on reduced duration of feeding tube dependency, a pragmatic outcome
valued by diverse stakeholders including patients, caregivers and clinicians [13, 21, 25, 26].
The second aim (Aim 2) of the PRO-ACTIVE trial is
to compare the relative benefit or harm of PROACTIVE to RE-ACTIVE swallowing intervention on all
secondary outcomes at both 3- and 12- months post
radiotherapy, namely: swallowing impairment, maximum
interincisal opening (trismus), swallowing-related QOL,
symptom burden, self-reported pneumonia, malnutrition
and mood disorder, cancer coping strategies, diet level,
feeding tube rates, weight loss, hospitalization and/or
emergency department (ED) presentation. In addition,
the second aim will compare the benefit on reduced duration of feeding tube presence at 3-month post radiotherapy. Our hypothesis for this second aim is that the
combined PRO-ACTIVE interventions will result in better secondary outcomes at 3- and 12- months following
the completion of RT (Hyp 2.1). As in our primary aim,
for each secondary outcome for which PRO-ACTIVE is
superior, dose response of the PRO-ACTIVE arms will
be examined hypothesizing the more intensive therapy
as superior (Hyp 2.2).
The third aim (Aim 3) of the PRO-ACTIVE trial is to
explore the relative benefit or harm of the PROACTIVE and RE-ACTIVE swallowing interventions in
relevant subgroups according to the following: age,
tumor site, prior surgery, radiation dose, chemotherapy
use, and prophylactic feeding tube use. Our hypothesis
for this third aim is that all interventions will be more
effective in the following higher risk subgroups: older
age; non-HPV related cancer sites; prior surgery; higher
radiation dose; chemotherapy (yes); and, prophylactic
feeding tube insertion (yes).
Methods/design
Overview of trial design
This is a multi-center, single-blinded 3-arm behavioural
intervention pragmatic RCT that will compare the effectiveness of PRO-ACTIVE versus RE-ACTIVE swallowing interventions in patients with HNC receiving RT
across eleven sites in Canada and the United States. The
PRO-ACTIVE trial design was developed using PRECIS2 framework for pragmatic trial methodology and adheres to the funding agency, Patient Centered Outcomes
Research Institute (PCORI), methodology standards [27,
28]. The research question was determined based on
identification of practice variation with clinicians equally
committed to each intervention [19, 22], and gap analysis from two recent systematic reviews from the
investigative team [21] and others [23] establishing clinical equipoise between RE-ACTIVE and PRO-ACTIVE
swallowing intervention. Further refinements to the trial
protocol, including the selection of secondary outcomes,
were made with input from patient and clinical stakeholders following PCORI guidelines for stakeholder engagement. The trial protocol is in accordance with the
principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and has been
approved by Research Ethics Boards across all sites. The
trial was prospectively registered on Clinicaltrials.gov
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03455608). Any
changes that need to be made in the trial protocol will
be communicated to all investigators, the ethics committees, and the trial registry. Written informed consent will
be obtained from each participant.
A total of 952 participants with HNC planned for RT
who do not currently have dysphagia will be randomized
to receive one of 3 swallowing interventions by speech
language pathologists:.
– Arm 1. delayed intervention started promptly if/
when dysphagia is identified (RE-ACTIVE)
– Arm 2. early low intensity intervention started
before RT commences (PRO-ACTIVE EAT)
– Arm 3. early high intensity intervention started
before RT commences (PRO-ACTIVE EAT+
EXERCISE)
The randomization of participants will be stratified by
participating site using a centralized, automated and
concealed process conducted by the Data Coordinating
Center (DCC). Participants and therapy providers will
not be blinded; however, clinical raters and data analysts
will be blinded to the study arm to minimize bias. Eligible patients will be randomized in a 1:2:2 allocation to
RE-ACTIVE (Arm 1, n = 190) and each of the PROACTIVE arms (Arms 2 and 3, n = 381 per group). All
patients will be followed to 12 months post-RT. The
main intention to treat analysis will compare duration of
feeding tube dependence post-RT. The study schemata
is shown in Fig. 1.
Study settings
Cancer treating centers will be included across eleven
North American cities to account for possible regional
variation (Toronto, Houston, Boston, Madison, New
York, London, Montreal, Baltimore, Detroit Miami, Orlando). The Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, part of
the University Health Network (PM/UHN) in Toronto,
serves as the prime site. In the USA, where patients are
as likely to receive treatment at an academic or community facility, we will aim to enroll 50% of participants
from both academic and community-based facilities. In
Canada, where cancer therapy is regionalized at academic teaching facilities, we will enroll all participants
from representative academic centers but across two
provinces thereby capturing regional variation.
Study participants
Eligibility criteria were defined to allow participation of
any patient for whom the following decisional dilemma
exists: “is there a benefit to proactive swallowing therapy
during RT?” In keeping with pragmatic trial standards,
the eligibility criteria were operationalized to include any
patient who presents to begin RT for HNC with a functional swallow but at high risk for developing post-RT
dysphagia: defined as planned RT dose ≥60 Gy with
treatment volumes including bilateral neck, based on
published prediction models for tube-dependent dysphagia [29]. Our local registries confirm that these criteria
should include more than 75% of patients who enter
curative (primary or adjuvant) intent RT. As a pragmatic
RCT, we will limit restrictiveness of eligibility, thereby
seeking to include patients who are commonly excluded
from efficacy trials. Specifically, common exclusions we
have avoided for this pragmatic study are: prior surgery
or RT; non-squamous cell histology; prior swallowing
therapies unrelated to current HNC; and selected HNC
sites and stages. We will enroll patients with sufficient
fluency in written English, French, Spanish or Simplified
Chinese to be able to complete the patient reported outcome (PRO) questionnaires and use written therapy materials (i.e., study specific patient hand-outs). Eligibility
and retention plans are flexible to avoid exclusion of
participants based on co-interventions or complications
(e.g., pain management strategies, or prophylactic feeding tube use), thereby supporting our planned subgroup
analyses for heterogeneous treatment effects (i.e. Aim 3).
Inclusion criteria
1. Adults ≥18 years of age diagnosed with head and
neck malignancy
2. RT treatment planned for curative intent
3. Planned to receive external beam radiotherapy dose
≥60 Gy to bilateral neck volumes at participating
institution; and
4. Sufficient fluency in written English, French,
Spanish or Simplified Chinese to be able to
complete the study patient reported outcome
questionnaires
Exclusion criteria
1. Distant metastasis at enrollment;
2. Prior or planned total laryngectomy;
3. Moderate/severe dysphagia at enrollment per
baseline videofluoroscopy DIGEST grade ≥ 2 (as
graded per central laboratory review),
4. Previously seen by speech language pathologist for
swallowing therapy for the current head and neck
cancer
5. Diagnosis of second primary non-head and neck
cancers in the thorax or the central nervous system
at enrollment
6. Head and neck radiotherapy for thyroid or
cutaneous/skin primary tumors, regardless of neck
fields.
There will be no purposeful exclusion by age within
adult age (18 years of age and older), sex, gender, race,
or ethnicity. Instead, the composition of age, women,
and minorities will reflect the demographic of subjects
with HNC who are treated at participating sites. We will
adhere to NIH standards for maintaining and presenting
data on self-declared race and ethnicity including two
ethnic categories (Hispanic/Latino and Non-Hispanic or
Latino) and five racial categories (American Indian or
Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Native
Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, and White).
At each participating site, coordinators will screen
tumour board lists and radiation treatment schedules
weekly to identify potentially eligible patients. Site coordinators will then approach the patient at or after their
next standard of care clinic appointment (e.g., with radiation oncology, medical oncology, surgery, or speech
language pathology) to obtain consent, after a member
of the treatment team has first discussed the trial with
the patient. All eligible patients who provide informed
consent will be consecutively enrolled to capture a representative spectrum of the target population. A screening log will detail clinicopathologic and demographics of
all patients screened, approached, enrolled and randomized to examine the representative nature of the trial,
and will be transparently reported in accordance with
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT)
standards [30, 31].
Screening before randomization
After giving written informed consent, participants fulfilling all eligibility criteria will be enrolled in the study.
Participants will only be randomly assigned to the study
intervention after screening for no/mild baseline dysphagia using videofluoroscopic swallow (VFS) study digital
recordings. The screening step requires independent and
blinded central laboratory review of the baseline VFS by
trained speech language pathologists. Baseline dysphagia
is operationally defined as a DIGEST [32] grade of > 2.
Screen failure information will be captured in the electronic database to ensure transparent reporting according to the CONSORT guidance. The minimal data set in
the screening log includes demography (age, sex, tumor
and treatment plan), screen failure details, and eligibility
criteria.
Study withdrawals
Participants are free to withdraw from participation in
the study at any time upon request. Furthermore, a site
investigator may discontinue or withdraw a participant
from the study for the following reasons: if any clinical
adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality, or other
medical condition or situation occurs such that continued participation in the study would not be in the best
interest of the participant; or, if intent of treatment
changes to palliative. The reason for participant discontinuation or withdrawal from the study will be recorded.
Subjects who sign the informed consent form and are
randomized but do not receive the study intervention
may be replaced. Subjects who sign the informed consent form, are randomized and receive the study intervention, but subsequently withdraw or are withdrawn or
discontinued from the study, will not be replaced.
Study interventions
This 3-arm pragmatic trial will compare RE-ACTIVE
swallow therapy (Arm 1) to two hierarchical conditions
of PRO-ACTIVE swallowing therapy (Arms 2 & 3). All
arms will receive an identical, routine baseline swallowing evaluation with the speech language pathologist. Before RT begins, patients will be randomized to 1 of 3
conditions of swallowing therapy as detailed below (preRT is operationally defined as before RT begins up to
RT treatment day 3, to allow baseline procedures to
occur on RT day 1, if necessary, when patients return to
the cancer center for care):
RE-ACTIVE therapy (arm 1)
Participants will receive no swallowing therapy sessions
from the speech language pathologist unless they develop dysphagia. If and when the following signs and
symptoms of dysphagia develop, patients will begin REACTIVE therapy as per the same EAT+EXERCISE
protocol in Arm 3. The trigger to initiate swallowing
intervention was selected based on input from stakeholders including, patients, family members, and a wide
array of clinical providers involved in the treatment of
HNC patients. Arm 1 participants will “trigger” when
any one of the following conditions are met:
1. Participant reports a common dysphagia symptom
(i.e., “choking”) on a standardized PRO screen taken
weekly during RT, defined as a score ≥ 6 on the
MDASI-HN choke item “difficulty choking on foods
or liquids” [33].
2. Participant becomes 100% feeding tube dependent
as monitored weekly during RT.
3. Participant develops aspiration pneumonia during
RT, as per suspicion by any healthcare team
member, that then triggers prescription of an
antibiotic.
Participants who develop or endorse any one of the
above three trigger conditions will be referred to begin
RE-ACTIVE swallowing therapy according to the EAT+
EXERCISE model within three RT days of their trigger.
PRO-ACTIVE therapy (arms 2 & 3)
All participants randomized to PRO-ACTIVE arms will
receive in person swallowing therapy sessions with a
speech language pathologist once before RT begins then
every 2 weeks during RT (weeks 2, 4, 6) and coached to
continue daily independent therapy in between live sessions. The two PRO-ACTIVE arms will adhere to the
same frequency of live sessions but differ in the intensity
of the exercise. Specifically,
PRO-ACTIVE “EAT” (Arm 2) will aim to keep the
patient eating challenging foods safely and efficiently
through the duration of RT (typically 6 to 7 weeks). Arm
2 represents a low intensity PRO-ACTIVE therapy, not
requiring any additional exercise or therapy outside of
mealtime.
In contrast, PRO-ACTIVE “EAT + EXERCISE” (Arm
3) will include the same therapy as Arm 2 (EAT) and in
addition, the patient will be trained in swallowing exercises to be executed independently between meals (EXERCISE). Arm 3 represents a high intensity PROACTIVE therapy asking the patient to perform a standardized set of throat exercises outside of mealtime.
All three swallowing therapy interventions require no
training or expertise beyond that of a typical provider,
namely a speech language pathologist, in a usual care
setting. Each arm represents a reproducible version of
therapy options that are currently provided in usual care
settings in this population [19, 22]. In keeping with pragmatic trial standards [34], co-interventions are not prohibited (e.g., pain management, other non-swallowing
behavioral therapies, other swallowing therapies post
RT, or other systemic cancer treatment including
chemotherapy and surgeries), but will be tracked in the
trial database. Likewise, patients with feeding tube in situ
at baseline will not be excluded, but will be tracked in
the trial database. For the purpose of reproducibility and
understanding natural adherence, patients will be asked
to log adherence to their swallowing therapy interventions with a simple paper “diary” log.
Outcome measures
This is a pragmatic RCT. Therefore, effectiveness will be
assessed through a series of questionnaires and clinical
exams to study swallowing status and swallowing-related
QOL. A complete list of study activities is summarized
in Table 1. The follow-up schedule is carefully planned
to align with the schedule of cancer surveillance visits
that patients attend in usual practice setting. We will
evaluate patients to 12 months to examine long-term effectiveness. Capture of outcome intervals have been set
with wide, but discrete windows to enhance flexibility.
In all arms, off schedule visits are allowable should problems arise, as per usual care. Clinical testing specified in
the protocol represents what is standard at institutions
that have adopted the PRO-ACTIVE models as routine
care.
Primary outcome
The primary endpoint of duration of feeding tube dependence was selected because of its high relevance and
clear importance to both patients and providers [35, 36].
Maintaining the ability to swallow foods and liquids is
the primary functional priority ranked by HNC patients
both before and after their treatment [35, 37]. Because
feeding tube utilization requires greater resource burden,
this endpoint is also relevant to administrators and
payers who make decisions about whether to support a
healthcare service by way of reimbursement, staffing, or
endorsement as best practice. Feeding tube dependence
is also pragmatic as a primary endpoint because it is universally measured in usual care, that is, providers ask
about and document feeding tube status at routine clinical visits. Therefore, our primary endpoint of feeding
tube use can be ascertained by medical chart, in clinic,
or by our study specific electronic PRO (ePRO) remotely. A participant will be considered lost to followup if feeding tube use cannot be ascertained by any
means at 12 months post RT.
Secondary outcomes
Secondary outcome measures represent both cliniciangraded and patient reported outcome (PROs) measures.
These measures were selected based on feasibility [38] at
all sites, psychometric validation, familiarity to the investigative team, and/or wide used in routine settings of
care, thereby maintaining pragmatic standards. The secondary outcomes are the following:
1) The MD Anderson Dysphagia Inventory (MDADI)
MDADI is a widely used PRO instrument to evaluate
swallowing-related QOL in HNC patients [39]. The 20-
item questionnaire quantifies an individual’s global,
physical, emotional, and functional perceptions of swallowing ability. MDADI was internally developed and validated at MD Anderson Cancer Center and has been
integrated in the MDACC dysphagia clinic for more
than 10 years. Questionnaire development included engagement of providers and patients with HNC who experienced dysphagia iteratively throughout conception
and refinement of the final scale. In a validation sample
of 100 patients with HNC, concurrent validity was moderate by comparison with the Performance Status ScaleHead and Neck (Spearman correlation, 0.47-0.61). Correlation with the subscales of SF-36 demonstrated convergent and divergent validity of the MDADI. Testretest reliability (physical, 0.86; emotional, 0.88; functional, 0.88) and internal consistency reliability (overall
Cronbach’s alpha, 0.96) were sound [39]. Subsequent
validation studies further demonstrated suitable psychometric properties in patients with different ethniccultural backgrounds [40–42]. Perceived dysphagia as
quantified by the MDADI is time-dependent, radiotherapy dose-dependent and varies by extent of surgery and
tumor site in HNC samples [35, 43]. The investigators
have previously shown a 10-point between-group difference to discriminate a clinically meaningful difference in
swallowing outcome [44].
2) The MD Anderson Symptom Inventory for Head
and Neck Cancer (MDASI-HN)
MDASI-HN is a multi-symptom PRO instrument designed to measure severity or burden of cancer-related
symptoms and their interference with or effect on patients’ daily functioning [33, 45]. Symptom burden refers
to the severity of physical or mental experience by a patient with a specific symptom. Symptom measures are
more specific and direct than QOL measures and thus
are more sensitive to treatment-related changes. The 28-
item MDASI-HN multi-symptom inventory measures
include 13 core items (“systemic symptoms”: pain, fatigue, sleep, etc.), 9 head and neck specific items (“local
symptoms”: dry mouth, mucus, shortness of breath,
taste, etc.), and 6 interference items (activity, work, relations, etc.). The core MDASI items were validated for
use in cancer patient populations regardless of the specific diagnosis or type of therapy [45] and thus can be
used to compare symptom burden between different
types of cancer. The 9 head and neck specific items were
validated internally at MDACC with regard to construct
and concurrent validity in a cohort of 205 HNC patients
[33]. Internal consistency reliability is high in the core
MDASI score, the 9 head and neck-specific items, and
the 6 interference items (Cronbach’s α: 0.72–0.92).
MDASI-HN can be completed in less than 7 min.
MDASI-HN offers quantification of overall symptom
burden, but also 2 dysphagia-specific items (“difficulty
swallowing”, “choking”) and will be used to understand
and adjust for symptoms such as mouth sores, pain, or
dry mouth, that make eating challenging during RT. The
investigators have experience in using MDASI-HN in
weekly radiation clinics for symptom monitoring with a
resultant publication characterizing the evolution and
cumulative increase in symptoms weekly during HNC
RT [46]. Symptom burden can be considered both a secondary outcome, but also a potential confounder (i.e.,
competing toxicity) that may influence adherence to
swallowing therapy.
3) Videofluoroscopic Swallow (VFS) Studies
The VFS is a dynamic, radiographic imaging study, in
which the patient is administered radiopaque labeled
bolus volumes in a series of standardized liquid and solid
food consistencies to examine oropharyngeal swallow
physiology, aspiration, and/or pharyngeal residue. VFS is
considered a gold standard measure of dysphagia in clinical practice and is routinely conducted by speech language pathologists in medical settings. Digital videos
from VFS will be scored centrally by a trained speech
language pathologist blinded to clinical history using the
following measures: DIGEST [32], pharyngeal
constriction ratio (PCR) [47], penetration-aspiration
scale (PAS) [48] and maximum pharyngoesophageal segment opening (PESmax) [49]. DIGEST, the primary
measure to determine study eligibility, was developed
and validated by the study team [32] as a CTCAE compatible VFS-derived severity grade of pharyngeal dysphagia. DIGEST is reliable (intra- and inter-rater weighted k
0.82–0.84 and 0.67–0.81, respectively) and discriminates
pharyngeal pathophysiology (MBSImP™©:r = 0.77, p <
0.001), perceived dysphagia (MDADI: r = − 0.41, p <
0.001), and diet (PSS-HN: r = − 0.49, p < 0.001) in HNC
survivors [32]. DIGEST is sensitive to change in swallowing function over time [50]. PCR, the primary endpoint of VFS for secondary analysis (Aim 2), is a
continuous measure of pharyngeal swallowing strength.
PCR is a pixel based measure computing area of the
pharynx at maximum constriction at peak swallow over
the resting area of the pharynx from the mid-sagittal
radiograph. PCR provides a reliable radiographic surrogate measure of pharyngeal strength (measured against
gold standard pharyngeal manometry) [47, 51, 52] and
discriminates aspiration status in dysphagia populations
[52]. PAS is an 8-point ordinal classification of swallow
airway safety capturing bolus penetration and aspiration,
where a score of 1 indicates no airway entry, 2–5 indicates penetration, and 6–8 indicates aspiration. PAS ratings are highly reliable (ICC for inter- and intra-rater
reliability: 0.96 and 0.95–0.97, respectively) and predictive of aspiration pneumonia after chemoradiation
(p < 0.001, AUC = 0.72) [1]. PESmax provides a reliable radiographic surrogate marker of stricture at the
level of the cricopharyngeal muscle, which if present
will critically disrupt transport of the bolus into the
esophagus [53].
4) Performance Status Scale Head and Neck (PSS-HN)
The PSS-HN [54] is a 3-item validated semi-structured
interview tool capturing normalcy of diet, public eating,
and, understandability of speech. Each item is scored
from 0 to 100, with the higher score indicating better
performance. The PSS-HN correlated well with the
FACT-HN, especially for normalcy of diet and eating in
public (r = 0.66, p < 0.0001; r = 0.42, p < 0.0001, respectively) and is a reliable tool, sensitive to differences in
functioning when applied to HNC patients [55]. The
PRO-ACTIVE trial adaptation of PSS-HN includes additional questions regarding tracheotomy status and feeding tube utilization.
5) Medical Outcome of Dysphagia (MOD)
The Medical Outcomes of Dysphagia (MOD) is a
newly developed 3-part inventory that targets patient
reported symptoms related to health consequences secondary to dysphagia, namely: malnutrition (MOD-Nutrition), aspiration pneumonia (MOD-Pulmonary) and
mood changes such as depression and anxiety (MODPsychology) [56]. The MOD-Nutrition sub-scale consists
of 13 items, of which all but one have either a 3, 4 or 5-
point ordinal response; the remaining item quantifies
food intake. The MOD-Pulmonary sub-scale consists of
11 items, of which all have a 5-point ordinal response.
Likewise, the MOD-Psychology sub-scale consists of
45 items, of which all have a 5-point ordinal response. The study assessing reliability and divergent
validity of the items in the three MOD subscales has
recently been completed, and included over 350 patients, among whom 77% had a diagnosis of dysphagia secondary to head and neck cancer. Each of the
sub-scales has excellent inter-rater reliability with the
following total score ICC (95% confidence interval):
MOD-Nutrition, ICC = 0.84 (0.73–0.91); MODPulmonary, ICC = 0.89 (0.81–0.94); and, MODPsychology ICC = 0.90 (0.83–0.94). The items on the
MOD were derived from an extensive review of the
literature combined with collective opinion of clinicians, patients and caregivers [56].
6) Cancer Behavior Inventory – Version 3 (CBI-V3)
The Cancer Behavior Inventory was developed as a
comprehensive measure of self-efficacy strategies for
coping with cancer, drawing from self-regulation and
self-efficacy theories [57–59]. The most recent version
of 27 items has undergone extensive revision to ease
administration and strengthen psychometric properties. The measure is designed at a grade 6 reading
level and has 7 subscales or factors including Maintaining Activity and Independence, Seeking and Understanding Medical Information, Emotion Regulation,
Coping with Treatment Side Effects, Accepting Cancer/Maintaining a Positive Attitude, Seeking Social
Support, and Using Spiritual Coping. Internal
consistency is reported as Cronbach’s alpha of .946,
and test-retest reliability as r = .890 (4 months) with
mixed groups of cancer patients [60]. Validity coefficients indicate strong psychometric properties with
higher scores on the CBI associated with better adjustment to cancer, higher quality of life, and lower
levels of emotional distress. Each item presents an activity a cancer patient might do during and after cancer treatment and is scored on a Likert type scale
ranging from 1 (‘not at all confident’) to 7 (‘totally
confident’). Scores are derived for each of the subscales as well as an overall total score.
EQ-5D-5L is a modified version of the widely used
EuroQOL 5 Dimension [61]. The brief 6-item EQ-5D-5L
questionnaire is used to describe and value health. The
EQ-5D-5L descriptive system measures five levels of severity in each of the existing five dimensions (mobility,
self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, and anxiety/
depression). The questionnaire also contains a Visual
Analog Scale, by which respondents can report their perceived health status with a grade ranging from 0 (the
worst possible health status) to 100 (the best possible
health status).
8) Medical History
Intake details, radiation therapy details, systemic therapy/chemotherapy details, tumour status, surgery history, tracheotomy, feeding tube insertion, removal, and
use dates, feeding tube dependence, concomitant swallowing therapies, vital status, BMI, and complication details will be collected by review of patient medical record
at specified intervals.
9) Pain Medications
All pain medications, including over-the-counter medications, reportedly taken in the past 48 h are noted on
the pain medication form in the case record form (CRF)
at pre-specified intervals (e.g. baseline, week 6 of RT, 3
months and 12 months post RT).
10) Mouth Opening/Trismus
Interincisal opening will be measured at baseline, and
3 months and 12 months post RT using a standardized
TheraBite® Range of Motion Scale (TRMS) [62]. Reference points will be noted (gingiva and/or teeth) on the
study case report form.
11) Hospitalization/ Emergency Department
Presentation
Hospitalization and/or emergency department presentation will be abstracted from the medical record and by
asking participants to identify such events to any external institutions anytime during their participation in the
trial.
Safety and adverse events
The therapy provider and/or study team will review adverse events of special interest (AESI) at each study visit.
Two adverse events of special interests (AESIs) in Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, CTCAE
version 5 [63] monitored by the DSMB (Data Safety
Monitoring Board) for this trial safety include: weight
loss of grade > 2, or aspiration of grade > 2. In addition,
at week 6 of RT, the study team will record the onset
and peak severity of selected adverse events during RT,
also graded using CTCAE version 5, for the following
categories: dysphagia, oral and pharyngeal mucositis,
oropharyngeal pain, nausea, vomiting and dermatitis. Attribution of each AESI to study intervention will be
assessed by the clinician and/or study team according to
best clinical judgment. It is expected that many of the
AESIs will be related to the RT (cancer treatment). The
summaries of AESIs will be reviewed regularly by the
trial DSMB.
Data management plan
The data management plan was developed in accordance
with PCORI Methodology Standards for Data Integrity
and Rigorous Analysis. Data sources include the electronic health record, PRO questionnaires, imaging data
(videofluoroscopy and DICOM radiation dose-grids),
and study specific questionnaires. A robust centralized
web-based database was designed and maintained by the
Techna Institute: Health Informatics Core, an independent research institute within UHN. Manuals of Procedures (MOP) will ensure harmonized entry of individual
data items from each source and site under a common
data model structure. Authentication, anonymization,
and confidentiality plans are detailed in the contractual
arrangement with the Techna Institute.
Statistical analysis
Primary endpoint
For the primary endpoint, an intention-to-treat (ITT)
approach will be applied incorporating a gate-keeper
method to control risk of Type 1 error in the setting
of multiple comparisons [64, 65]. The primary hypothesis (Hyp 1.1) is that the combined PROACTIVE interventions (PRO-ACTIVE EAT and PROACTIVE EAT+EXERCISE) will result in a better swallow outcome compared to RE-ACTIVE as measured
by duration of feeding tube use in the first year after
the completion of RT. If PRO-ACTIVE is superior in
Hyp 1.1, we will assess the dose response of the
PRO-ACTIVE arms. The secondary hypothesis (Hyp
1.2) is that the most intensive intervention (PRO-ACTIVE EAT+EXERCISE) will be more effective than
the least intensive (PRO-ACTIVE EAT).
The initial analysis will compare the RE-ACTIVE
group to the combined PRO-ACTIVE groups in terms
of the duration of feeding tube use operationalized as
count of days of tube use from end of RT to last tube
use within the 12-month study period by means of a
multiple linear regression model with covariate adjustment. The presence of a feeding tube which is not being
used for feeds is disregarded. The treatment effect will
be expressed as absolute mean difference along with
95% confidence intervals. If this test yields p < 0.05, the
two PRO-ACTIVE groups (EAT versus EAT+EXERCISE) will be compared using the same linear analysis
method. The meaningful variables we will include in the
regression model are: age (as a continuous variable);
HPV status (oropharyngeal site vs all others); surgery
(yes/no); chemotherapy (yes/no); radiation dose (as a
continuous variable); and, facility (as a categorical variable to account for practice variation across the eleven
sites).
The largest threat of missing data is non-random loss
of outcomes data for the primary endpoint. Missing data
for the primary endpoint is extremely unlikely because it
is a simple variable that can be ascertained in clinic or
remotely via telephone/web interview of the patient.
Non-random missing data is more likely for outcomes
requiring clinic examination (i.e., videofluoroscopy) for
which we have estimated attrition at 26% based on prior
longitudinal work from the investigators [38]. For outcomes missing in > 10% of patients, we will consider
multiple approaches. One method we may employ is inverse probability weighting approach to account for statistical uncertainty due to missingness. Another option
we will explore is multivariate imputation using chained
equations [66]. When similar inferences are derived
from complete case analysis and imputation, we will report complete case analysis results for simplicity and
transparency.
Secondary endpoints
The analysis of the secondary endpoints is not
dependent on the findings of the primary endpoint. The
hypothesis (Hyp 2.1) is that the combined PRO-ACTIVE
interventions will result in a better secondary outcomes
including videofluoroscopic swallowing evaluations,
functional status measures, health status measures, and
patient reported outcomes 3 months following the completion of RT. For the secondary outcomes, ITT analysis
will again use a gate-keeper approach to assess differences between arms. Continuous outcomes will be evaluated with ANCOVA approach (multiple linear models
regressing outcome on randomization arm plus the
baseline measure for adjustment) at the 3-month posttreatment interval when a baseline measurement is
present and a t-test (or suitable replacement) otherwise.
The treatment effect will be expressed as the mean adjusted difference, or equivalently, mean adjusted change
along with 95% confidence intervals. Binary outcomes
will be compared by means of a chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test if expected counts are less than 5 and
treatment effects will be expressed as risk differences
with 95% confidence intervals. Sensitivity will be
assessed in terms of consistency of inference as well as
magnitudes of effect size using distributional measures
of Minimal Clinically Important Difference (MCID) [67]
or anchor-based MCID [44] when available to interpret
whether observed differences are meaningful. Exploratory analyses will be conducted on all outcomes with repeated measurements using mixed-effect models to
examine time by treatment interactions. Exploratory
subgroup analyses will examine the relative benefit or
harm of the PRO-ACTIVE and RE-ACTIVE swallowing
interventions in relevant subgroups according to the following: patient (age, tumor site, prior surgery); and provider (radiation dose, chemotherapy use, prophylactic
feeding tube use).
Sub-group analyses (heterogeneous treatment effects, HTEs)
Acknowledging that certain groups may benefit substantially while others may benefit far less, exploratory heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) analyses are planned
(Aim 3). The goal of the HTE analyses is to explore if
there are subgroups for whom swallowing interventions
have varied impact. For hypothesis-generating analyses,
HTEs will be assessed by testing the treatment arm by
subgroup interaction. Analyses are planned according to
two potential sources of HTE [34]: the patient and provider. For parsimony, a likelihood ratio test will examine
proposed HTEs simultaneously. Irrespective of their significance, the subgroup effects will be reported (with
95% confidence intervals) to be assessed in terms of clinical significance.
We have identified several participant subgroups for
whom differences in treatment response or swallowing
outcomes may exist. Preliminary data suggest superior
swallowing outcomes in younger patients [10], those
with HPV-associated cancers [68–70] those with no
prior surgery [68], those who receive lower doses of RT
[10], those who avoid chemotherapy [68, 71] and who
avoid prophylactic feeding tube placement [9]. Each of
these classifications will be examined as relevant subgroups in the exploratory HTE analysis, as justified
below:
Sample size calculation
Sample size calculations, based on a 2-sample t-test, assume 952 patients enrolled with 1:4 allocation to REACTIVE (Arm 1, n = 190) and PRO-ACTIVE arms
(Arms 2 and 3, n = 381 per group). The attrition factor
is set at 5% because the primary endpoint can be ascertained without clinical encounter. Thus, the resultant
sample size estimated is 180 in Arm 1, 361 in Arm 2,
and 361 in Arm 3. For the primary comparison (Hyp
1.1) of Arm 1 (n = 180) versus the combined Arms 2
and 3 (n = 722), assuming ITT analysis with type 1 error
probability of 0.05 (two-sided) yields 80% power to detect a small effect size of .23 SD for duration of feeding tube use. For the analysis of Hyp 1.2 in the gate-keeper
approach, we will compare intensity of PRO-ACTIVE
therapies (Arm 2 versus Arm 3, n = 361 per group), assuming type 1 error probability of 0.05 (two-sided), we
have 80% power to detect again a small effect size of
0.21 SD for the primary endpoint of feeding tube duration. We expect the t-test will not be sufficient as the
primary analysis given it does not allow for covariate adjustment. Therefore, we will apply the multiple linear regression model as the primary analysis for Aim 1. The
power calculation conducted assuming t-tests for analysis of hypotheses 1.1 and 1.2 and deriving a sample of
952 patients remain sufficient for the linear model because by adjusting for variables associated with the mean
response, the distribution of the residuals is expected to
improve. Therefore, the power for the same hypothesized difference in the primary outcome attributed to
treatment in the regression framework will be at least as
much as for that for the t-test.
For the secondary analysis (Aim 2) in the gate-keeper
approach, we will compare intensity of PRO-ACTIVE
therapies (Arm 2 versus Arm 3, n = 361 per group), assuming type 1 error probability of 0.05 (two-sided), we
have 80% power to detect again a small effect size of
0.24 SD for PROs and VFS measures. The attrition factor for the secondary analysis is set at 26% because they
are more prone to attrition due to required clinical visits
and survey responses required from participants. As an
exception, feeding tube dependence at 3-months uses an
attrition factor of 5%, for the same rationale as the primary endpoint.
Discussion
Despite continued improvements in RT techniques to
optimize functional outcomes by minimizing collateral
normal tissue damage [10], almost all patients experience some degree of early dysphagia. Dysphagia is not
only an acute toxicity but a progressive and chronic
issue particularly relevant to the rapidly growing pool
of younger HNC survivors who achieve long-term
cure [24].
Several single institution observational and controlled
efficacy trials as well as two recent systematic reviews
have shown benefits of swallowing therapy, regardless of
its timing and intensity, to various outcomes, including
feeding tube dependence, QOL, swallow efficiency, function, and swallow physiology [21, 23]. While offering a
strong evidence base for efficacy of swallowing interventions in this population, these small efficacy trials and
meta-analyses were unable to identify the timing (PROACTIVE versus RE-ACTIVE) or intensity (less versus
more) that is most effective in treating dysphagia. As
such, the PRO-ACTIVE trial was designed as a pragmatic, real-world examination to compare effectiveness
of 3 models of swallowing therapy during the radiotherapy interval.
Strengths and limitations
Stakeholder engagement in the development and implementation of the PRO-ACTIVE trial is a major strength.
In keeping with the PCORI standards, stakeholder consultation and collaboration was built into all study
phases, from conception through dissemination. As an
initial step in engagement, the trial concept was presented to the National Foundation on Swallowing Disorders (NFOSD) who endorsed the relevance of the
decisional dilemma. Provider stakeholders in the investigators’ Radiation-Associated Dysphagia Investigative
Working Group also met over 30 h to refine proposed
Arms, pragmatically align methodologic decisions, and
to enhance feasibility of study procedures across different geographic and sociodemographic settings. Stakeholder panels in both Canada and the USA share
governance and consultation over the life of the study.
Diverse stakeholders representing the perspectives of patients, caregivers, physicians, allied health care providers,
policy makers, and payors convene in these panels at
regular intervals to advise the investigators in key trial
issues. Stakeholder engagement has informed operationalization of the ‘trigger’ criteria for the RE-ACTIVE
therapy arm, secondary outcome measurement, recruitment/retention strategies, and the content of studyspecific patient educational materials.
PRO-ACTIVE was designed in accordance with pragmatic trial standards. The investigators used the
PRECIS-2 tool [27, 28] to guide development of the trial
protocol to ensure that findings are derived from a study
design that is reflective of, and thus generalizable to, the
real-world setting. For this reason, outcome measures
represent those most practically implemented in the
clinical setting. A limitation of the trial protocol includes
the omission of detailed RT dose data, specifically including the dose distributions to normal tissues (commonly referred to as organs-at-risk, or OARs). While it
is outside the scope of the PRO-ACTIVE trial protocol
to analyze RT plans to extract OAR dose, the trial protocol includes the upload and archiving of the full RT
DICOM data set including the anatomic imaging and
dose files. This RT plan archive will allow the investigators the opportunity for future post-hoc correlative analysis of RT plans with other trial data.
Other key omissions from the trial protocol include
details of financial burden or cost incurred by patients
and their caregivers. The investigators recognize the critical importance of this issue in modern healthcare. This
domain was outside the scope of allowable funding for
the PRO-ACTIVE trial. The investigators intend to consider alternate funding sources to examine cost in a subset of PRO-ACTIVE trial participants for exploratory
or hypothesis-generating purposes. Another avenue for
future or related work is qualitatively exploring the perspective of patients, caregivers, and providers in the lived
experience of swallowing therapy during the PROACTIVE study.
The data obtained from PRO-ACTIVE is intended to
help address the decisional dilemma about which type
and timing of swallowing therapy provides the best outcomes in the real world and in distinct subgroups of
HNC survivors. Given the minimal risk associated with
participation, there is great potential benefit from this
study to improve quality of care and QOL in HNC survivorship. Also, since all participants enrolled in PROACTIVE will receive a form of swallowing therapy, there
is potential for individual benefit in all arms. There is
currently insufficient evidence to guide decisions of best
swallowing therapy options in real world settings. Once
clinically manifested, radiation-associated dysphagia is
difficult to reverse. Real world comparisons of common
therapies represent a critical step forward to improve
quality of care in the health care system and the QOL of
individual patients. These data might also translate to
better health by way of improved nutritional status and
diminished risk of death from aspiration pneumonia.
The potential yield is far greater than the minimal risk
imposed upon patients enrolled to the trial.