Background
Chronic renal failure (CRF) refers to the abnormal renal
function and structure persisting for more than 3
months with or without a decrease in the glomerular
filtration rate, and its clinical manifestations vary from
asymptomatic, laboratory abnormalities to uraemia [1].
The global prevalence rate of CRF has reached 14.3 %.
Recently, the incidence of CRF, especially terminal-stage
renal diseases, has significantly increased, which is a
serious threat to human health [1, 2]. Indeed, Chronic
renal failure was among the fastest-growing causes of
death worldwide and estimated to become the second
most common cause of death within the next century in
some countries [2]. Renal interstitial fibrosis is a histological
feature of CRF and an important predictor of
renal function loss in patients [3]. It has been demonstrated
that Post-translational modifications (PTMs) can
form epigenetic layers that respond to environmental
signals and external stimuli, thereby altering the
expression of genes involved in CRF [4]. Epigenetic
changes, including the importance of PTMs in fibrosis,
inflammation and immunity related to various kidney
diseases, are becoming more important in the development
of CFR [5].
PTMs are an essential part of the protein maturation
process, which changes the functions of proteins [6, 7].
Improvements in the mass spectrometry (MS) technique
enhance proteome research and contribute to the recognition
of a rich list of PTMs [8]. Protein lysine acetylation
is a ubiquitous and reversible PTM. The initial
results were mainly through the catalytic regulation of
gene transcription and expression in the nucleus by
histone acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase [9]. In
chromatin biology, lysine acetylation was discovered in
tubulin and mitochondrial proteins, suggesting that lysine
acetylation significantly contributes to cell biology
[10]. Besides lysine acetylation, some new types of
PTMs, such as lysine malonylation and succinylation,
have been identified and play an important role in regulating
various eukaryotic and prokaryotic physiological
functions [11, 12].
Lysine crotonylation, a novel protein PTM, was
initially found in human cell lines and mouse sperm
histone [13]. The discovery of lysine crotonylation has
attracted extensive attention to the scientific circle.
Lysine crotonylation has been deeply studied in a short
time. Lysine crotonylation has been demonstrated first
as a potent indicator of active promoters and could be a
major signal for controlling male germ cell differentiation
[14]. Wei et al [15] has believed that DNA replication
may be affected by protein crotonylation, which
may result in the inhibition of DNA replication, thus
affecting the cell cycle. All studies have suggested that
lysine crotonylation controls the interpretation of
genetic data at the chromatin level and plays a major
role in gene expression and cell fate.
Histone acetylation has been adequately characterised
in this paradigm. So, far, studies on histone acetylation
have focused on tumours, neuropsychiatric disorders,
lupus, cardiovascular diseases, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia,
diabetic nephropathy, acute kidney injury (AKI)
and chronic nephropathy [1, 16–21]. In addition, histone
acetylation shares the same enzyme system as histone
crotonylation [22]. According to this, the histone acetylation
modification group has a structure similar to that
of the lysine crotonylation group [14]. Recent studies
have shown that histone deacetylase inhibitors have protective
effects on some experimental models of renal injury
[23, 24]. Histone crotonylation has been observed in
renal tissue, suggesting that it contributes to the epigenetic
regulation of gene expression during renal injury
[25]. This study found that lysine crotonylation in renal
tissue increased during AKI, and crotonate
supplementation protected healthy renal tissue from
nephrotoxic AKI [26]. Therefore, we speculate that lysine
crotonylation significantly contributes to various
biological processes and is closely related to the pathogenesis
of CRF. However, data on the relationship between
lysine crotonylation and CRF are limited, and the
pathogenesis of CRF remains unclear. Most studies have
focused on histone crotonylation and its function, but
recent studies have shown that lysine crotonylation also
occurs in several non-histone proteins [27]. This suggests
that non-histone proteins are also widely present
in the human body and play a related function, but data
on this aspect are still lacking. Therefore, we speculate
that lysine crotonylation is closely associated with the
pathogenesis of renal failure and related changes in nonhistone
proteins.
In this study, highly sensitive immune affinity purification
and high-resolution liquid chromatography tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were used to examine
quantitative proteomics. A quantitative assessment on
crotonylated proteomics was conducted in this study. Of
347 proteins, 1,109 lysine crotonylation sites were identified.
The identified crotonylated proteins were mainly
located in the cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria and
extracellular region. The identified crotonylated proteins
were primarily localised in the cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondria
and extracellular region. Bioinformatic analysis
was performed to reveal the biological functions of
crotonylated proteins. Further bioinformatics analysis
showed that the biological function of crotonylated proteins
was significantly enriched on CD36 of platelets and
blood cells. As far as we know, this is the first study
describing lysine crotonylation in the global proteome of
CRF, thus expanding the understanding of the role of
lysine crotonylation in the pathophysiological process of
patients with CRF.
Materials and methods
Sample collection
The peripheral blood samples of 6 patients with chronic
renal failure and 6 healthy blood donors were collected
and tested. Those six patients were diagnosed with
chronic renal failure (CKD 5-stage GFR<15ml/min) by
Shenzhen People’s Hospital and the primary etiology of
CRF was glomerulonephritis. The healthy controls freed
from any diseases, including cancer, allergies, diabetes,
or infectious diseases. All patients and healthy blood
donors were over 18 years old (Table 1), and signed consent
before this study. And it was approved by the Ethics
Committee of Clinical Research of Shenzhen People’s
Hospital. After sample collection, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by density
gradient centrifugation using Ficoll-Hypaque (GE
Healthcare Bio-sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol.PBMCs were lysed with
TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and stored at
− 80 °C.
Protein extraction
Sample was sonicated thrice on ice using a high intensity
ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in a lysis buffer (8 M urea,
1 % protease inhibitor cocktail). After centrifugation at
12,000 ×g and 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was
collected and protein concentration was determined
with the bicinchoninic acid kit (Sigma Chemical Co., St.
Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Trypsin digestion
For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5
mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with
11 MM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature
in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by
adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than
2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein
mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100
trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.
Tandem mass tag/isobaric tags for relative and absolute
quantitation (TMT/iTRAQ) labeling
After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X
C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried.
Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed
according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/
iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent
were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide
mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room
temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum
centrifugation.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
fractionation
The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions
with high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil
C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm
length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a
gradient of 8–32 % acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into
60 fractions. The peptides were then combined into 6
fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.
Affinity enrichment
To enrich Kcr-modified peptides, tryptic peptides
dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM sodium chloride
[NaCl], 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA],
50 mM Tris–HCl, and 0.5 % NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated
with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio) at
4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were
washed 4 times with NETN buffer and twice with
water. The bound peptides were eluted from the
beads with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted fractions
were combined and vacuum dried. For LC-MS/
MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with
C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
LC-MS/MS analysis
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid
(solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed
phase analytical column (15 cm length , 75 μm i.d.). The
gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23%
solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile)over 26
min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min
then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant
flow rate of 400 n L /min on an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC
system.
The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed
by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive
TM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The
electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan
range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides
were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000.
Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE
setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the
Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data dependent
procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed
by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion.
Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first
mass was set as 100 m/z.
Database search
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Max-
Quant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra
were searched against the human database concatenated
with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified
as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 4 missing cleavages.
The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as
20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search,
while that for the fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation
on Cys was specified as fixed modification
and oxidation on Met was specified as variable
modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to
< 1 % and the minimum score for modified peptides was
set as > 40.
Gene ontology (GO) annotation
Gene ontology annotation was derived from the
UniProt-GOA (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The identified
protein ID was converted to UniProt ID, followed
by its mapping to GO IDs using the protein ID. If some
identified proteins were not annotated By UniProt-GOA,
InterProScan software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/
search/sequence-search) was used to annotate protein’s
GO functions, based on protein sequence alignment
method. The proteins were GO annotated based on the
following 3 categories: biological process, cellular component,
and molecular function. For each category, a
two-tailed Fisher exact test was employed to test the enrichment
of the differentially expressed protein against
all identified proteins. GO with a corrected value of
P <0 0.05 was considered significant.
Protein domain annotation
The domain functional description of the identified proteins
was annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis
application) based on the protein sequence alignment
method using InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/)
domain database. For each category of proteins, InterPro
database was searched and a two-tailed Fisher exact test
was used to test the enrichment of the differentially
expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein
domains with a corrected value of P <0 0.05 were considered
significant.
KEGG channel annotation
We used KEGG online service tool KAAS (http://www.
genome.jp/tools/kaas/) to annotate protein’s KEGG database
description. The mapping of the annotation result
on the KEGG pathway database was performed using
KEGG online service tool KEGG mapper. The pathway
with a corrected value of P < 0 0.05 was considered significant.
These pathways were classified into hierarchical
categories according to KEGG website.
Subcellular localization
We used WoLF PSORT (http://www.genscript.com/
wolf-psort.html), a subcellular localization predication
software to predict subcellular localization.
Motif analysis
Soft motif x was used to analysis the model of sequences
constituted with amino acids in specific positions of
modify 21 mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream
of the site) in all protein sequences. And all the
database protein sequences were used as background
database parameter, other parameters with default.[hj1]
[hj1]To improve description of experimental procedures.
Result
Comparative analysis on complete protein and lysine
crotonylation in patients with chronic renal failure and
healthy controls
The whole process consists of nine steps (Fig. 1 A). A
total of 1209 crotonylation sites were identified, of which
1109 of 347 proteins were quantifiable (Table S1). As
fold changes over 1.2 as an up regulation and below 1/
1.2 as a down regulation. There was a differential expression
of 260 proteins in chronic renal failure and
healthy controls, of which 772 sites were from upregulated
260 proteins and 51 sites from 69 downregulated
proteins. Another result showed that significantly
differential expression lysine crotonylation between
the CRF and NC (Table S2). In order to verify the
validity of mass spectrum data, the mass errors of all
identified peptides were evaluated. The quality error is
centered at 0 and below 10 ppm, which shows that the
quality accuracy of MS data meets the requirement
(Fig. 1B). Among 347 crotonylated proteins, most proteins
contain one or two crotonylation sites, while fewer proteins
have 7 or more crotonylation sites (Fig. 1 C). The
length of most peptides varied from 8 to 20 amino acids,
consistent with the rule of trypsin digestion ( Fig. 1D).
Analysis of crotonylation site motif
In order to understand the sequence commonness
around crotonylation site and compare it with acetylated
site, the sequence motifs of all identified crotonylated
peptides were studied by Motif-X program. In total, 7
conserved motifs (KK, KD, AK, EK, K.D, Ke, K.K) were
retrieved (Table S3, Fig. 2 A). Particularly, the motifs of
Ke and KD are very conservative. It is important that the
amino acids that are significantly conserved among these
motifs, E and D, are negatively charged and are rarely
found in other PTMS. These motifs may represent a
characteristic of crotonylation in chronic renal failure.
Hierarchical clustering analysis is also worked out to further
analyze these topics (Fig. 2B). At − 10 to − 5 and 10
to 5, the positively charged K residue is enriched, while
the negatively charged residues D and E are significantly
enriched at the − 1 to 4 position. Residues of short aliphatic
groups often appeared at the − 7 ~ 8 position, but
sulfur-containing C residues were not found.
Functional classification of crotonylation in GO and
crotonylation subcellular localization
Functional classification of GO and subcellular lysine
crotonylation the subcellular localization characteristics
of lysine crotonylation have been identified (Fig. 3 A). It
turned out that up-regulated proteins were mainly distributed
in cytoplasm (56 %), nucleus (10 %), mitochondria
(10 %) and extracellular (10 %), while down-regulated proteins
were mainly distributed in cytoplasm (57 %), nucleus
(7 %), mitochondria (4 %) and extracellular (17 %)
(Fig. 3B). It showed that there was no significant difference
in protein localization between up-regulated
and down-regulated proteins. In order to understand
the general situation of crotonyl protein in chronic
renal failure, on the basis of its biological process,
molecular function and cell composition, the GO
functional classification of all crotonylates proteins
was studied (Table S4). In the category of biological
process, most crotonylated proteins are associated
with cellular processes, single organism processes,
biological regulation and stimulation (Fig. 3C), and
most down-regulated proteins are associated with cellular
processes, single organism processes, biological
regulation and stimulation (Fig. 3D). In cell
components, most crotonylated proteins are associated
with cells, organelles, extracellular domains, and
the membrane of up-regulated proteins (Fig. 3E),
while most of the down-regulated proteins are associated
with cells, organelles, extracellular domains and
membranes (Fig. 3 F). In the molecular functional
category, most crotonylated proteins are associated
with up-regulated protein binding, catalytic activity,
structural molecular activity and molecular function
modulators (Fig. 3G), while most down-regulated proteins
are concerned with binding, catalytic activity,
molecular function modulators and structural molecular
activity (Fig. 3H). There was no significant difference
in GO functional classification between upregulated
and down-regulated proteins, suggesting
that crotonylation of lysine might have a large scale
of biological functions.
Functional enrichment of Kcr in GO, KEGG, and protein
domain
The functional enrichment of GO, KEGG and protein
domain lysine crotonylation based on GO was studied
(Table S5). Highly expressed crotonylated protein is
highly enriched on platelets and erythrocytes CD36
(Fig. 4). The down-regulation of crotonylated protein
mainly includes those (Fig. 5A). At the same time, the
function enrichment analysis based on KEGG was carried
out (Table S6). It was found, however, that there
was no up-regulated crotonylated protein in KEGG
(Fig. 5B). In addition, the down-regulated crotonylation
domain includes the S100/CaBP9K calcium binding
subdomain, globin, globin-like, Globin/Protoglobin. The
EF-hand domain pair and EF-hand domain (Table S7,
Fig. 5C) suggest an important part for crotonylation during
these processes. Similarly, there was no up-regulated
crotonylated the protein domain in this study. Pentose
phosphate pathway has an important relationship with
complications of CRF. Search for crotonylated involved
in carbon metabolism, including dense protein interaction
networks (Fig. 6A).
Cluster analyses in GO, KEGG, and protein domain
For the sake of understanding the function of lysine
crotonylation in more detail, we performed GO, KEGG,
and protein domain enrichment-based clustering analyses.
All quantized crotonylation sites were separated
into four quartiles according to the multiple changes of
the Lysine crotonylation sites: Q1 (0<−<0.77), Q2
(0.77 < 0.77), Q3 (1.2<−<1.3), and Q4 (ratio > 1.3), P
value < 0.05. Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 have 54, 15, 98 and 647
crotonylation, respectively. The four kinds of quantifiable
proteins were analyzed by cluster analysis. Q1 and
Q2 are considered down-regulated, while Q3 and Q4 are
considered up-regulated (Fig. 6B).
For GO analysis, it was found that the crotonylated
protein in Q1 was mainly enriched in cell secretion, and
the crotonylated protein in Q2 was mainly enriched in
cell substrates, neurons and cytoskeleton, the crotonylated
protein in Q3 was mainly enriched in cell junctions,
while the crotonylated protein in Q4 was mainly
abundant in cell microcrystals composed of cell membranes
and cells (Fig. 7A). In addition, the biological
enrichment process of crotonylation was also carried
out. It was found that the crotonylated protein in Q1
was mainly concentrated in the cell response to pathophysiology,
and that the crotoacylated protein in Q2 was
located in cell function, such as migration and
development. However, the crotonylated in Q3 is mainly
enriched in cell metabolism. In addition, the crotonylated
protein in Q4 is mainly concentrated in the cell response
to the outside world (Fig. 7B). For the molecular
functional crotonylated proteins, they were found to be
highly enriched in the activity of cells in Q1 and highly
increased in the cell-binding processes of Q3 and Q4
(Fig. 7C).
The enrichment of KEGG suggests that certain pathways
of Q3 and Q2 are associated with diseases, for instance,
pancreatic cancer, type II diabetes, cellular metabolism, and
salmonella infection, while crotonylated protein is abundant
in cell signaling pathways in Q1 and measles and influenza
viruses, and crotonylated protein is enriched in cell signaling
pathways and germ cell division in Q4 (Fig. 7D).
At the same time, the protein domain of crotonylated
protein was studied. They were found to be highly
enriched in Q2: Calponin homology domain, aldolase-
Tim type barrel, globin/proton protein, globin, globinlike
(Fig. 7E).
Protein–protein interaction network of the Kcr proteins
To further identify the cellular processes regulated
through crotonylation in CRF protein-protein interaction
network of the Kcr proteins was established (Fig. 8). A
total of 888 pairs of protein-protein mapping to the
protein interaction database, showing the different cellular
function of crotonylated protein in CRF. The
physiological interaction between these protein complexes
may contribute to their synergy and coordination
in CRF.
Discussion
In this study, a comparative study was conducted between
the healthy control group and the crotonylated
proteome of CRF, and the crotonylated peptide was
identified using the antibody affinity enrichment
method. High-resolution MS was performed. The
method identified 1,209 crotonyl sites on 377 proteins,
of which 1,109 sites in 347 proteins contained quantitative
information. The modification level of 772 loci was
upregulated, and the modification level of 69 loci was
downregulated in the CRF/healthy control group. The
roles of these different proteins in cellular and molecular
functions and the related signalling pathways were discussed
by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses, which laid a
foundation for the study of the distribution of apparent
lysine crotonylation modification in higher biological
eukaryotes.
This study was the first attempt to describe lysine
crotonylation in patients with CRF. In the past, there has
been evidence of the role of PTM mutations in CRF.
Fibrosis, cell cycle and the abnormal expression of inflammatory
genes are the key events in the progression
of CRF and are related to the changes in PTMs [28].
Non-histone crotonylated proteins exist widely in the
human body and play related roles [29]. According to
the aforementioned data, the crotonylation levels of
histone and non-histone proteins increased in patients
with CRF.
A recent study has found that lysine crotonylation in
the kidney increases during AKI. Lysine crotonylation
may play a role in the repair of AKI. Because lysine crotonylation
in renal tubular cells and kidneys in vitro increases
the expression of PGC-1α and sirtuin-3 that
have neuroprotective actions on cultured renal tubular
cells and normal kidneys and downregulates genes
involved in tissue damage, such as encoding MCP-1
chemokines of CCL2, a chemokine that contributes to
kidney PGC-1α inflammation [30]. Parenteral injection
of crotonic acid increases the level of crotonylation in
renal tissue and reduces inflammatory markers, mitochondrial
stress, renal dysfunction and renal damage
through excessive doses of experimental aldosterone
protection [31]. These results suggest that lysine crotonylation
is beneficial to the recovery of AKI. AKI and
CRF share several pathogenic processes, including inflammation
and parenchymal cell death [30].They are
considered interconnected syndromes, as CRF predisposes
affected patients to AKI, and AKI may accelerate
CRF progression. Thus, lysine crotonylation also can
slow the progression of CRF and AKI. However, we not
only found that crotonylation of histone proteins is increased
but also found that crotonylation of non-histone
proteins is increased and was enriched in CD36 in
patients with CRF; this is not found in AKI. Crotonylated
non-histone proteins have been characterised in
different cell types, such as Hela and H1299 cells,
and in tissues, such as the lung, kidney, liver, colon,
uterus, ovary and brain of mice [32]. It is thought to
be important in various biological processes, such as
RNA splicing, gene expression, chromatin organisation,
nucleic acid metabolism and cell cycle. However,
the requirement of crotonylation for most putative
cellular functions has not been formally tested.
The functional enrichment of lysine crotonylation in
GO showed that crotonylated proteins are related to
many biological processes, including cellular structural
components and cellular molecular binding and pathophysiological
processes involved in these biological processes,
suggesting that the various interactions related to
these biological processes may be regulated by modifying
proteins. The functional enrichment of lysine crotonylation
in KEGG was studied. However, only the B-class
scavenger receptor CD36, a KEGG pathway, is closely
related to renal failure. It showed that crotonylated proteins
were enriched in CD36. CD36 is a multifunctional
receptor that mediates the binding and cellular uptake of
long-chain fatty acids, oxidised lipids and phospholipids,
advanced oxidation protein products, thrombospondin
and advanced glycation end products and contributes to
lipid accumulation, inflammatory signalling, energy
reprogramming, apoptosis and kidney fibrosis [33]. Furthermore,
it is expressed in various kidney cells, such as
proximal tubular epithelial cells, mesangial cells, podocytes,
monocytes and macrophages [32]. To promote
CRF, CD36 is involved in lipid accumulation, inflammation,
energy reprogramming, apoptosis and kidney fibrosis
by activating Toll-like receptors, Na+/K + ATPase, NLRP3
inflammasome, PKC-NAPDH oxidase, Scr/Lyn/Fyn and
mitogen-activated protein kinases and TGF-β signalling
pathways [32]. Recent studies have shown that in patients
with diabetes, hyperglycemia can increase the expression
of CD36, aggravate platelet-mediated inflammation [34],
cause apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells and accelerate
renal tubular degeneration and renal interstitial fibrosis
[35]. Thus, experimental studies have demonstrated
that blockade or knockout of CD36 prevents kidney injury.
Selected patients with CRF have shown elevated soluble
fibrin plasma levels and enhanced thrombin-induced
thrombin generation, which was normalised by CD36
blocking, suggesting that CD36 is a novel therapeutic target
for preventing kidney fibrosis [36]. The expression and
intracellular location of CD36 are regulated by multiple ligands
that contribute to gene transcription and PTMs.
Histone crotonylation can promote the expression of
genes in the range of increasing substrate availability, but
under the condition of promoting inflammation or cell
stress, histone crotonylation may decrease the expression
of some genes, which are mainly enriched in CD36 [37,
38]. We can speculate that histone crotonylation affects
the expression of CD36-related genes.
In another study, data have shown that crotonylationmodified
proteins were reduced in haemodialysis patients
because crotonylation may contribute to the recovery of
AKI. However, patients who maintain haemodialysis are
unlikely to restore renal function [39], combined with the
role of crotonic acid modification currently being studied
in kidney cells. We can speculate that crotonylation also
alleviates disease progression in patients with CRF and restores
some of its functions, whereas in patients with CRF,
histone and non-histone proteins are higher than those in
healthy controls. It can be speculated that in some ways,
the body modifies histone and non-histone protein to
delay renal fibrosis, further restore renal function and
delay the progression of CRF.
Presently, the aetiology of CRF is complicated, the
clinical manifestations are diversified, the treatment is
difficult and the prognosis is of a sort. However, the
current treatment is limited. Few drugs can inhibit the
progression of CRF. By further studying the lysine crotonylation
reaction in the global proteome of CRF, its
function in the progression of CRF can be further
understood. The current therapeutic drugs for posttranslational
modification of histone, even if they may
affect the expression of multiple genes with different or
even opposite functions, can also have certain positive
effects under various pathological conditions, including
renal injury [40]. If the mechanism of lysine crotonylation
modification in CRF was studied, by changing the
crotonylation modification to achieve the purpose of
preventing and treating diseases, it provides a new idea
for treating CRF.