Introduction
Hypoxemic respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation
occurs in approximately 18 per 1000 live births
[1], and is associated with increased risk of mortality and
morbidity [2]. Extremely low gestational age neonates
(ELGANs) born at < 28 weeks gestation with hypoxemic
respiratory failure frequently experience arterial oxygen
desaturations, apneas, or intermittent hypoxia (IH), lasting
< 3 min in duration [3]. Resolving hypoxic/apneic
events are often accompanied by increasing the fraction
of inspired oxygen (FIO2) resulting in a transient period
of hyperoxia overshoot [4]. These IH episodes are due to
immature respiratory systems, cessation of respiratory
neural output [5], low blood oxygen capacity, blood volume,
and hemoglobin content [6]. Studies show that the
number of IH episodes are significantly high (50–100/
day) during the first few weeks of life [4]. Chronic
exposure to supraphysiological oxygen and neonatal IH
can have deleterious effects on the immature kidneys, increasing
the risk of renal diseases during adulthood [7].
Nephrogenesis occurs at the time of birth for the majority
of preterm infants, but whether postnatal renal development
follows a similar trajectory to normal in utero
growth is unknown [8, 9]. Many preterm infants are at
higher risk for renal issues including acute kidney injury
and chronic kidney disease [10, 11]. Studies comparing
the tissues of kidneys from preterm neonates to term
controls found that renal maturation accelerated after
preterm birth, with an increased number of glomerular
generations [12]. However, compared with gestational
controls, preterm kidneys had a greater percentage of
morphologically abnormal glomeruli and a significantly
larger cross-sectional area of the renal corpuscle, suggestive
of renal hyperfiltration [12]. These observations
suggested that the preterm kidney may have fewer functional
nephrons increasing the vulnerability to impaired
renal function in both the early postnatal period and
later in life. Moreover, birth weight may be directly correlated
the number of glomeruli [12–14].
Acute kidney injury (AKI), commonly seen in premature
neonates in the intensive care unit (ICU), has been
associated with later development of chronic kidney disease
(CKD), hypertension and proteinuria [13–16]. Reduced
nephron numbers may predispose ELGANs to
hypertension because of a reduced filtration surface area,
which may limit sodium excretion and would be less
likely to meet increased functional demands of the body.
Neonatal IH, combined with reduce renal function may
further exacerbate kidney damage, and impact key pathways
which may later contribute to the development of
chronic kidney disease and hypertension. Although the
factors that may contribute to acute kidney injury have
been extensively studied [15–18], there is a paucity of information
with regard to the effects of neonatal IH on
the developing premature kidneys.
The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is a key regulator
of blood pressure, fluid/electrolyte homeostasis, and kidney
development. The major hormone generated in the
RAS system is angiotensin II (Ang II) which directly
constricts vascular smooth muscle cells, stimulates aldosterone
production, and increases sodium reabsorption,
contributing to hypertension [19]. Angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE) generates the vasoactive Ang
II from the inactive precursor Ang I [20], and hence,
ACE inhibitors are effective and widely used for the
treatment of hypertension and kidney diseases. Conversely,
ACE-2 hydrolyzes Ang II with high efficiency,
resulting in opposing actions to Ang II, including release
of vasodilatory products such as nitric oxide (NO), prostaglandin
E2, and bradykinin [21]. Endothelin (ET-1) is a
21 amino acid peptide that is considered the most
potent vasoconstrictor in the human body. Formation of
ET-1 occurs by cleaving of preproET-1 to the biologically
inactive big ET-1 (38 amino acids). Endothelin converting
enzyme then splits big ET-1 to the biologically
active ET-1 [22]. ET-1 is produced by almost every cell
type in the kidney, but predominantly by endothelial and
tubular cells. ET-1 exerts its actions by binding to specific
ETA and ETB receptors [23]. ET-1 signaling to
ETAR mediates vasoconstriction, while signaling to ETBR
results in vasodilation via increased prostacyclin and NO
[24]. An imbalance between ETAR and ETBR activity
leads to renal dysfunction and disease [25].
We previously showed that clustered IH events were
associated with a more severe outcome in oxygeninduced
retinopathy than dispersed IH events [26]. This
was later proven in preterm infants [27]. Using the same
rat model of clustered neonatal IH [26], which simulates
IH experienced by ELGANs, we tested the hypotheses
that: 1) early exposure to increasing episodes of neonatal
IH has detrimental effects on the developing kidneys;
and 2) that there is a critical number of daily IH episodes
which will result in irreparable renal damage that
may involve Ang II and ET-1. Our hypotheses were
tested to: 1) examine the effects of increasing episodes of
neonatal IH on renal histopathology and morphometry
(primary objective); 2) determine whether IH-induced
renal damage is associated with Ang II, ET-1, and biomarkers
of hypoxia and oxidative stress; and 3) identify
the critical number of neonatal IH episodes that induce
Ang II, ET-1, biomarkers of hypoxia and oxidative stress,
and renal damage (secondary objectives).
Material and methods
Ethical statement
All procedures performed in this study were conducted
in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional
animal care and use committee (IACUC approval
number 11–10255) of SUNY Downstate Medical Center;
the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
(National Research Council); the United States Department
of Agriculture; and in compliance with the Animal
Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE)
guidelines. Animals were euthanized according to the
guidelines of the American Veterinary Medical Association
(AVMA) Panel for euthanasia of animals (Ver.
2020). All necessary measures to reduce pain and distress
before and during euthanasia were applied.
Animals
Certified infection-free, timed-pregnant Sprague Dawley
rats were purchased from Charles River Laboratories
(Wilmington, MA) at 17 days gestation. The animals
were housed in an animal facility with a 12-h-day/12-hnight
cycle and provided standard laboratory diet and
water ad libitum until delivery of their pups at 22 days
gestation. Within 2–3 h of birth, newborn rat pups delivering
on the same day were pooled and randomly
assigned to expanded litters of 18 pups/litter (9 males
and 9 females). Animals with a birth weight > 10% below
or above the mean birth weight were excluded. Sex was
determined by the anogenital distance. Each pup was
weighed and measured for linear growth (crown to rump
length in centimeters), as previously described [28].
Sample size
A sample size of 18 pups was used to simulate poor nutrition
of preterm infants. We used GraphPad Statmate
(GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) for sample size determination.
The sample size calculations were based on
previous data comparing means from unpaired t-test. A
sample size of 18 pups in each group was calculated to
have an 80% power to detect a difference between means
with a significance level (alpha) of 0.05 (two-tailed). This
sample size has been shown to produce oxidative stress
in neonatal rats [28].
Experimental design
A total of 31 groups of 18 rat pups (9 males and 9 females)
were studied according to the experimental design
[28]. Briefly, there were 3 normoxia groups (P7,
P14, and P21), 4 hyperoxia (50%O2) groups (P7, P14,
P21–7, and P21–14), 4 groups each for 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and
12 IH episodes (P7, P14, P21–7, and P21–14) for a total
of 24 IH groups. Groups assigned to P21–7 were exposed
to IH for 7 days and recovery/oxygenation in normoxia
for 14 days. Groups assigned to P21–14 were
exposed to IH for 14 days and recovery/oxygenation in
normoxia for 7 days (Supplemental Figure S1). These
groups were euthanized on P21. The total number of animals
used for these experiments was 558. Two groups
of animals served as control: 1) 50% O2 only with no IH
events; and 2) room air (RA) only. Pups remained undisturbed
in each oxygen environment until the time of euthanasia
at P7, P14, and P21, except for bedding and
water changes every 48 h. Animals were monitored twice
daily. No unexpected adverse events were noted. At P7,
P14, and P21 animals were euthanized by decapitation
without anesthesia. Since these are experiments involve
intermittent hypoxia and hyperoxia, this method was
used to prevent the known effects of anesthesia and/or
carbon dioxide inhalation on hypoxia production.
Intermittent hypoxia (IH) cycling
The IH cycles consisted of hyperoxia (50% O2)/hypoxia
(12% O2) in stepwise increments of brief (1-min), hypoxia
(12%) clusters (3 clusters) during 50% O2. The
number of IH episodes per day increased incrementally
from 2 episodes/day to 12 episodes/day as previously
described [28], and as presented in the Supplemental
Figure (S2).
Sample collection
Whole kidneys were harvested, rinsed in ice-cold phosphate
buffered saline (pH 7.4) on ice, and weighed. For
histopathology, kidneys were placed in 10% neutral buffered
formalin (NBF). For ELISA assays, 5 mg tissue were
placed in separate Lysing matrix D tubes with ceramic
beads (MP Biomedicals, LLC, Irvine CA, USA), snap frozen
in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C. Unstained
paraffin-embedded sections of the kidneys were used for
immunohistochemistry (IHC) of ACE, ACE-2, ETAR,
and ETBR, HIF1α, and TUNEL assay.
Histopathology
Whole kidneys fixed in 10% NBF were sent to the Pathology
Department of State University of New York
(SUNY) Downstate Medical Center for processing, embedding,
and sectioning (5 μm thickness). The sections
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) according
to standard laboratory techniques. Sections were imaged
using an Olympus BX53 microscope, DP72 digital
camera, (Olympus, Center Valley, PA USA), attached to
a Dell Precision T3500 computer (Dell, Round Rock, TX
USA), and analyzed using the CellSens software (Olympus
America, Center Valley, PA, USA). Morphometric
analyses, including kidney weight, length, width, and
glomerular number, circumference, and diameter, were
determined using the count and measure tool of the
CellSens software (Olympus America, Center Valley, PA,
USA). Images were captured at 20X magnification
(1600 × 1200 pixels; scale bar = 50 μm). Resolution was
enhanced using Adobe Photo Shop (San Jose, CA USA).
ELISA assays
Lysing Matrix D tubes containing kidney samples and
sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS) were placed in a
Fast Prep 24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, LLC, Irvine
CA, USA) and homogenized. The homogenates were
centrifuged at 10,000 rpm at 4 °C and the supernatant
transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube. The samples were
filtered and the filtrate was used for determination of
ACE, ACE-2, ET-1, and big ET-1 using rat enzymelinked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits purchased
from MyBiosource, San Diego, CA, USA. A portion of
the filtrate was used to determine total cellular protein
levels.
Malondialdehyde (MDA) assay
MDA levels (biomarker for lipid peroxidation) in the
kidney homogenates were determined in using commercially
available kits purchased from Millipore-Sigma (St.
Louis, MO, USA). Samples were processed and assayed
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A total of 6
samples per experimental group were analyzed. All data
were standardized using total cellular protein levels.
Total cellular protein assay
On the day of the assay, renal homogenates were assayed
for total protein levels using the dye-binding Bio-Rad
protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) with bovine serum
albumin as a standard.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Unstained paraffin-embedded kidney sections were
treated with xylenes and alcohols to remove the paraffin.
After unmasking the antigens, the sections were blocked
with blocking buffer for 1 h and incubated overnight
with primary antibodies (1:1000 dilution) against ACE
(#SC12187), ACE-2 (#SC20998), ET-1 (#SC21625), ET-2
#(SC21627), HIF1α (#SC10790), ETAR, (#PIPA3065),
ETBR (#PIPA3066), from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies
(Dallas, TX, USA), and Invitrogen (Suwanee, GA, USA),
respectively. After washing with PBS, the sections were
incubated with Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA) Signal
Stain Boost IHC reagent (HRP-conjugated), washed,
mounted with Prolong Antifade, imaged and quantified
using the CellSens software. Quantitative analysis was
determined using the count and measure tool of the
CellSens software (Olympus America, Center Valley, PA,
USA). Images were captured at 20X magnification
(1600 × 1200 pixels; scale bar = 50 μm). Resolution was
enhanced using Adobe Photo Shop (San Jose, CA USA).
Apoptosis (TUNEL stain)
Apoptosis was determined in the kidney sections using the
TUNEL assay kit purchased from Abcam (Waltham, MA,
USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Sections
were counterstained with Methyl Green. Images were captured
at 40X magnification (1600 × 1200 pixels; scale bar =
20 μm). Quantitative analysis was determined using the
count and measure tool of the CellSens software (Olympus
America, Center Valley, PA, USA). Resolution was enhanced
using Adobe Photo Shop (San Jose, CA USA).
Statistical analysis
To determine differences among the groups, a test for
normality of variances was conducted using the Bartlett’s
test. Normally distributed data were analyzed using oneway
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s posthoc
tests. Non-normally distributed data were analyzed
using Kruskall Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison
test. Data are presented as mean ± SEM and a pvalue
of < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant,
using SPSS version 16.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
Graphs were prepared using GraphPad Prism version
7.03 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA).
Results
Kidney weights
Mean kidney weights (panels A and B) and kidney/body
weight ratios (panels C and D) are presented in Fig. 1.
At P7 (panel A), mean kidney weights were lower in the
2, 6 and 10 IH groups compared to RA. At P21 following
7 days of IH and recovery in RA for 14 days (P21–
7DO2), mean kidney weights increased in the hyperoxia
and 4 IH groups. Mean kidney weights in all the oxygen
groups were comparable at P14 compared to RA. At
P21, only the hyperoxia group resulted in higher mean
kidney weights (panel B). Kidney/body weight ratios at
P7 (panel C) were significantly lower in all oxygen
groups than RA. The P21–7DO2 groups showed reductions
with 4–12 IH episodes. At P14 (panel C), kidney/
body weight ratios rebounded with 2 and 8 IH episodes.
However, reductions were sustained in all the P21–
14DO2 groups (panel D). Comparisons between sex revealed
significant reductions in kidney weights (0.36 ±
0.018, p < 0.01 vs. 0.44 ± 0.02) and kidney/body weight
ratios (0.01 ± 0.0008 vs. 0.015 ± 0.0009) in males in the
group exposed to 4 IH episodes (P21–14DO2) only.
Histopathology and morphometry
Figures 2 and 3 represents histopathology of the renal cortex.
Only samples demonstrating damage are shown. Exposure
to 50% O2 for 14 days (P14) showed the
appearance of necrosis (arrow). During the recovery/reoxygenation
period (P21–7DO2) irregular vacuolizations developed
secondary to ischemia (arrows). Exposure to 50%
O2 for 14 days with 7 days of recovery (P21–14DO2)
showed reduced numbers of glomeruli and necrosis (arrows).
Exposure to neonatal IH for 14 days without recovery/
reoxygenation showed more severe necrosis (arrows).
Exposure to 8 neonatal IH episodes for 7 and 14 days with
recovery/reoxygenation resulted in severe tissue damage
and hemorrhage (arrows). There was also notable breakdown
of the glomeruli capsule. Figure 3 shows the samples
that were exposed to 12 neonatal IH episodes for P14
without recovery/reoxygenation. There was significant
and pervasive hemorrhage (arrows), as well as breakdown
of glomeruli and tubule structure. Compared to RA, exposure
to 50% O2 for 14 days resulted in increased kidney
size (4221.4 ± 174.8, p < 0.01 vs. 2152.0 ± 198.5) and reduction
in the number of glomeruli (8.6 ± 0.55, p < 0.01 vs
13.6 ± 1.8). Recovery from 50% O2 for 7 days caused a further
increase in kidney size (5557.3 ± 219.5, p < 0.01 vs.
4160.7 ± 93.8) and reduction in the number of glomeruli
(5.8 ± 1.1 vs. 10.0 ± 0.68). Recovery from 50% O2 for 14
days reduced kidney to body weight ratios and number of
glomeruli (5.6 ± 0.74 vs. 10.0 ± 0.68), but did not affect
kidney size. Exposure to neonatal IH (8 episodes/day) increased
kidney to body weight ratios, but had no effect on
kidney size or number of glomeruli. However, recovery
from neonatal IH for 7 and 14 days decreased kidney to
body weight ratios, but reductions in kidney size
(3374.2 ± 149.2, p < 0.01) and number of glomeruli (5.6 ±
0.89, p < 0.01 vs. 10.0 ± 0.68) were noted only with 14-day
recovery group.
Effect on lipid peroxidation
Figure 4 shows MDA levels in the kidney homogenates.
Panel A represents in the groups exposed to hyperoxia
or neonatal IH for 7 days (white bar) or 7 days with recovery
in RA for 14 days (black bar), and panel B
represents the groups exposed to hyperoxia or neonatal
IH for 14 days (white bar) or 14 days with 7 days of recovery
in RA. Exposure to 6–12 IH episodes for 7 days
induced MDA levels, as did recovery from hyperoxia
and recovery from 6 to 10 IH episodes (panel A). Exposure
for 14 days resulted in higher levels in the group exposed
to hyperoxia, but decreased MDA levels with 2–6
IH episodes. A progressive increase in MDA was noted
in the groups exposed to 8–12 IH episodes. MDA was
robustly elevated in the groups recovering from 6 to 12
IH episodes (panel B).
Effect on ANG II
Figure 5 shows the effects of hyperoxia and neonatal IH
on renal levels of ANG II. Panel A shows data from animals
exposed for 7 days (white bar) or exposure for 7
days with recovery for 14 days (black bar). Panel B shows
data from animals exposed for 14 days (white bar) or exposure
for 14 days with recovery for 7 days (black bar).
At P7, ANG II was reduced with hyperoxia and 8 neonatal
IH episodes/day compared to age-matched control
groups in RA (panel A). Conversely, at P21, ANG II
levels were elevated in all neonatal IH groups during the
recovery/reoxygenation period compared to RA counterparts.
There was a progressive increase from 0 to 4, a
peaked with 6–10, then a decline at 12, neonatal IH episodes/
day. Exposure for 14 days resulted in elevations in
ANG II with 6, 8, and 10 neonatal IH episodes/day with
the highest elevations noted in the 8/day group. Similar
elevations were noted in the groups recovering from 4,
6, and 8 neonatal IH episodes/day, although a decline
was seen with 2/day (panel B).
Effect on ACE and ACE-2
The effects of increasing episodes of neonatal IH on
ACE (panels A and B) and ACE-2 (panels C and D)
in the kidney homogenates are presented in Fig. 6.
Exposure to hyperoxia for 7 days decreased ACE
levels as did exposure to 4 and 6 neonatal IH episodes/
day. In contrast, exposure to 8/day caused a
significant elevation in ACE. During the recovery/reoxygenation
period, only 4 and 12 episodes/day
caused a decline in ACE levels (panel A). Exposure to
8 IH episodes/day for 14 days resulted in elevations in
ACE, and recovery/reoxygenation from 8 and 12 episodes/
day decreased it (panel B). Neonatal IH had the
most significant effect on ACE-2 particularly in the
groups exposed for 7 days. While hyperoxia increased
ACE-2, levels declined substantially in all neonatal IH
groups. During the recovery/reoxygenation period,
levels were elevated only in the 8/day group (panel
C). Conversely, exposure for 14 days caused an opposite
elevation with 8–12 IH episodes/day. Levels
remained elevated in the groups exposed to 6–12 episodes/
day despite recovery/reoxygenation, although
levels declined in the group recovering from 2 episodes/
day (panel D). Figure 7 shows immunoreactivity
of ACE in the renal cortex. Robust staining was seen
in the group recovering from 14 days of hyperoxia
(P21–14DO2) and in all groups exposed to 8 IH episodes/
day. Figure 8 shows the immunoreactivity of
ACE-2. ACE-2 was highly expressed in the RA
groups. Exposure to hyperoxia for 14 days decreased
ACE-2 expression, an effect that rebounded with 14
and 7 days of recovery/reoxygenation in RA. Exposure
to 8 neonatal IH episodes had no effect on ACE-2,
supporting Fig. 6. Table 1 shows the quantitative assessment
of the intensity of ACE and ACE-2 immunoreactivity
in the samples. Compared to RA,
exposure to hyperoxia and neonatal IH increased
ACE and ACE-2 expression in all groups, although
the highest expression was seen with neonatal IH (8
episodes/day), correlating with the ELISA results.
ACE/ACE-2 ratios
Figure 9 shows the ratio of ACE/ACE-2 levels following
7 days (panel A) or 14 days (panel B) of hyperoxia or
neonatal IH exposure. In the groups exposed for 7 days,
the ratio of ACE/ACE-2 showed an interesting palindromic
curve with progressive incremental increases that
peaked with 6 IH episodes/day followed by an obverse
decline with 8–12 episodes/day. No differences were
noted among the recovery/reoxygenation groups (panel
A). In the groups exposed for 14 days exposure to 6 episodes/
day resulted in a dramatic elevation compared to
all other groups (panel B).
Effects on ET-1 and big ET-1
Figure 10 shows the effects of hyperoxia and neonatal
IH on ET-1 (panels A and B), and big ET-1 (panels C
and D) levels in the kidney homogenates. Exposure for
7 days showed a decline in ET-1 with hyperoxia and 2–6
neonatal IH episodes/day. An opposite increase was seen
with 8–12 IH episodes/day. The same effects persisted
during the recovery/reoxygenation period (panel A). Exposure
for 14 days resulted in the same response pattern
with reductions from 0 (hyperoxia) to 6 IH episodes/day
(except 2/day) and elevations with 8 and 10 IH episodes/
day. The same effects persisted during the recovery/reoxygenation
period (panel B). The effects of hyperoxia
or neonatal IH on big ET-1 mirrored those on ET-1. Exposure
for 7 days showed reductions with hyperoxia and
4 IH episodes/day, but increases with 2, 8, 10, and 12 episodes/
day. During recovery/reoxygenation, elevations
were noted with 6–12 episodes/day (panel C). Exposure
for 14 days showed reductions with 2 and 4 IH episodes/
day, and elevations with 8–12 IH episodes/day, peaking
with 8 episodes/day. During recovery/reoxygenation elevations
were noted with hyperoxia and 6–12 IH episodes/
day, while reductions occurred with 2/day (panel
D). Figure 11 shows the immunoreactivity of ET-1 in the
renal cortex. ET-1 was not appreciably expressed in the
renal cortex at P14 or P21. However, exposure to hyperoxia
and 8 IH episodes/day increased ET-1 expression
with and without recovery in RA. Table 1 shows the
highest intensity of ET-1 immunoreactivity occurred
with all hyperoxia and neonatal IH groups regardless of
recovery/reoxygenation. Figure 12 shows that ET-2 immunoreactivity
was highly expressed at P21 in the RA
samples. Exposure to hyperoxia for 14 days decreased
ET-2 compared to RA. Recovery from hyperoxia for 14
days further reduced ET-2, but recovery from hyperoxia
for 7 days increased it. Table 1 shows that ET-2 was
increased during and post hyperoxia and neonatal IH,
except in the group recovering from 8 IH episodes/day
for 14 days.
Effects of ET receptors
Figures 13 and 14 demonstrates the immunoreactivity of
ETAR and ETBR, respectively in the renal cortex. ETAR
was robustly elevated in the cortex at P14 and P21.
Hyperoxia increased ETAR with modest reductions during
the recovery/reoxygenation periods. Similarly, exposure
to 8 IH episodes/day caused a robust increase in
ETAR expression, an effect that remained sustained during
recovery/reoxygenation, but was lower that exposure
for P14 (Fig. 13). Similar elevations in ETBR expression
were seen with 8 IH episodes/day with and without recovery/
reoxygenation, although the levels declined during
recovery/reoxygenation compared to exposure for
14 days (Fig. 14). Table 1 shows that elevations in ETAR
with 14 days of hyperoxia and neonatal IH (8 episodes/
day). However, the levels declined during recovery from
hyperoxia, but not during recovery from 7 days of neonatal
IH. In contrast, ETBR expression declined with
hyperoxia and subsequent recovery/reoxygenation compared
to RA, and was elevated with 8 neonatal IH episodes/
day. However, the levels declined during the
recovery/reoxygenation period.
Effect on HIF1α
HIF1α immunoreactivity (brown) in response to hyperoxia
and neonatal IH in the kidneys is presented in
Fig. 15. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin
(blue). There was minor staining in the P14 and P21 RA
sections which predominated in the renal capsule. Compared
to RA, no major differences were noted with exposure
to 50% O2 for 14 days. In contrast, robust
staining was noted in the renal capsule and cortex with
exposure to 8 neonatal IH episodes/day for 14 days.
Similar responses were noted in the groups recovering
from 7 and 14 days of hyperoxia and neonatal IH. Table
1 shows the corresponding quantitative analysis of HIF1α
expression.
Effect on apoptosis
TUNEL stained kidney sections counterstained with Methyl
Green are presented in Fig. 16. Positive apoptosis is
indicated by a dark brown signal and green indicates
non-reactive or negative reactivity. Groups exposed to
RA were negative while groups exposed to 50% O2 and
8 IH episodes/day for 14 days showed strong reactivity
in the renal capsule and cortex. Groups recovering from
hyperoxia and neonatal IH showed less intense reactivity,
but positive staining persisted throughout the renal
cortex. Table 1 shows the corresponding quantitative
analysis.
Discussion
This study showed that hyperoxia as well as increasing
episodes of neonatal IH can cause detrimental and irreversible
damage to the developing kidney, evidenced by
increasing damage severity, apoptosis, and necrosis as a
function of neonatal IH episodes. The levels of vasoconstrictors
Ang II, ACE, ACE-2, ET-1 increased even during
the recovery/reoxygenation phases of the study,
regardless of the length of exposure. This indicates that
neonatal IH is indeed associated with biomarkers of
hypertension and in part, may contribute to kidney damage,
thus proving our hypothesis. ACE-2 levels involved
in vasodilation also increased to counter the vasoconstrictive/
damaging pathways, but to a lesser degree and
with a limited ability to compensate, as the frequency of
neonatal IH increased resulting in preponderance of the
vasoconstrictive effects. In this model, we examined rat
pups at days 7, 14, and 21 of life in order to further
examine the effects of neonatal IH at various stages of
renal development. At 0–14 days of life, rat pups correlate
to the neonatal period, where they mainly consume
their mothers’ milk [29]. However, from days 14–21, the
rat pups gradually begin to consume solid food, go
through the weaning process, and are fully weaned at
P21. Consumption of solid food also aligns with salt intake.
Nephrogenesis is completed on postnatal day 8
[30]. This transition may partly explain why the rat pups
at P7 are more sensitive to the effects of neonatal IH
resulting in higher ACE and lower ACE-2 levels compared
to P14 and P21. To our knowledge, this is the first
study to show low levels of renal ACE-2 in the suckling
period. These developmentally low levels may account
for an inability to mount a compensatory and protective
ACE-2 response to counteract ACE levels.
The histopathology results demonstrated that both
chronic hyperoxia and neonatal IH are detrimental to
the developing kidney, but neonatal IH produced the
worst damage. The morphometric analysis supported
this finding and a notable increase in kidney size was
found in the hyperoxia samples as compared to the controls,
possibly due to increased hemorrhage and possible
hypertrophy [31]. Animal models have demonstrated enlarged
renal corpuscles and subsequent decreased nephron
number in kidneys during periods of hyperoxia [32,
33]. Previous studies have also shown that neonatal
hyperoxia exposure results in impaired nephrogenesis,
affecting the nephrogenic zone width and glomerular
diameter as well as increased apoptotic cell count [34].
There are sparse studies on the impact of neonatal IH
on kidney damage and biomarkers of hypertension. A
study involving 8-week old mice with obstructive sleep
apnea found that IH caused kidney injury accompanied
by glomerular hypertrophy, mesangial matrix expansion,
increased expression of glomerular growth factors and
an increased cellular apoptosis [35]. In our study, shorter
neonatal IH exposure time with a longer recovery/reoxygenation
time resulted in more renal damage than
longer exposures with shorter recovery. This may be due
to upregulation of mechanisms involved in reperfusion
injury. The shorter recovery/reoxygenation time may not
be sufficient to initiate those responses. It seems reasonable
that a longer IH exposure would require comparatively
longer recovery/reoxygenation. The severity of
kidney damage was directly correlated with neonatal exposure
time with the worst damage seen in the 12 episodes/
day group, where severe hemorrhage and necrosis
are demonstrated. The findings in this study prove that
hyperoxia and more importantly, neonatal IH can both
cause irreversible damage to the kidney structure regardless
of recovery/re-oxygenation [31, 36]. These are findings
are consistent with necrosis that can later lead to
the development of chronic kidney disease, supporting
our hypothesis.
Malondialdehyde (MDA) is produced by oxidation of
polyunsaturated fatty acids [37], and is a major determinant
of lipid peroxidation [38]. Our study showed that
MDA was significantly higher in the groups recovering
from all IH episodes, particularly 8–12 episodes. This
finding provides evidence for reperfusion injury and
suggests that the immature kidney is highly susceptible
to IH-induced lipid peroxidation and cannot sustain
more than 6 episodes per day. Given the numerous IH
episodes reported to occur in preterm infants during the
first few weeks of life [4], this may explain, in part, the
higher risk for developing AKI [39]. Monitoring MDA
levels may be a useful biomarker to identify infants at
risk.
Neonatal IH also caused high levels of Ang II and
ACE, with a plateau seen at 8 episodes per day
followed by a decline at 10–12 episodes. This may indicate
that 8 IH episodes/day is the maximum number
that the developing kidney can sustain. The
decline with 8–12 episodes suggest either that the tissue
is deteriorating and unable to mount a response,
or that there is a bi-phasic response with the shift
from predominant hyperoxia (less IH episodes) to
predominant hypoxia (more IH episodes). The immunoreactivity
results of ACE analysis support these
findings. Ang II, ACE and ACE-2 are all part of the
RAAS system, and serve important functions for the
preservation of the kidney. While Ang II and ACE
are involved in vasoconstriction and apoptosis, ACE-2
works to counter this effect and balance the system
with vasodilation [40–46]. Ang II is strongly associated
with re-perfusion injury and AKI, via reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production. Our data demonstrated
a strong correlation with increased IH episodes
and renal Ang II and ACE production,
suggesting renal vasoconstriction and oxidative damage
as seen in AKI [42, 43, 46].
Another important finding was that the ACE response
was more robust in the P7 and P14 animals, while the P21
animals demonstrated a stronger ACE-2 response, suggesting
that ACE-2 is activated with advancing renal development
and may be protective, and take precedence over
ACE. ACE-2 has the primary function of degrading Ang II
and opposes the effect of ACE [37–39]. However, this effect
may be overridden in neonatal IH as shown in the more
mature P14 and P21 rats exposed to 8 IH episodes/day. A
study involving ACE knockout mice, found that despite unopposed
ACE and Ang II activity, kidney function and renal
development was normal [47]. However, in periods of
RAAS activation and kidney stress ACE-2 becomes a more
vital for preventing kidney damage [45, 46]. Similar to ACE,
the efficacy with which the kidney can incite the release of
ACE-2 during stress reaches a threshold after which it
wanes. Multiple studies have supported this finding in patients
with CKD undergoing dialysis having lower levels of
ACE-2 compared to pre-dialysis patients [47, 48]. The
ACE-2 pathway may be more effective as reno-protective in
AKI and early CKD [48–50].
The ACE/ACE-2 ratios were higher with shorter exposure
time, peaking with 6 IH episodes/day. Longer exposure
time resulted in ACE-2 overriding ACE and
resulting in balanced levels, except in the group exposed
to 8 IH episodes. Studies found that ACE/ACE-2 ratios
were significantly higher in patients with hypertension
than in those without [51]. Other studies in rats showed
higher ACE mRNA compared to ACE-2 mRNA leading
to elevated ACE/ACE-2. Those studies confirm that the
ACE-Ang II axis was dominant in severe kidney injury
[52]. This balance of ACE and ACE-2 is important in
maintaining the equilibrium in the kidney, and using
these pathways the neonatal kidney appears able to compensate
for stress up to a point. However, when threshold
is reached, despite subsequent recovery, the damage
is irreversible and these pathways are no longer able to
function properly, thus leading to CKD.
The effects of increasing IH episodes on ET-1 were interesting.
Short term exposure resulted in elevated ET-I
levels in all groups exposed to 8–12 IH episodes, while
long-term exposure resulted in an earlier rise with 6–12
IH episodes. Given that ET-1 is a potent vasoconstrictor,
these findings provide clear support that neonatal IH
produces hypertension, with no resolution during the recovery/
reoxygenation phase, suggesting a permanent effect.
Our findings confirm those of others which showed
that ET-1 is activated during periods of stress [29, 53–
56] such as with hyperoxia and intermittent hypoxia.
ET-1 acting via the ET receptors is rapidly up-regulated
in the kidney by ischemia and has been implicated in
renal inflammation and hypertension [57–60]. The
endothelin system has also been largely implicated as being
involved in CKD [55, 56]. Big ET-1 is the precursor
to ET-1 via proteolytic action, and has minimal biological
function, but is able to bind to endothelin receptors
with lower affinity [56–58]. The concurrent
elevation in big ET-1 provides further evidence of a
vasoconstrictor response, as this precursor is cleaved to
form ET-1. This finding suggests that neonatal IH induces
or promotes big ET-1 cleavage.
Compared to RA and hyperoxia, 8 neonatal IH episodes/
day increased ETAR and ETBR immunoreactivity.
ETAR and ETBR both serve as receptors for ET-1 but
have opposing effects depending on the cell type, tissue
type, or physiological situation [58–60]. ETAR has been
implicated in vasoconstriction and may play a more active
role in causing damage to the kidney when the
organ is placed under stress [58, 59, 61–65]. ETAR cause
an agonist effect on ET-1, and may prevent its degradation
[58, 64, 65]. Conversely ETBR may promote ET-1
clearance and may be more involved in vascular dilatation
[11, 58, 64–66]. Our findings demonstrated that
ETAR increased with damage caused from hyperoxia and
neonatal IH, while ETBR declined. Higher ET-1 and
ETAR with 8–12 neonatal IH episodes/day were consistent
with Ang II trends. The increasing severity of damage
provide strong evidence that neonatal IH is involved
in the pathogenesis of AKI in neonates. Medication
which targets these pathways to promote vasodilation
and inhibit vasoconstriction could help prevent AKI and
subsequent CKD.
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)1α is a transcription factor
that regulates the expression of numerous genes and
activates various downstream signaling pathways, including
erythropoietin production, angiogenesis, energy metabolism,
and other related pathways, to facilitate cell
adaptation to the anoxic environment [67]. Studies show
that HIF1α plays exerts a protective role in acute kidney
injury [68]. In our study HIF1α was higher during recovery/
reoxygenation from hyperoxia, but also during and
post neonatal IH, further indicating its renoprotective
role. However, studies show that induction of HIF1α was
associated with reduced apoptosis in rat proximal tubular
cells subjected to hypoxia and kidney tissues of mice
after renal ischemia-reperfusion injury [69]. In our study,
apoptosis was indeed higher in the hyperoxia group with
lower HIF1α. However, this was not the case with exposure
to 8 IH episodes, suggesting that frequent IH episodes
may override the protective effect.
Clinical implications
The neonatal IH model used in these experiments is
clinically relevant. We previously demonstrated that the
brief clustered IH pattern is more damaging than dispersed
IH episodes [26]. Using complex mathematical
modeling, DiFiore M, et al. [27] later confirmed our
findings in preterm infants. Premature neonates, particularly
soon after birth, are more vulnerable to the development
of AKI and CKD [70]. Stress resulting from
hyperoxia and neonatal IH may cause structural damage
as well changes in the physiological pathways involved in
the function of the kidney. The kidneys appear able to
recover shorter numbers of IH episodes/per day due to
the longer recovery time between episodes. However,
when a threshold is reached due to more frequent IH
episodes, resulting in decreased recovery time between
episodes, the neonatal kidneys may no longer be able to
a mount a compensatory response. This study provided
a novel model of assessing the damage caused to the
kidney by neonatal IH, which had not been previously
assessed in a similar context.
Conclusions
While the study has important clinical implications,
there are limitations. For example, the rat model may
not accurately reflect apnea experienced by ELGANs
and periviable neonates who may be the most susceptible
to the kidney damage [66, 71]. These neonates may
possibly have different thresholds for compensatory responses.
Additionally, we did not examine renal histopathology
at P7. Nevertheless, the most damaging effects
were noted in the groups exposed to 8 IH episodes/day,
confirming that a critical number of daily IH episodes
that may result in irreparable renal damage. Long term
outcomes such as urinary biomarkers of kidney function
and changes in blood pressure was not determined in
adult rats, but could be the focus of future studies. Our
study suggests that the critical number of IH episodes
that the immature kidneys can sustain is 6, beyond
which irreparable damage may occur. The Ang II and
ET-1 pathways appear to be highly involved in IHinduced
renal damage. Therapeutic targeting of these
pathways may help decrease the risk for kidney injury in
the developing neonate to prevent and/or treat neonatal
AKI and CKD.