Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) occurs when acute kidney
injury (AKI) is accompanied by histological findings
of interstitial inflammation, edema, and tubulitis. AIN is
a common cause of AKI [1, 2]. Drug-induced AIN is
known to account for 60–70% of cases [1], but the incidence
of AIN caused by herbs or folk medicines is unknown
and often ignored. Single or concurrent use of
herbs with therapeutic drugs could increase the potential
for side effects. Traditional herbal medicines have been
widely used in South Korea for a long time. The Japanese
chaff flower, Achyranthes japonica, has been used
as complementary medicine for edema and arthritis and
to delay a woman’s menstruation without clinical evidence.
Recent studies have reported the antiinflammatory,
pain relief, and antibacterial effects of A.
japonica as well as its ability to improve osteoporosis
conditions in ovariectomized rats [3–6]. However, there
has been no report on side effects. Therefore, we report
a case of AIN after ingesting A. japonica. This case report
suggests that ingesting a complementary medicine
could be a cause of AKI leading to chronic kidney disease
(CKD) if management is delayed.
Case presentation
A 56-year-old Korean woman was admitted for deterioration
of renal function. She had suffered from general
weakness and nausea for the past month and visited a
local clinic. She was recommended to visit the tertiary
hospital because of poor renal function. She was a
farmer, but she strongly denied any recent exposure to
pesticides. She had intermittently taken medicines for
arthralgia in both knees. She had been diagnosed with
hypertension 3 years previously and was taking 5 mg lercanidipine
without change. She had a routine check-up
1 year ago and did not show any abnormalities of renal
function at that time. She also denied various infections
and other systemic or auto-immune diseases that cause
acute TIN by a thorough history taking. However, she
complained of a 5-kg weight loss in the last 3 months.
She did not complain of fever, oliguria, skin rash, or a
urine color change at admission. She had not taken
NSAIDs, toxins, or Chinese herbal medicines, but had
ingested the extract of A. japonica for control of knee
pain beginning 4 months ago.
Her initial vital signs were as follow: blood pressure of
140/80 mmHg, heart rate of 68 beats/min, respiratory
rate of 20 breaths/min, and body temperature of 36.1 °C.
No remarkable findings were observed in the physical
examinations. Her complete blood count (CBC), biochemical
findings, and arterial blood gas analysis was
shown Table 1. Briefly, her blood urea nitrogen and creatinine
were elevated whereas potassium level decreased.
There was no eosinophilia on her CBC. A arterial blood
gas analysis was compatible with metabolic acidosis and
anion gap was normal. C3 and C4 levels were 102 mg/dL
(normal, 90–180 mg/dL) and 26.9 mg/dL (normal, 10–
40 mg/dL), respectively. Immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA,
and IgM levels were 2530 mg/dL (normal, 700–1600 mg/
dL), 689 mg/dL (normal, 70–400 mg/dL), and 171 mg/dL
(normal, 40–230 mg/dL. Anti-nuclear antibody, antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic antibody, and anti-glomerular
basement membrane antibody were all negative. A urinalysis
revealed 1+ protein, 2+ blood, and 3+ glucose by
dipstick. Microscopy revealed 10–29 red blood cells/high
power field (HPF) and many WBCs/HPF. No bacteria
grew on a urine culture. No eosinophils existed on
Hansel staining of the urine.
Protein (1406 mg) was detected in the 24-h urine sample.
There was no evidence of monoclonal gammopathy
in the serum or urine protein on the immunoelectrophoresis
assay.
Kidney size was normal on ultrasonography (USG)
(10.5 cm right and 11.0 cm left) with normal echogenicity,
and a Doppler study was unremarkable.
USG-guided renal biopsy revealed moderate and diffuse
interstitial lymphocyte infiltration with mild
tubular atrophy, and lymphocytic tubulitis was also
frequently found on higher magnification (Fig. 1a and
b). The glomeruli were normally sized and cellularity
and capillary walls were not thickened. The blood
vessels were unremarkable. Imminofluorescence microscopy
was negative. As she had not taken any
medicines except for anti-hypertensive drugs for the
past 3 years without changes, A. japonica was considered
the causative agent of the tubulointerstitial nephritis
(TIN) and was immediately withdrawn.
Conservative management, including appropriate
blood pressure control, a low salt diet, and oral potassium
and bicarbonate replacement was started. Her
initial symptoms and signs improved and blood pressure
was well controlled without further medication.
She was discharged on day 10 after admission and
followed up in the outpatient department. The abnormal
urinalysis findings resolved completely, and oral potassium
and bicarbonate administration was withdrawn 13-
months after discharge. Serum creatinine was 1.05 mg/
dL and the estimated glomerular filtration rate was 57
ml/min/1.73m2 24-months after discharge (Fig. 2). She
is currently being followed up in our outpatient department
with the maintenance of renal function.
Discussion and conclusions
We described a case of AIN that occurred after ingesting
A. japonica for 4 months. As far as we know, this is the
first report in the English literature. There are numerous
cases of unexplained decreased renal function in a clinical
setting. This report is significant in that careful and
thorough history taking of medications, including Chinese
herbal medicines, nutraceuticals, and traditional folk
medicines are essential to diagnose and treat AIN.
AIN is usually confirmed when AKI is accompanied
by histological findings of interstitial inflammation,
edema, and tubulitis. Many etiologies of AIN have
been recognized, including drugs, various infections,
autoimmune or systemic diseases, and idiopathic
diseases [1, 2]. A report of pooled data from three
large studies revealed that drugs were the most common
etiology of AIN, underlying 91 of 128 cases
(71.1%) [7]. AIN induced by drugs has been observed
in 6.5–27% of patients when a renal biopsy was performed
due to unexplained AKI [8–10]. AIN has been
reported after ingesting herbal and folk medicines
[11–13]. A. japonica has been ingested in South
Korea for a long time to control arthralgia. However,
there have been no reports of adverse effects.
Although acute TIN has a good prognosis when diagnosed
early, the causative agents are withdrawn and,
where necessary, early steroid therapy is started; undetected
subclinical acute TIN can progress to renal fibrosis
and eventually cause irreversible CKD [2].
Schwarz et al. revealed that drug-related AIN causes
permanent renal insufficiency in 36% of cases with a
maximum of 56% in NSAID-induced cases and taking
the suspected drug for more than 1 month before the
diagnosis causes permanent renal insufficiency in 88% of
cases. Less oliguria and anuria as acute symptoms and
prolonged intake of the suspected drug are related to a
more chronic course of interstitial nephritis [14]. Other
studies also showed that acute TIN-related damage is a
potential promoter of CKD and the duration of treatment
and the cumulative dose appear to increase the
risk of kidney damage [15, 16]. Our patient had ingested
A. japonica for 4 months and the renal histology revealed
moderate interstitial cell infiltration and mild
tubular atrophy, resulting in long-term restoration of
renal function and some irreversibility. Two formal
methods are available for calculating the probability of
causation: the Naranjo probability scale [17] and the
World Health Organization-Uppsala Monitoring Center
(WHO-UMC) causality categories [18]. The patient’s
Naranjo probability scale score was 6 (probable causal
relationship) and her WHO-UMC causality category was
“probable”.
AIN is also characterized by tubulitis, which is the extension
of interstitial inflammation over the tubular
basement membranes. Patients with AIN can present
with tubular dysfunction, which includes salt-wasting
nephropathy, abnormal renal acidification, urinary concentration
defects, potassium secretory defects related to
distal nephron injury, or defective proximal tubular reabsorption
leading to features of Fanconi’s syndrome
presented as glycosuria, phosphaturia, aminoaciduria,
hypokalemia, and type II renal tubular acidosis from
bicarbonaturia [19]. Our patient also presented with
both tubulitis and laboratory features of tubular dysfunction,
such as hypokalemia, glycosuria, non-nephrotic
proteinuria, and normal anion gap metabolic acidosis.
The tubular dysfunction improved 13 months after withdrawing
the A. japonica and restoration of renal
function.
The pathogenesis of drug-induced AIN generally involves
allergic reaction that is prompted by exposure to
certain drug. As a result, T-cell mediated hypersensitivity
reactions and cytotoxic T-cell injuries are involved in
pathogenesis of drug-induced AIN [1, 19, 20]. The precise
disease mechanism to give rise to AIN by Achyranthes
japonica is not clear based on our one reported
case, but antigen-driven immunopathology by exposure
to this drug seems to be NSAID-associated AIN in that
there was no clinical symptoms and signs such as fever,
rash, arthralgia, and eosinophilia, it took about 6–18
months to develop AIN from the exposure than other
drugs, and eosinophil rarely infiltrated into renal interstitium
[21]. These clinical and pathological characteristics
might be derived from anti-inflammatory properties
of this agent.
We firstly report the case of AIN associated with a
pure A. japonica extract which is widely taken as complementary
medicine in South Korea. AIN should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of all cases of
AKI. Physicians should not only ask about prescribed
and an over-the-counter drugs that cause AIN, but also
about herbal medicines, nutraceuticals, and traditional
folk medicines including A. japonica.