Background
Transplantation has always been considered the renal replacement
treatment of choice, if possible, for patients
with end-stage kidney disease [1]. Following transplantation,
patients continue to be considered chronically ill
as they have to adhere to lifelong immunosuppressive
medication regimes and need to pay close attention to
all lifestyle choices in order to avoid aggravation of
medication side effects and graft dysfunction [2]. The
transplantation impacts many aspects of life, including
functional status and psychosocial well-being [3], and
patients describe life after transplantation as highly demanding
and complex, requiring them to manage challenges
such as physical symptoms, disability, complex
medication regimens, lifestyle adjustments, and having
to deal with other consequences such as stress, frustration
and fear of transplant failure [3–5].
In Norway, the renal transplant follow-up is organized
in the specialist health care service at the hospitals [6, 7].
Renal transplant recipients have to see a nephrologist on
regular basis, usually four times a year, when the graft is
functioning adequately. In unstable phases, follow-up
visits are even more frequent. A few days prior to the
consultation, the patients must have blood samples
drawn at the hospital in order to have important blood
values assessed and discussed in the consultation with
the nephrologist. This practice means that the patient
has to come to the hospital twice related to each threemonth
renal transplant follow-up consultation.
Video consultations have been emphasized by health
authorities as a potential mean to improve access to care
and increase quality of care [8–10]. In order to reduce
the disease burden for the renal transplant recipients by
decreasing the number of visits at the hospital, video
consultation can be an alternative to in-person consultations.
A growing body of evidence supports the notion
that video consultations may contribute to successful
management of chronic illness, including health management
following organ transplantation [11–15]. Studies
have shown how video consultations are highly
appreciated by patients with chronic illness already using
such solutions [15–17], that video consultations can enhance
engagement and communication between health
care providers and patients [15, 16], and that such solutions
have been considered to be effective and convenient
[14, 17].
Despite the promising findings and potential of video
consultations, challenges such as technical problems
[18–20] and concerns related to security and privacy
[15] have been raised. For example, unstable internet
connection has resulted in audio problems and time lag
that has interrupted the conversation between patient
and provider [18–20]. Some researchers have also argued
that video consultations are best suited for
consultations where a physical examination of the patient
is not required [18, 19] and for settings where an
established patient – health care provider relationship is
already in place [14].
Renal transplant patients have displayed a positive attitude
towards using electronic health (e-health) technology
[21]. Video consultation solutions to support renal transplant
recipients have yet to be implemented and studied
in clinical practice in Norway, however. Therefore, the
aim of the current study was to investigate the perceived
benefits and challenges of using video consultations in
outpatient renal transplant recipient follow-up from the
perspective of patients and health care providers.
Methods
Study design and participants
The current study explored the patient and health care
provider experiences of using video consultations in regular
outpatient renal transplant recipient follow-up. The
study was conducted at the outpatient clinic at the Department
of Nephrology at Oslo University Hospital in
Norway, which has regional responsibilities for approximately
50% of the Norwegian population (www.helsesorost.
no). Three health care providers (i.e., one nephrologist
and two health support personnel) were requested
and consented to participate in the study. As this was the
first time video consultations were tested in this particular
setting, a decision was made to primarily include renal
transplant recipients in stable phases of their transplant
trajectory. Purposive sampling was therefore applied to
ensure that the patients was in a stable phase, had few expected
complications related to their kidney disease, were
18 years or older, were able to speak Norwegian, and have
access to their own portable device so that skin changes,
oedema and so on could be shown if necessary. Potential
participants were identified and informed about the study
by the study nephrologist. The study was planned and performed
in compliance with the principles outlined in the
Declaration of Helsinki [22]. The study was approved by
the Oslo University Hospital department for data protection
and information security (i.e., Institutional Review
Board) (approval number: 18/09405). Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants.
Real-time video consultations
When enrolled in the study, the patients were informed
that every second planned three-month follow-up consultations
would be conducted by video, unless the patient
would be in need of a physical examination at the
time. This meant that there would be a video consultation
approximately every 6 months for each participating
patient.
The video consultation solution Norwegian Health
Network (NHN) Cisco meeting application (app), was
used in the study. The solution was approved for
patient-provider consultations by the hospital department
for data protection and information security (i.e.,
Institutional Review Board equivalent). The NHN Cisco
meeting app solution was delivered through NHN specific
computer devices in two consultation rooms at the
outpatient nephrology clinic. The patients could download
and access the Cisco meeting app solution via their
own personal computer (PC), tablet or smartphone.
The health care providers received in-person training
in how to use the video consultation solution. Security
aspects such as being alone in the consultation room
during the consultation and also ensuring that the patient
is properly identified (i.e., through recognition/social
security number) were stressed in the training.
The patients received a letter with information about
how to access the solution from their own device, including
a personal log-in username and password. The
patients were asked to log into the solution a few minutes
in advance of the consultation, so that they could
be given access to the video consultation as soon as the
nephrologist was ready. Patients were also informed
about the importance of security precautions and encouraged
to make sure they were calling from a private
environment where others were not present (i.e., could
hear or see them) during the consultations. A phone
number was provided for assistance/technical support if
needed. The patients were also informed that they
needed to go to the hospital to have blood samples
drawn a few days ahead of the consultation as well as
measure their own weight and blood pressure ahead of
the consultation.
Data collection
Information about patient demographics and illness characteristics,
as well as health care provider demographics and
work characteristics, was collected through a study specific
demographic form at study enrollment (June 2018 to April
2019). Individual interviews were conducted with patients
and health care providers 1 year post final participant inclusion
(i.e. April 2020). Semi-structured interview guides developed
for this study were used, containing questions about
the execution of in-person consultations and video consultations,
the similarities and differences, the advantages and disadvantages
considered, as well as any experienced technical
challenges using video consultations (see Additional file 1 for
an English version of the interview guide). Interviews with
patients were conducted by telephone and interviews with
health care providers were conducted in-person at the hospital
by members of the research team. The patient interviews
lasted 14–34 min. The health personnel interviews
lasted 10–20 min. All interviews were audio-recorded and
transcribed verbatim.
Data analysis
Demographics were collected and recorded in Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences (release 25, SPSS Inc., Chicago,
IL, USA) for simple descriptive analyses. Transcripts
were analyzed based on the principles of thematic analysis
[23]. In the first step of the analysis, the first author listened
to the recordings, read through the transcripts and
took notes to become familiarized with the content. Next,
using an inductive-deductive approach the first author
coded the transcripts into three pre-defined overarching
themes based on the interview guide using the software
program NVivo version 12 (QSR International, Victoria,
Australia). The overarching themes included: 1) In-person
consultation execution, 2) Video consultation execution,
including technical challenges, and 3) Comparisons between
in-person and video consultations, including similarities
and differences, advantages and disadvantages.
Sub-themes were identified as they emerged under each
theme, and the transcripts were coded into these subthemes.
Each theme was then re-examined, identifying
variations and similarities within the themes and subthemes.
The co-authors then discussed and reviewed the
themes and sub-themes and subsequently renamed and
re-arranged them into a final structure.
Results
Participant information
Seventeen renal transplant recipients, 1 patient in pretransplant
phase, and 3 of their health care providers
were included in the study and used video consultations
in outpatient follow-up. Patient participants were enrolled
in the study for minimum 12 months (June 2018
– April 2020). Patients’ self-reported number of video
consultations undertaken during the study period ranged
from one to ten.
Of the 21 participants enrolled in the study, 15 patients
and all 3 health care personnel agreed to participate
in the post study interviews. Of the three patient
participants not consenting to participate in the interviews,
one had never conducted a video consultation
and two did not give a reason for declining.
Of the patients (n = 15) participating in the interviews,
gender was equally represented (female 53%), age was
median 53 years old (range 37–64), most were married
or cohabitating (12/15, 80%) and all except one were
renal transplant recipients. Most of the participants (12/
15, 80%) owned a smartphone, and rated their digital
user experience (i.e., PC/tablet/smartphone use) as high.
Please see Table 1 for demographics and illness characteristics
for the patients participating in the interviews).
The participating health care providers (n = 3) were female.
All three had access to their own PC, tablet and
smartphone, and rated their user experience as very high
(median 5).
Overview
Transcripts from the interviews were analyzed into five
main themes: (1) Practical execution of the video consultations,
(2) Hassle and technical frustration, (3) Prerequisites
for success, (4) Benefits, and (5) Potential
challenges and harms. Main themes and sub-themes are
illustrated in Fig. 1.
Practical execution of the video consultations
The alternating between in-person and video consultations
was considered an appropriate arrangement by patients
as well as the nephrologist. The majority of the
patients interviewed said the information received in advance
about how to download and use the video solution
was sufficient to get them started. However, some of the
patients expressed concerns regarding the procedure,
stating that it might be too difficult to follow for people
with less technical knowledge/experience, and suggested
that the hospital staff could provide more direct “get
started” help for those who might need it. One of the patients
said:
So maybe finding out in advance how much the
person knows about the technical things. Maybe
that could be a good idea. Or maybe say that you
will get help from someone to do this. But I think
maybe it would have been nice and reassuring, and
good service, if you had time to show how it should
be done. (Patient 1)
Half of the patients reported conducting the video
consultations from home, and half of them from work.
The latter was possible when the patients had a private
room available at work where they could close the door
to participate in the consultation.
A majority of the patients reported using their smartphone
for the video consultations, closely followed by
those using tablet or PC. Two of the patients bought a
new device due to lack of compatibility with the NHN
Cisco meeting app video consultation solution.
Hassle and technical frustration
Almost all of the patients interviewed had experienced
technical challenges using the video consultation solution.
One of them reported having had to stop using
video consultations and go back to in-person consultations
at the outpatient clinic due to technical issues/not
getting the equipment to work.
Poor quality of sound and image
The problems experienced related to sound and image
were multifaceted. Patients reported sometimes being
unable to get in touch with the nephrologist through the
video consultation solution. Other times the sound had
been of bad quality (e.g. choppy) or had totally disappeared.
Patients also reported that the images sometimes
disappeared and sometimes froze. Many of the patients
also described having experienced new types of technical
problems from video consultation to video consultation.
One of the patients said:
It was probably not fully synchronized, sound and
image. And once there was a picture, without
sound. And then there was sound, without image.
(Patient 13)
The patients and health care providers stated that it
had not always been possible to detect the cause of the
error, but in many cases there were concrete reasons for
the errors. For example, video consultations where the
patients were at work could be hindered by network
fire-walls. One error that took the team some time to
discover, was that the video solution went into “sleep
mode” if the patient logged into the video solution too
long before the consultation started. One of the health
support personnel explained:
So we found out lately, the patient has been in the
app for too long, so the app has gone to sleep. So
then they [the patients] have to restart the app, and
then we usually get the connection going. (Health
support personnel 1)
Also, some user errors caused by the patients themselves
were reported. For example, the patients lost their
password or they bought a new telephone or computer
and were unable to download the application onto the
new device. Also, there were some errors related to that
the patients had not allowed the solution to use the
computer microphone. Patients as well as health support
personnel reported having spent significant amount of
time to make the video consultation solution work. Patients
and health care providers alike reported that many
patients had needed help with downloading and start-up
of the solution.
Even if most of the patients had experienced technical
problems during their video consultations, there was a
collective understanding that start-up problems when
using such new solutions were quite usual. One of the
patients said:
There was a technical failure in the beginning, and
then we were up and running again. That is to be expected
in the beginning. This is after all a pioneering
project, I think, at least for me. So I guess some hassle
in the beginning is to be expected. (Patient 3)
Wasted time and increased work load for health support
personnel
In case of technical problems, the health support
personnel in the current study had to be available for
technical support during each video consultation. As
such, they experienced increased work load and was occupied
for as long as the consultations lasted. One of the
health support personnel said:
I have tried to be in the doctor's office every
time there was a video consultation. If I have not
been there, and the doctor has not been able to
get in touch with the patient, then the doctor
must first go to find me, I must come to the
consultation room, and then we find the patient's
cell phone number, and then I have to call the
patient. So it can take a lot of time. (Health support
personnel 1)
More than half of the patients described having had to
continue the consultation by telephone one or more times,
after trying and failing for a while when technical problems
occurred. One of the patients stated that every consultation
had started with video and ended by telephone:
It has actually been so bad that in the end we have
decided to do the rest of the consultation by phone.
(Patient 12)
Prerequisites for success
The interviews revealed that there were some elements
that acted as prerequisites for the overall positive attitude
towards video consultations, despite the apparent
pervasive and comprehensive technical problems.
Mutual trusting patient – physician relationship, established
over many years
Half of the patients reported having had the same nephrologist,
without exception, during their respectively 3–
25 years follow-up at the hospital. Three of the patients
had had follow-up by other nephrologists for some years,
and five of the patients had had other nephrologists only
when their usual nephrologist was on vacation or for
other reasons unavailable. As such, the patients in the
current study had an already established, long-term
trusting relationship with their nephrologist. In that regard,
the patients stated that changing the consultation
from in-person to video did not represent too much of a
change for them as the consultation followed the same
structure and covered the same topics whether they
were in-person or by video. One patient said:
It's the same. The difference is probably only that
I'm physically there. We do the same things. [...]
And I do not feel that there’s any more security in
being with the physician in-person, as opposed to
being at home. I feel as confident and safe with the
treatment and what we agree on by video, as what I
do when present in the doctor's office. (Patient 6)
The nephrologist also acknowledged the video consultation
as equivalent to the in-person consultation:
For the doctor, I would say it is the same. We have
our appointment schedule, and that time is set aside
for each patient. Whether it's in-person attendance,
or by video, it really does not matter. (Nephrologist)
Stable illness phase, few complications
All patients in the study were in a stable phase of their
kidney disease. Medical challenges and issues were stable
and well monitored, and there were no need for physical
examinations. Some of the patients did however express
need for re-assurance that they could ask for an inperson
consultation if they felt it was necessary.
Benefits
The majority of the patients interviewed stated that they
wanted to continue with video consultations, and would
also recommend them to others, even if they had experienced
a lot of technical problems during the study. The
health care providers also stated that the benefits with
video consultations outweighed the problems. One of
the health support personnel summarized:
I would like to emphasize that despite the fact that
we have experienced a number of challenges, we
have been very satisfied with the video consultations,
when the solution has worked. The fact that it
has worked has outweighed all the challenges we
have faced, because it is so much fun when it actually
works, because it is such a good offer. And from
what I have seen from the patients, who have used
video consultation, they are also very satisfied when
it actually works. (Health support personnel 1)
Less trips/travel to the hospital
The benefit most often reported by patients as well as
health care providers was the time saved and that the patients
did not have to travel to the hospital for the consultations.
As such, the video consultations were viewed as
effective, practical and convenient. One patient said:
This has meant that I don’t have to set aside so
much time. I have to go all the way to the hospital.
It takes, as I said, three to four hours, back and
forth, and so on. So I can do it in ten minutes,
which means that I have time to do other things instead,
or plan other things. So for me it has been
absolutely superb. (Patient 3).
Patients with long as well as short travel distance to
the hospital reported appreciating that they did not
have to go to the hospital. This was especially the case
on days when they did not feel well, and for persons
with physical disabilities. They reported appreciating still
having the option to conduct the consultation, not
needing to cancel if they did not feel well enough to
travel. Some of the patients also mentioned the economical
aspect, that money usually spent on travel was
saved and also that there was a socio-economic aspect
of not needing to leave the workplace to go to the hospital
for consultation. Some patients also mentioned
psychological benefits related to the use of video consultations.
For example, one of the patients reported
feeling less stressed when conducting the consultation
from home, as visits to the hospital usually came with
feelings of stress and anxiety. Another patient described
experiencing fewer burdens with chronic illness:
But I think that being able to have the consultation
by video is much, much better, because you do not
have to [...] spend time, and travel, and leave work.
When you, somehow, do not want to be chronically
ill, as it is called. So it's okay to have minimal absence
due to consultations then, since I do it every three
months. It's not much, but when you've done it for 20
years, it's a lot. So for me, it's a huge, huge improvement
that I can do it [by video]. (Patient 8)
As the interviews were conducted right around the beginning
of the Covid-19 pandemic situation, several of
the patients mentioned that the pandemic situation, with
the risk of disease spreading had strengthened their positive
attitude towards video consultations. One of the patients
said:
It is one of the advantages, when such situations
occur [Covid-19], that you can then still keep in
touch with the doctor. Especially for us who are especially
at risk. So if I was to mention an extra benefit
when you have diseases [in the surroundings] that are
contagious, that makes a video consultation beneficial
[because you can stay at home and decrease your
own risk of being infected]. (Patient 5)
A new dimension when entering the patients’ private sphere
The nephrologist reported experiencing that entering
the private sphere of the patients, when the video consultations
brought the nephrologist into the patients’
homes, was an unanticipated positive experience:
Actually kind of interesting too, because then you are
in their homes, or you are at their cabin, or wherever
they are. So you kind of get more, an additional dimension,
in the doctor-patient relationship, which I
think has been rather rewarding. (Nephrologist)
Potential challenges and harms
Some patients said they could not think of any disadvantages
to using video consultations, while some described
how they thought video consultations could carry the potential
for harm. Patients did not describe potential harm
as personal experiences, but rather as elements they imagined
as potential challenges and threats for harm.
Security and confidentiality
Most patients did not mention any aspect of security or
confidentiality. Only one patient mentioned a fear of leaking
of sensitive information, or getting hacked by
unauthorized persons. One patient expressed trust regarding
own personal information, and trusted the storing and
log-in routines of the video solution chosen by the hospital
for this study. Also, one patient said it was important
that the routines from the hospital were followed so that
there were no other persons in the room together with
the physician, without the patient being informed about it.
Some patients mentioned that it could be difficult to find
a quiet place for the video consultation from work or from
home, for example if they were home together with family
members. One patient said:
So I don’t think I would have liked, even if it may be
my spouse, I would not have liked to carry it out if the
spouse was sitting in the living room, or in the same
room as me. (Patient 7).
Need for physical examination
Several of the patients mentioned that there was a potential
risk of overseeing important signs and symptoms
when the consultation was conducted over video and
not in-person, particularly related to aspects such as
pain, wounds, weight, blood pressure, heart rate and so
on. One of the patients said:
The downside, of course, is that there may be things
that you are not aware of, that the doctor can discover
physically, when in-person. [...] There is an extra safety
when the doctor performs physical examinations, than
when you perform those examinations on yourself. (Patient
5).
The nephrologist also described the potential risks of
overseeing important aspects:
If there were clinical findings, which in a way, will
not be discovered, because you cannot examine the
patient. It will only be visual and auditory, right.
You don’t get the third dimension, the physical
examination. (Nephrologist)
Discussion
The current study examined the experiences of renal
transplant recipients and health care providers when
using video consultations in follow-up after renal transplantation.
The respondents interviewed in this study
described the video consultation solution used as having
major technical deficiencies, including connection problems
and poor quality of sound and images. Despite the
technical challenges experienced the majority of the patients
appreciated being able to have video consultations
as an alternative to in-person consultations at the hospital.
The main benefit reported by patients was that
they did not need to travel to the hospital, stating that
this meant time savings, less focus on being chronically
ill and economic benefits for patients as well as the society.
Health care providers also described appreciating
the benefits involved in using video consultations, but
did describe significant disturbances experienced by the
technical challenges. Facilitators for succeeding with
video consultations included the patients being in a
stable phase of their disease, and already having an
established, trusting relationship with their nephrologist.
Potential challenges and harms of video consultations
were described as most likely related to security, confidentiality,
interruptions and if there should be a need for
a physical examination by the physician.
The benefits outweighed the technological shortcomings
The patients in the current study described a number of
benefits related to using video consultations. Time savings
was one of the benefits reported, with patients living
far away saving a significant amount of time.
However, patients living or working near the hospital
also appreciated the benefit of time saved. This is in line
with previous studies showing that time spent on travels
is unwelcome to patients [14, 17, 24]. As renal transplant
patients have to have routine follow-up for the rest of
their lives, being able to have some of these follow-up
consultations (i.e., every second follow-up in the current
study) via video appeared to bring a sense of freedom to
the patients. Traditionally, the routine in-patient consultations
at the hospital were set, but with the new alternative,
patients could attend the consultation from
wherever they wanted, which provided them with a new
sense of freedom and flexibility. The patients could even
travel around the world if they wanted to, and still be
able to have close follow-up from health care providers
that they knew and trusted at home.
Technological options and solutions are constantly
evolving, also within healthcare. Challenges with and
disruptions from the technology frequently occur however
[14, 18–20], and in the current study, there was significant
technological hassle with the video consultation
solution used. Research has pointed to the need to avoid
technological problems as much as possible, as patients
receiving health care are in a vulnerable situation and
may lack the energy to keep trying if the technology
does not work [25]. In the current study, however, patients
continued to be motivated for use, even if the
technology presented with significant issues, and patients
as well as health care providers remained positive
towards the use of video consultations despite these issues.
One reason for this might be that many of the patients
were experienced technology users. Another factor
could be that the participating patients in the current
study were in a stable phase of their disease, with only
limited disease related concerns. Perceived seriousness
of the conditions has also been seen to be a key factor
influencing patients’ willingness to use electronic consultations,
as lower use has been associated with patients in
poorer health conditions [26].
In line with previous studies [17, 24] the patients in the
current study indicated that they saved money by attending
video consultations compared to in-person hospital consultations.
In contrast, however, video consultations such as
the ones tested in the current study save no time or money
for the health care providers or the hospital itself. The physicians
may spend the same time on the consultations, regardless
of type (i.e., in-person or video), but in the current
study the health support personnel spent more time on the
video consultations, trying to solve technical issues. Such
challenges may even lead to a need for more preparations
in advance of, and follow-up during, consultations. Such
added aspects of consultation routines will create staffrelated
as well as financial challenges. Reimbursement, or
lack of adequate reimbursement systems, is described as
another major barrier to the implementation of video consultations
[27]. If the reimbursement systems are not in
place, providing options for reimbursements equivalent to
that of in-person consultations, electronic/video consultations
will never reach implementation potential. The occurrence
of the Covid-19 pandemic, although detrimental, has
however triggered an urgent need for implementation of
video consultations in patient follow up, as video consultations
can be a practical solution for many chronic conditions
or during unusual health care challenges and
situations such as the current Covid-19 pandemic. This
might especially be helpful for people with a high risk for
hospital infections, for families with chronically ill children
or less mobile patients, for whom traveling to the outpatient
clinic is burdensome or for those whose therapy
data are already available in software clouds. Furthermore,
the reimbursement barriers are slowly being addressed [28].
However, as reimbursement for video consultations cannot
surpass that of in-person consultations, the implementation
of such solutions depends on reliable, easy to use technical
solutions that require minimum technical support. In
addition, new and efficient systems for support need to be
established in order for health care providers to be allowed
to do their job of providing care, rather than technical support.
Supporting existing research [14, 15, 29], the current
study demonstrates that video consultation implementation
needs to be prioritized in order for it to be incorporated as
a fluent part of clinical practice.
Aspects of human interaction
The results from the current study underlined an established,
trusting relationship between patient and physician
as a prerequisite for the video consultations to be
experienced as a good service. An established, mutually
trusting relationship has also previously been demonstrated
by a number of studies as a key factor for success
[30]. The current study further emphasized that not only
do the patients need to trust their nephrologist, but the
nephrologist must also trust the patients. In the current
study, the mutually trusting relationship allowed the patients
to trust that they would receive the same high
quality of care, whether they met the nephrologist inperson
or by video. Likewise, the nephrologist had to
trust that the patients would be able to measure and report
important physical changes, for example occurrence
of rashes or edema, to the nephrologist. Findings show
that that some of the responsibilities that have traditionally
had been placed within the health care service, and
for renal transplant follow-up especially on the nephrologist,
can be transferred to the patients. The patients
in this study had to measure physical functions, such as
blood pressure and weight, usually measured by health
care providers at the hospital, by themselves. Whether
delivered in-person or by video, the post renal transplant
follow-up consultations are very much the same, as described
by patients as well as health care providers in
this study. This can likely be explained by the routine
follow-up nature of the consultations (e.g., brief and precise,
focusing mainly on kidney/graft function and blood
pressure). As such, the results from the current study
showed renal transplant follow-up as suitable for video
consultations, particularly when providing patients and
health care providers alike with the opportunity to alternate
between in-person and video follow-up.
The use of video consultations may not be suitable for
all types of patients, not even all types of patients post
renal transplant. Are the patients capable of conducting
the measures needed for the physician to be assured of
their health situation? Can adequate care be provided
should there be the need for a physical examination?
Renal transplant recipients may also feel isolated after
the transplantation, with the contact with the hospital
being considerably reduced [31]. Patients’ emotional and
support needs should not be overlooked [31, 32] but
may be more challenging to detect and address when
not meeting the patient in-person.
Despite the many potential benefits with the use of
video consultations, aspects of appropriateness and professional
soundness have to be carefully considered and evaluated
before replacing or offering alternatives to in-person
consultations. Individual considerations are required.
Strengths and limitations
There are number of limitations to this study. First, the
study was conducted at a single university hospital, and
the results may not be representative for other practice
settings. However, the outpatient clinic in which the study
was conducted is one of the largest Nephrology clinics in
Norway, with regional responsibility for half the country’s
population, and all results are annually reported to the national
quality register [6]. Second, the study included a
limited number of patients and health care providers.
However, even though the sample is small, the data material
presents with a significant amount of informative input
and knowledge that may be important to improve future
health care settings. As the current study aimed to gather
rich and varied data, this means that statements from one
participant could be as important as statements of the majority.
Furthermore, the small sample size ensured that all
procedures could be well tested and further refined before
providing a larger population of patients and health care
providers with the option of video consultations. Third, all
patients included in the current study were identified and
selected by the nephrologist to make sure that the participants
were in a stable phase of their disease and also
somewhat familiar with technology. This could have introduced
a selection bias and as such be considered a limitation,
but it also ensured professional soundness (i.e., stable
phase of the disease) and made it possible to conduct the
video consultations despite the many technical challenges
presented by the video solution in use. Finally, the interviews
conducted in the current study provided insight into
a variety of patient experiences and as such allowed sufficient
depth in the analyses, which can be considered a
strength.
Future implications
Future studies examining the use of video consultations in
renal transplant recipient follow-up should aim to include
larger patient samples from multiple centers and strive to
incorporate more variation in terms of where the patients
are in the disease trajectory. This could involve including
patients in less stable phases of their disease, if considered
appropriate, justifiable and professional sound to do so.
Furthermore, future options to have health data such as
blood pressure, weight, body composition, heart frequency
or oxygen saturation transferred by apps directly to the
Health care team or into a personal health care suite available
in advance of the video consultation should also be
explored. When scaling up to larger studies comprising
more patients as well as health care providers, the aspects
of implementation (e.g., how to best implement new types
of follow-up, such as video consultations, into routine
care) should also be addressed [29].
Conclusions
The current study offers insight into the use of video
consultations in outpatient renal transplant follow-up
from the perspective of patients and health care providers.
The results indicate that the benefits experienced
by patients as well as health care providers surpassed
any technological challenges encountered. An important
prerequisite for the experienced benefit was a longlasting
mutual trusting relationship between patient and
physician. Findings also support the notion that initial
small-scale studies, with few selected patients in stable
phases of their condition, may lay the groundwork before
providing a larger population of patients and health
care providers with the option of video consultations.