Background
Spinal arteriovenous fistulas (SAVFs) is a rare but treatable
cause of chronic myelopathy as a result of progressive
spinal venous hypertension. Available evidence
suggests that SAVFs are acquired lesions due to
obstructed spinal venous drainage although the actual
etiology remains unclear. Despite increasing recognition
of this disease and advancing surgical skills over the recent
years, the diagnosis of complex SAVFs involving
the low-flow fistulas especially at less common sites with
atypical clinical presentation and non-specific spinal
cord imaging appearance remains a challenge. SAVFs involving
the craniocervical junction are rare, but are the
most dangerous among all due to their potential significant
brainstem oedema secondary to venous congestion.
This can lead to an increased risk of subarachnoid or
posterior fossa haemorrhage [1, 2]. Very often, this variant
of SAVFs is misdiagnosed even among experienced
clinicians [3]. Unlike the high-flow pattern of other
spinal vascular malformations, in which enlargement of
perimedullary and/or epidural veins are readily identified
by MRI imaging, the low-flow SAVFs are often missed
or misdiagnosed due to a heterogenous spectrum of
clinical presentation and non-specific appearance on imaging
[4]. Common locations for low-flow SAVFs are
perimedullary, epidural and dural [5]. A recent study on
the sources of radiological error in diagnosing dural
SAVFs found that over half of the radiologically confirmed
cases were misinterpreted on initial MRI despite
presence of typical imaging characteristics such as dilated
veins, increased T2 signal and enlarged spinal cord
segments [6]. There is no denying that the diagnostic
process of this rare entity requires more than the standard
routine imaging sequences.
We report 4 cases of low-flow SAVFs with longitudinally
extensive, multi-segment lesions involving more
than one spinal cord region. The atypical clinical course
and imaging characteristics discussed unveils the paradigm
of clinical heterogeneity in a single entity.
The clinical characteristics, chronology of events and
outcome of patients are summarised in Table 1.
Case presentation
Case 1
A 50-year-old man presented with progressive spastic
lower limb paraparesis over 3 months associated with
urination retention. Neurological examination revealed a
sensory deficit below the T6 dermatome. MRI demonstrated
intramedullary T2 hyperintensities extending
from the medulla to C7 spinal cord with heterogenous
contrast enhancement and cord expansion. Despite being
negative for serum Aquaporin 4 (AQP4) IgG and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) oligoclonal band (OCB), he
was treated as immune-mediated longitudinal extensive
transverse myelitis (LETM) with intravenous (IV) Methylprednisolone.
Two days later, his weakness progressed
to quadriparesis. He subsequently received 5 sessions of
therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE), but showed no response.
A repeat MRI/MRA of the spine revealed extension
of the hyperintense lesion from pons to T1 level
with cord expansion and anterior serpinginous flow void
signals (Fig. 1a and b). Spinal angiogram confirmed a
SAVF at left C1 level with a feeding artery from the
meningeal branch of the left vertebral artery. Endovascular
embolisation was attempted but was incomplete due
to technical difficulties. Imaging was repeated in view of
poor neurological recovery. MRI done a year later demonstrated
worsening of SAVF with new abnormal dilated
epidural vessels at C6 to T6 level. Despite successful surgical
ligation, there was no satisfactory clinical improvement
and his functional outcome remained poor.
Case 2
A 45-year-old gentleman with no prior illness was admitted
for hemorrhoidectomy under general anesthesia.
Immediately following surgery, he complained of bilateral
lower limb weakness and numbness with difficulty
passing urine. Clinical assessment revealed paraparesis
and loss of sensation with sensory level below the L1
dermatome. MRI of the thoracic and lumbosacral spine
revealed an intramedullary T2 hyperintense lesion extending
from T6 to L2 vertebra level with cord expansion
and minimal contrast enhancement. He was treated
as LETM with 3 days of IV Methylprednisolone and was
subsequently discharged. Despite initial improvement in
lower limb power after 2 weeks, he remained dependent
on a urinary catheter and required laxatives to aid bowel
opening. His lower limb weakness worsened 1 month
later. An urgent MRI of the whole spine showed similar
findings. In addition to second course of IV Methylprednisolone,
he received 5 cycles of TPE but showed minimal
improvement. A year later, he presented again with
worsening paraparesis. Repeat MRI revealed a lesion suspicious
of SAVF at the L2 region (Fig. 2a and b). This
was confirmed with a spinal angiography after which he
underwent successful embolisation. Despite no further
relapses, his neurological recovery was poor.
Case 3
A 27-year-old gentleman presented with acute bilateral
spastic paraparesis and bowel/bladder dysfunction with a
sensory level at T12. He had a similar presentation 2
years ago and was treated as immune-mediated LETM
in another institution. Following a course of IV methylprednisolone
and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG),
he had partial recovery and was able to ambulate despite
a right foot drop and required intermittent bladder
catheterization. Upon admission to our center, an urgent
MRI of the spine reported a T2 hyperintense intramedullary
lesion with patchy enhancement extending from
T7 to L1. He rapidly deteriorated and became paraplegic
over the next few days despite retreatment with IV
Methylprednisolone. MRI images were revisited, with
identification of flow void signals at the posterior aspect
of the cord from T6 to L2 (Fig. 3a, b and c), which later
confirmed a SDAVF at the L2 region on spinal angiogram.
The patient underwent successful endovascular
embolisation and showed good neurological recovery.
Case 4
A 56-year-old gentleman presented with a month history
of lower back pain followed by paraparesis. Prior to that,
he had an episode of acute urinary retention requiring
temporary indwelling catheterization. MRI of the whole
spine done at another center concluded degenerative
spine disease. Upon assessment, sensation was reduced
below the L4 dermatome. Repeat MRI showed a longitudinal
extensive T2 hyperintense contrast enhancing
intramedullary lesion from T6 to L1. His lower limb
weakness deteriorated soon after the first dose of Methylprednisolone.
Despite strong clinical suspicious of
SAVF, his spinal angiogram was negative for this. He received
a course of IV Methylprednisolone followed by
plasmapheresis but showed no remarkable improvement.
Within a year, he was readmitted twice for similar relapses
and responded poorly to IV methylprednisolone.
Repeated MRI spine demonstrated a worsening contrast
enhanced T2 hyperintense lesion involving T4 to the
conus medullaris with dilated spinal veins seen most
prominently from T10 to L1 level (Fig. 4a and b). A
second spinal angiogram confirmed a SAVF with feeders
from the left 12th posterior intercostal arteries and L1
lumbar artery. Despite successful embolisation, his
neurological recovery was poor.
Discussion and conclusion
We described 4 cases of low-flow dural SAVFs with
unique heterogeneous clinical spectrums. We discuss 4
important but less-described aspects of clinical practice
in the management of SAVFs.
Firstly, the clinical presentation of the low-flow variant
of SAVFs correlated poorly with radiological findings.
Myelopathy and sensory deficit inaccurately predicted
the extent of spinal cord intramedullary T2 signal and
the level of SAVF. This was thought to be due to the unequal
distribution of venous outflow channels along the
spinal cord, with the lower thoracic region having relatively
fewer venous outflow channels compared to the
cervical region. This results in venous congestion being
transmitted in a caudocranial direction, explaining the
more severe myelopathy symptoms correlating with a
more distal region of the MRI signal [7, 8]. This also explains
why majority of the SAVFs involve the thoracolumbar
region. Similarly, the rate of clinical progression
and severity are independent of the length of abnormal
spinal cord signal. Our patient with high cervical SAVF
from a feeding artery that originated from the meningeal
branch of the left vertebral artery was completely lacking
brainstem signs as well as the commonly reported subarachnoid
hemorrhage or intraparenchymal bleed within
the brainstem [9]. The actual reason behind this is unclear.
One study described five different types of craniocervical
junction AVFs (Dural, Radicular, Epidural with
pial feeders, Epidural and Perimedullary) based on location
of the shunt point. The authors inferred that radicular
type is more commonly associated with SAH besides
other factors such as aneurysm of the feeder artery and
anterior spinal artery as the feeder. All these features
were not present in our patient [10]. The extent of spinal
cord ischemia resulting in infarction likely plays a more
important role than spinal cord oedema which is largely
reversible [11]. From a recent analysis, symptoms of
brainstem dysfunction are very rarely reported, occurring
in only 3.3% of patients with craniocervical junction
SAVFs [12]. This highlights the importance of careful
imaging as a SAVF in a particular location may produce
symptoms and signs further away as a result of intramedullary
venous oedema [13]. This clinical-radiological
discrepancy/mismatch may be an important clue to differentiate
SAVFs from other causes of myelopathy.
Secondly, increased venous hypertension in low-flow
SAVF reflects the underlying dynamic vascular pathophysiology
of this disorder. Although the underlying
aetiology and pathophysiology of SAVF is not perfectly
understood, we know that arterialization of the venous
system diminishes the arteriovenous pressure gradient
and leads to a decreased drainage of normal spinal veins,
resulting in venous congestion [7]. Therefore, any disruption
around this arteriovenous system may result in
SAVFs. In relation to this, we observed 2 unique events
among our patients that could have led to the development
of myelopathy. One of our patients developed
symptoms following hemorrhoidectomy. To our knowledge,
acute presentation post-operatively, and in our
case, following hemorrhoid surgery, has not been reported.
The pathogenesis of hemorrhoids is thought to
be due to abnormal distension of the arteriovenous anastomoses
within the hemorrhoidal cushions, in which
part of the surgical treatment involves the ligation of
hemorrhoidal arteries [14, 15]. It is still unclear if
hemorrhoidectomy could affect the hemodynamics
within the inferior vena cava (IVC) and the venous system,
resulting in increased venous pressure at the spinal
venous plexus contributing to an acute presentation in a
patient with a pre-existing subclinical SAVF. Dural
SAVF reported following spinal surgery such as correction
of scoliosis and microdiscectomy for radiculopathy,
further supports the postulation of an acquired traumatic
or inflammatory mechanism [16, 17]. Another patient
of ours developed extensive dilated epidural vessels
from C6 to T2 following an incomplete embolization of
the left vertebral artery SAVF. Although this occurred
after a year, it was not unusual. In majority of the patients,
SAVFs, symptoms are usually slowly progressive
over many months to years. Elswick and colleagues reported
a case of dural SAVF that developed 5 years after
thoracolumbar fusion for scoliosis [16].
Thirdly, majority of patients with SAVFs have MRIs
that show either longitudinally extensive intramedullary
T2 hyperintense signal, flow voids or cord expansion.
The probability of one of these MRI changes occurring
in a patient is reported to be as high as 100% [18]. Despite
that, these features are frequently missed due to its
rare occurrence [19]. Spinal angiogram is considered
the gold standard investigation to confirm SAVFs [20].
However, no imaging modality has perfect sensitivity
and specificity. A false negative spinal angiogram may
further complicate clinical judgement. This could be
due to misinterpretation of images, technical difficulties
especially when involving small SAVF < 1mm or limited
spinal segments on angiogram study [3, 13, 20].
Highly specific angiographic techniques performed by
experienced interventional specialists and meticulous
analysis of angiographic images are essential for accurate
diagnosis and identification of the location of the
fistula [3, 4, 20].
Lastly, low-flow SAVF is typically diagnosed among
older patients presenting with a progressive myelopathy
secondary to spinal venous hypertension. The diagnosis
is extremely uncommon in the younger population and
is rarely discovered before the age of 30, although one of
our four patients was 27 years old. It is estimated that
disease onset before 30 of age constitute less than 1% of
the patients [7]. We could not identify any specific
history or precipitating factors in this patient, but in
comparison to the other 2 patients with relatively similar
thoracolumbar SAVF presentation at maximum severity,
the outcome post-embolization was far better. Although
his presentation was relatively early within 2 weeks of
symptoms onset, which has been associated with better
long-term outcome [13, 21], similar outcome was not
observed in case 2 with symptom onset posthemorrhoidectomy.
From a recent analysis, patient’s age
and neurological status at diagnosis had no influence on
the long-term outcome. This was in contrast to the conventional
assumption that younger patients have better
recovery potential and likewise, the more severe the
neurological deficit, the poorer the recovery [21]. These
observations reflected the ongoing lack of understanding
of the disease.
Neurosurgery and endovascular embolization have
been employed in the management of SAVF. Endovascular
modality has been the traditional first line approach
in our institution, possibly due to the limited expertise
and risks involved with open spinal surgery. However,
several studies and meta-analyses over the years have
consistently shown better success and lower recurrence
rates with neurosurgery compared to endovascular treatment;
although the outcome of the latter has improved
over time [22].
We described the atypical presentation and clinical
heterogeneity seen among patients with low-flow SAVFs.
Careful recognition of these uncommon features such as
prominent high craniocervical lesions without brainstem
signs, symptom onset in association with a recent surgery,
false negative spinal angiogram, and SAVF in
young adults may change the clinical course of the disease
and improve functional prognosis.