Introduction
Stroke is a leading cause of mortality globally and results
in more disabilities compared with other diseases [1].
In general, stroke can be separated into two subtypes:
ischemic, which accounts for 80% of strokes, and hemorrhagic.
The proportions of the two subtypes vary in different
countries, which is associated with the national
income [2]. The nonmodifiable risk factors of stroke
include age and male sex, whereas the modifiable risk
factors include hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia,
cardiovascular diseases, sedentary lifestyle,
atrial fibrillation, smoking, and alcohol consumption [3].
Despite improved knowledge and control of modifiable
risk factors, the decline in stroke incidence in the twentyfirst
century is unsatisfactory [4]. Acute treatments for
stroke, especially ischemic stroke, have been developed,
which have improved stroke recovery remarkably [5].
However, studies for identifying protective factors that
can reduce the risk of stroke are warranted [6].
Coffee is a widely popular beverage worldwide. In addition
to caffeine, coffee contains other biochemical compounds
that affect human health [7]. Mounting evidence
suggests noteworthy health benefits of coffee. Caffeine
and phenolic compounds have antioxidant properties
and regulate intracellular signaling for growth, proliferation,
and apoptosis [8]; they also modulate the gut microbiome
[9] and glucose and fat metabolism [10, 11]. The
health benefits of coffee have been reported for diseases
including cancer, cardiovascular disease, and Parkinson’s
disease [12].
The effect of coffee on stroke is unclear, and a U-shaped
association has been claimed in some studies, which
have suggested that the protective effect is dose dependent
and a high dose of coffee is less effective [13, 14].
However, some studies have found consistent protection
against stroke in moderate to heavy coffee drinkers
[15, 16]. The mixed components and varied types of coffee
may explain the discrepancy. A positive indication of
coffee’s protective effects is that moderate coffee intake
is associated with less carotid atherosclerosis in women
who drink coffee occasionally [17]. For men, coffee intake
is associated with reduced body weight [18]. Additionally,
coffee consumption reduces the risk of diabetes
[19]. Conversely, coffee may exacerbate certain risk factors
for stroke. Caffeine, a major component of coffee,
causes vasoconstriction and increases blood pressure.
Habitual coffee drinking is associated with uncontrolled
hypertension in older adults with hypertension [20],
although a meta-analysis of other cohorts found no association
between habitual coffee consumption and hypertension
[21]. In addition, the sympathomimetic effect
of coffee, especially caffeine, may be responsible for an
increased risk of atrial fibrillation [22]. Unfiltered coffee
may increase blood cholesterol, especially the undesirable
low-density lipoprotein [23]. Moreover, confounding
factors, including smoking, alcohol consumption,
diet, education, and physical activity, interact with coffee
regarding the risk of stroke [24]. Figure 1 summarizes the
possible advantages and disadvantages of coffee regarding
the risk of stroke. Because of the conflicting evidence,
forming a reliable opinion regarding whether coffee
consumption can reduce stroke risk and what amount of
coffee provides the best protection is still challenging.
This study investigated the association between stroke
risk and coffee consumption. To examine the role of coffee
in primary stroke prevention, prospective cohort
studies that enrolled healthy or stroke-free people with a
record of coffee consumption were included in the metaanalysis.
In addition to overall stroke, hemorrhagic stroke
and ischemic stroke were subjected to subgroup analyses
for risk assessment.
Methods
Literature search strategy
All relevant articles in English published from January
1, 1990, to May 31, 2020, were identified by searching
PubMed, BioMed Central, Medline, and Google Scholar.
Details regarding search terms are provided in the supplementary
data. Moreover, the reference lists of relevant
articles were reviewed to identify eligible studies not
derived using the search terms. The meta-analysis procedure
complied with PRISMA guidelines.
Inclusion and exclusion of studies
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) clear definition
of stroke diagnosis, (2) clear definition of the quantity of
coffee consumed, (3) cohort study published as an original
article, case series, or letter to the editor, and (4) publication
in English. After ineligible studies were excluded,
seven studies were ultimately included. The enrolled
studies were grouped into three categories: those assessing
overall risk of stroke (n = 7), those assessing ischemic
stroke (n = 3), and those assessing hemorrhagic stroke
(n = 3). The flow of the selection process is illustrated in
Fig. 2.
Data extraction
The following data were extracted: name of the first
author, year of publication, country and location, study
design, and diagnostic criteria for stroke. Three investigators
(CH Bai, CT Hong, and L Chan) independently
reviewed all data, and conflicts were resolved through
consensus. Two investigators (CH Bai and YC Fan)
independently extracted data from the seven candidate
studies.
Statistical analysis
Hazard ratios (HR) were determined, and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) were calculated based on a binomial
assumption. Furthermore, the I2
statistic was used
to assess heterogeneity across the studies. All statistical
analyses were performed using SAS (version 9.3, Statistical
Analysis System, SAS. com, USA). All reported
probability (p) values were two sided, with P < .05 considered
statistically significant.
Results
Of the seven studies (Table 1), four were conducted in
Europe, one in the United States, and two in Japan [20,
25–30]. All seven studies enrolled healthy individuals
without a history of stroke, and two studies included
only female participants. All studies were large-scale,
long-term, epidemiological cohort studies. Coffee consumption
was evaluated using either detailed and comprehensive
or simple questionnaires. Overall stroke,
ischemic stroke, and hemorrhagic stroke were identified
through self-reports, confirmation of medical records, or
a national health care database. Most studies categorized
caffeine consumption as degrees 3 to 5 points based on
the number of cups of coffee per day or week, and only
two studies provided yes or no options for regular coffee
consumption.
Considering variations in coffee consumption among
studies, we considered results from all degrees of
coffee consumers and considered the no-exposure group
a reference to determine the HRs. Overall, 20 results
extracted from the 7 studies were analyzed. Coffee consumption
was significantly associated with a lower overall
stroke risk (HR = 0.922, 95% CI: 0.855–0.994, P = .035
using the random model, I2
= 49.98%, Fig. 3A). Because
two studies recruited only female participants and one
study provided sex-segregated results, we further analyzed
the association between coffee and stroke in female
participants; coffee demonstrated a similarly considerable
risk-lowering effect (HR = 0.869, 95% CI: 0.76–0.99,
P = 0.048 using the random model, I2
= 65.86%, Fig. 3B).
Subgroup analyses were conducted to investigate the
risk of ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke in coffee drinkers.
Coffee consumption reduced the risk of ischemic
more robustly than for hemorrhagic stroke (hemorrhagic,
HR = 0.895, 95% CI = 0.824–0.972, P = .008; ischemic,
HR = 0.834, 95% CI = 0.739–0.876, P < .001; Fig. 4A and
B). Heterogeneity was unremarkable for both hemorrhagic
and ischemic strokes (
I2 = 3.732% for hemorrhagic
and 0% for ischemic). No obvious dose-dependent
or U-shaped effect (highest protection with moderate
amounts of coffee and no protection with the highest
amount) was observed under either condition.
Discussion
Our study reveals the protective effect of coffee consumption
against stroke, especially the overall stroke
events and the risk of both ischemic and hemorrhagic
stroke. Considering that most of the articles analyzed
were large-scale, population-based cohort studies,
this evidence indicates the benefit of coffee in primary
stroke prevention.
Studies have reported the benefits of coffee in several
health conditions [12]. Regarding neurological disorders,
a meta-analysis conducted by Santos et al. demonstrated
a protective effect of coffee on Alzheimer’s disease from
pooled cohort studies, with a relative risk of 0.93 [31].
Compared with Alzheimer’s disease, the benefit of coffee
on Parkinson’s disease is more substantial not only
for reduced risk in healthy people but also for slowing
disease progression in patients [32]. Additionally, coffee
consumption reduces the risk of depression by 9%
in elderly people who drink ≥4 cups of coffee per day
[33] and reduces the risk of suicide by approximately
one quarter for each increment of 2 cups/day of coffee
according to three large-scale cohort studies of medical
professionals [34].
Coffee also has beneficial effects on cardiovascular disease
(CVD), another major vascular occlusive disorder.
CVD shares several modifiable risk factors with stroke,
such as hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, smoking,
and obesity. On the disease- mechanism level, oxidative
stress, inflammation, and endothelial dysfunction contribute
to both diseases. The effect of coffee consumption
reducing the risk of CVD has been established based
on several large-scale cohort studies and pooled metaanalysis.
A U-shaped protective effect, wherein the best
protection is obtained for people who drink 3–5 cups of
coffee per day, is presented as well. However, some distinctions
exist between the two related diseases of CVD
and stroke. First, CVD involves only ischemic infarction,
whereas stroke results from either ischemic or hemorrhagic
infarction. Second, cardioembolism, usually secondary
to atrial fibrillation, causes stroke but not CVD.
Because of these differences, the evidence for CVD cannot
be applied directly to stroke. In the present metaanalysis,
our findings reveal that for ischemic stroke, the
net effect of coffee consumption is beneficial, with a considerable
risk reduction of nearly 20%. We did not observe
a U-shaped trend of risk reduction. The U-shaped phenomenon
may not result solely from the effect of coffee.
Biases may be introduced by socioeconomic status, use
of other substances (e.g., cigarettes and alcohol) [35], and
mental stress from high coffee consumption. The benefit
of stroke risk reduction in people who consume coffee at
different frequencies provides medical professionals an
accessible and transparent approach to promoting coffee
consumption for stroke prevention.
We detected heterogeneity within the studies included
in the meta-analysis. Regarding overall stroke, Floegel
et al. [26] reported a trend of increased stroke risk in
their study on coffee consumers. The study was conducted
in Europe with a mean follow-up of 8.9 years,
and the authors reported that coffee consumption did
not substantially increase the risk of chronic diseases
(stroke, myocardial infarction, and cancer) but did protect
against diabetes. Zhang et al. [36] reported a slightly
increased stroke risk among women with diabetes. Thus,
these studies have found that coffee consumption is associated
with a decreased risk of CVD and all-cause mortality
as well as better control of blood glucose. For other
studies, a considerable trend in stroke protection has
been observed.
Our findings reveal the stroke-preventive benefit
of coffee consumption through a meta-analysis that
included prospective, large-scale cohort studies with
healthy or stroke-free individuals, and the follow-up
spanned decades. The results are representative and
support the benefit on coffee consumers. However,
original epidemiological studies have not discussed
the limitations. For instance, the accuracy of information
regarding the frequency and amount of coffee
consumption was questionable, although self-reported
questionnaires are proven to be accurate and reproducible
[37]. Another limitation is the lack of knowledge
regarding the component responsible for the beneficial
effect of coffee. Caffeine is postulated to be a key component,
but the lack of similar benefits observed from
tea and other caffeinated foods or beverages is confounding.
Information on the type of coffee participants
consumed was lacking. Lastly, none of the studies provided
information on the subtypes of ischemic stroke,
such as large-artery occlusion, cardioembolism, smallvessel
diseases, or cryptogenic diseases, or whether coffee
is beneficial for specific subtypes of ischemic stroke
remains unknown.
Conclusion
Our meta-analysis revealed an association between
decreased stroke risk and coffee consumption; ischemic
stroke was found to be the most preventable subtype
of stroke. Coffee may be effective in primary stroke
prevention, although the U-shaped relationship is a
concern. Medical staff are encouraged to inform the
population regarding coffee’s beneficial effects. Further
analysis is warranted to identify the primary component
of coffee responsible for preventing stroke.