Background
Ischemic stroke is a devastating condition with a high
burden of neurologic disability and death. Timely and effective
reperfusion is necessary to salvage the ischemic
penumbra and to increase the chances of a favorable
clinical outcome [1].
Several factors may influence the response to therapy
in acute ischemic stroke (AIS), such as time-totreatment,
size, and location of arterial occlusion. The
main reason for the limited efficacy of thrombolysis is
the modest rate of early reperfusion among patients
with a large-vessel occlusion [2, 3], such as those with
internal carotid artery (ICA) involvement. There are
two types of AIS due to ICA occlusion that show a
poor prognosis for inadequate response to systemic
treatment: complete occlusion of ICA due to atheromatous
plaque or dissection and tandem lesions
(TL), defined as proximal anterior circulation intracranial
occlusion and an ipsilateral cervical ICA highgrade
stenosis or occlusion [4].
Acute ICA occlusion causes between 6 and 15 % of
AIS and is associated with a significant level of morbidity
and mortality [5]. For this type of lesion, treatment
with standard intravenous thrombolysis alone leads to a
good clinical outcome in only 17 % of cases, with a death
rate as high as 55 % [6]. Accordingly, TL response rates
to intravenous thrombolysis are low and the prognosis is
often poor [7–9].
Since 2015, several trials assessed the superiority of
mechanical thrombectomy in the treatment of AIS due
large vessel occlusion in the anterior circulation over
standard medical care [10–13]. Nevertheless, the efficacy
of endovascular treatment in TL, as well as the choice of
emergent carotid stenting is not yet clearly defined.
In this study, we report a multicenter experience in
EVT of AIS due to ICA occlusion, either in isolation or
in the setting of a TL.
Methods
Patient Selection
Data collection was carried out from May 2018 to
March 2020 at the Hub Centers for ischemic stroke in
Bologna (Ospedale Maggiore Carlo Alberto Pizzardi)
and in Salerno (Ospedali Riuniti San Giovanni di Dio
and Ruggi d’Aragona).
All patients who arrived in the two centers with symptoms
of AIS, within 6 h of onset, were evaluated with
CT angiography and CT perfusion according to a standard
stroke protocol. We included in this study all patients
(n = 51) with isolated ICA occlusion (both on an
atheromatous basis or due to dissection) or TL.
Ethical approval was waived by the review boards of
our institutions (Ospedale Maggiore Carlo Alberto Pizzardi
and Ospedali Riuniti San Giovanni di Dio and
Ruggi d’Aragona) in view of the retrospective nature of
the study. All procedures being performed were in accordance
with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its
later amendments and were part of approved integrated
care pathways (PDTAI 017 and PDTA 234 resolution
no. 321 of June 18, 2018).
Demographic and clinical data
We collected the following clinical and demographic
data: age, sex, National Institute of Health Stroke Scale
(NIHSS), pre-treatment modified Rankin Scale (mRS),
previous antiplatelet therapy and comorbidities (hypertension,
diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and atrial
fibrillation).
Neuroimaging features
We reviewed admission non-contrast CT, CTangiography,
and CT perfusion. Baseline Alberta Stroke
Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS), type of occlusion
(isolated ICA occlusion or TL), and cause of occlusion
(either atheromatous or secondary to dissection) were
evaluated.
Procedure data
We collected data on stent placement, use of stentretriever
and/or thromboaspiration, use of dual antiplatelet
therapy after the procedure, procedure time,
angiographic result using the modified Thrombolysis in
Cerebral Infarction score (mTICI): mTICI 0 / 2 A = reperfusion
of < 50 % of the vascular territory and mTICI
2B / 3 = reperfusion of ≥ 50 % of the vascular territory.
For ICA stenting we employed either Wallstent (Boston
Scientific, Marlborough, Massachusetts) or Casper stent
(Microvention, Terumo, Tustin, California), while for
mechanical thrombectomy with retriever we employed
Trevo (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan) or Solitair
(Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), and Sofia (Microvention,
Terumo, Tustin, California) or Penumbra (Penumbra,
Alameda, California) catheters for thromboaspiration.
None of the included patients were treated with IV therapy
alone.
The choice of post-procedural antiplatelet therapy
(single or dual) was established as follows:
 • Dual therapy: patients with stent implantation or
patients already on ASA therapy before the ischemic
event but who nevertheless developed an AIS;
 • Single therapy: patients who were not implanted
with a stent and who were not on ASA therapy
before the ischemic event or patients with an
indication for dual therapy who developed
hemorrhagic transformation within 12 h of the
procedure (while the patient was still on tirofiban
infusion and before starting dual antiplatelet
therapy);
 • No therapy: patients with single therapy
indications who developed hemorrhagic
transformation within 12 h of the procedure.
Outcome
A good clinical outcome was defined as an mRS of 0–2
at 90 days (as assessed by an examiner independent of
the interventional physician), while an mTICI score of
2b-3 was considered as successful reperfusion. The 90-
day mRS score was obtained through patient visit or
phone interview. Any procedure-related complications,
such as hemorrhagic infarction (HI) or parenchymal
hematoma (PH) were classified according to the European
Cooperative Acute Stroke Study II (ECASS II) criteria
[9]. At discharge NHISS score was regarded as
minor stroke (0–4), moderate stroke (5–15), moderate
to severe stroke (16–20) and severe stroke (> 20).
Statistical Analysis
Categorical variables were compared using Fisher’s exact
test, while Wilcoxon rank-sum test was computed for
continuous variables. At multivariate analysis, odds ratios
(OR) and 95 % confidence intervals (95 % CI) were
estimated with a logistic regression model. Categorical
variables were summarized by absolute and relative (%)
frequency, numerical variables were described as median
and interquartile range (IQR). All tests were two sided,
and p < 0.05 was considered significant. Statistical analysis
was performed using R version 3.6.1 (The R Foundation
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2019).
Results
Clinical, neuroimaging and procedure data are summarized
in Table 1.
Study Population
Between May 2018 and March 2020, 51 consecutive patients
(63 % males, median age 68 years) with AIS were
admitted to our two institutions within 6 h of the onset
of symptoms and underwent EVT. Of these, 9 patients
(17.6 %) had complete occlusion of the ICA, and 42
(82.4 %) had a TL. Thirty-eight patients (74.5 %) were diagnosed
with an atheromatous lesion and 13 (25.5 %)
with a dissection of the cervical ICA. Baseline ASPECTS
was 9–10 in 27 patients (52.9 %) and ≤ 8 in 24 (47.1 %).
Median baseline NIHSS was 12 (IQR = 4.0–20.0).
Twenty-one patients (41.2 %) were on antiplatelet
therapy (ASA or ASA + clopidogrel) prior to the stroke
event.
Clinical and Angiographic Outcomes
At 3 months a favorable outcome (mRS 0–2) was
achieved in 34 patients (66.7 %), 13 patients (25 %) had
an mRS > 2 and 4 patients did not survive, resulting in a
mortality rate of 8 %. TICI 2B-3 (successful intracranial
recanalization) was achieved in 42 patients (82.4 %), TICI
0-2 A in 9 (17.6 %).
A stent was deployed in 21 patients (41.2 %) and 95 %
of these had a post-treatment TICI 2B-3, while among
patients who did not undergo stent placement 73 %
achieved successful recanalization (p = 0.064).
Ten patients (19.6 %) experienced post-procedural
hemorrhagic transformations, in particular, the rate of
post-interventional parenchymal hematoma was 1.9 %
for PH1 and 1.9 % for PH2 while the rate of postinterventional
petechial hemorrhages was 9.8 % for HI1
and 5.8 % for HI2, in the absence of symptomatic
bleeding.
The comparison of patients with successful and unsuccessful
intracranial recanalization is reported in Table 2.
Management of ICA occlusion and TL in emergency
Antiplatelet therapy was administered in 18 patients
(35.3 %), aspirin in 6 (11.8 %) and GpIIb/IIIa inhibitors
in 11 (21.6 %), only 1 patient (1.9 %) received heparin
(2000 IU) during the procedure.
A stent was employed in 21 patients (41.2 %). Among
patients who underwent intracranial mechanical
thrombectomy (80.4 %), ADAPT was employed in 28
(54.9 %), Solumbra in 11 (21.6 %) and retriever in 2
(3.9 %). The median procedure time was 69 min (IQR,
46–90 min).
Factors Influencing Outcome and Recanalization
The comparison of patients with favorable and unfavorable
outcome at 3 months of follow-up is shown in
Table 3.
Factors significantly associated with a favorable 90-day
outcome were:
a) the use of dual antiplatelet therapy after the
procedure: 78.8 % of patients who received ASA +
clopidogrel had an mRS of 0–2 at 90 days
compared to 53.3 % of those who received only
ASA (p = 0.008).
b) A shorter procedure time: median procedure time
was 60 min in patients with favorable outcome
compared to 86 min in patients with 90-day mRS >
2 (p = 0.031).
c) lack of post-procedural hemorrhagic transformation:
only 2 patients (20 %) among those who had
this complication (even though asymptomatic)
reached an mRS of 0–2 at 90 days (vs. 78 % of those
without hemorrhagic transformation, p = 0.001).
Notably, patients with favorable outcome were those
who had a satisfactory degree of revascularization. In
fact, 81 % of patients with a TICI of 2b-3 had a mRS at
90 days of 0–2, while in the group with a TICI of 0-2a
none had a 90-day mRS of 0–2 (p < 0.001). At multivariate
analysis, a TICI of 2b-3 was the strongest predictor
of favorable outcome (Table 4). Furthermore, this factor
affects the mortality rate, which was 2 % in patients with
TICI 2b-3 and 33 % in those with TICI 0-2a (p = 0.015).
While the presence of diabetes was not significantly
associated with the clinical outcome, 56 % of diabetic patients
had an mRS of 0–2 at 3 months, compared to
71 % of those without diabetes. In addition, diabetes also
affects the mortality rate (19 % in patients with diabetes
vs. 3 % in patients without diabetes, p = 0.085). When
considering the association between 90-days mRS and
the presence of multiple risk factors, 77.8 % of patients
with no risk factors achieved a good clinical outcome
compared to 72.7 % among those with one risk factor,
68.2 % among those with two risk factors and 55.6 %
among those with three or more risk factors. Nonetheless,
this association failed to reach statistical significance
(p = 0.14).
We did not detect a significant association between
clinical outcome and the type of occlusion: a 90-day
mRS of 0–2 was reached by 66 % of patients presenting
with atheromatous occlusions and by 69 % of those with
dissection (p = 1). Additionally, we did not find a significant
correlation between the degree of severity on the
NIHSS scale and the mRS at 3 months.
Good recanalization (TICI 2B-3) was achieved in 95 %
of patients who underwent stent placement. Among patients
who were given dual antiplatelet therapy subacute
hemorrhagic transformation was observed in 17 %, compared
to 21 % in patients who did not receive dual antiplatelet
therapy.
Discussion
Timely and effective reperfusion is necessary to reverse
the ischemic penumbra and to increase the chance of a
favorable clinical outcome [1]. In patients with AIS due
to ICA occlusion, recanalization rates after IV therapy
alone range from 4.4 to 12.5 % [14]. The reported recanalization
rates of IV thrombolysis remained low (10–
15 %) even among patients treated within 3 h of stroke
onset [15]. The Internal Carotid ARtery Occlusion study
(ICARO) showed a higher favorable outcome in patients
treated with IV thrombolysis (28.9 %) compared to
controls (20.6 %), but an increase in mortality and intracranial
bleeding was also observed [16]. Previously published
studies suggested that endovascular methods,
particularly stenting in extracranial occlusions, achieve
better recanalization, higher favorable outcome rates,
and lower death rates than IV therapy alone in patients
with AIS resulting from occlusion of the ICA [17, 18].
Acute treatment for ischemic stroke has been rapidly
evolving over the past 5 years resulting in a dramatic improvement
of functional outcome after ischemic stroke
in selected patients [19].
In our study the use of a post-procedural dual antiplatelet
therapy was significantly associated with the
outcome at 3 months (p = 0.008): 78.8 % of patients who
underwent this treatment had a 90-day mRS of 0–2
compared to 53.3 % of those who used only one antiplatelet
agent or heparin. The association between dual
antiplatelet therapy with 90-day mRS may be influenced
by indication bias, since it was highly dependent on stent
placement, prior ASA use and lack of post-procedural
hemorrhagic transformation. Nevertheless, the multivariate
model, which included post-procedural therapy as
well as TICI score and hemorrhagic transformation
among the explanatory variables, showed that dual antiplatelet
therapy remained significantly associated with
good clinical outcome (p = 0.04, Table 4).
EVT can cause endothelial damage resulting in vessel
stenosis, dissections, and reocclusions [20, 21]. Antiplatelet
agents might prevent thrombus formation and
vessel reocclusion in damaged vessel. Furthermore, administration
of antiplatelet therpay is required to prevent
reocclusion of stents [22, 23]. However, previous studies
showed an increase in bleeding complications in patients
undergoing bridging thrombolysis who receive additional
antiplatelet therapy during endovascular intervention:
the ARTIS trial was stopped early because of an increased
rate of symptomatic ICH (sICH) in the patient
group in which infusion of 300 mg of ASA was started
within 90 min of intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase,
with no improvement in outcome [24].
A previous study did not detect an increase in rates of
sICH, asymptomatic ICH (aICH) or any bleeding complications,
neither in patients receiving ASA acutely nor
in patients pretreated with antiplatelet agents [25], in
particular sICH (5.6 % without ASA vs. 6.1 % with ASA)
and aICH (20 % without ASA vs. 18.8 % with ASA).
These data are in agreement with our results: we found
hemorrhagic transformation in 19 % of patients treated
with antiplatelet agents after EVT (when including both
single and dual anti-aggregation). Furthermore, none of
these patients developed sICH, and only one patient,
who died before the follow-up at 3 months, had parenchymal
hematoma type 2 (PH2). Therefore, based on
our experience, antiplatelet therapy after EVT is appropriate
and safe. No comparison was possible between patients
who received antiplatelet therapy and those who
did not, since antiplatelet therapy was administered to
all but 3 patients (2 were given LMWH and had no
bleeding, one was not given any therapy and had HI2
hemorrhagic transformation).
We found similar results when evaluating the association
of post-procedural hemorrage with clinical and
angiographic outcome. In fact, 78 % of patients without
hemorrhagic transformation had an mRS of 0–2 at 3
months, compared to 20 % of those with post-procedural
hemorrhage (p = 0.001). Similarly, 90 % of patients without
hemorrhagic transformation had a TICI score 2B-3
compared to 50 % of those who presented with postprocedural
hemorrhage (p = 0.009).
A significant association is observed between 90-day
mRS and the degree of vascularization obtained at the
end of the treatment defined as successful intracranial
recanalization (TICI 2B-3): 81 % of patients who had a
TICI 2B-3 had a 90-day MRS of 0–2 while none of the
patients with a TICI of 0-2 A had a 90-day mRS of 0–2
(p < 0.001). Furthermore, this factor affects the mortality
rate, which was 2 % in the first group and 33 % in the
second group (p = 0.015). This data is in accordance with
a previous study which found a correlation between recanalization
and outcome in acute ischemic stroke: recanalization
is strongly associated with improved
functional outcome and reduced mortality [22, 26].
In our study, we analyzed both patients with single
ICA occlusion and patients who presented with TL, who
underwent EVT. At 3 months a favorable outcome was
achieved in 34 patients (66.6 %), while an mRS > 2 was
found in 13 patients (25.4 %), with a mortality rate of
8 %. Our data are in accordance with a previous study,
which found that the occurrence of recanalization is associated
with a 4- to 5-fold increase in the odds of good
final functional outcome and a 4- to 5-fold reduction in
the odds of death [22].
In all 4 cases of death, the pre-treatment NHISS was
higher than 12. Importantly, early NIHSS scores has a
strong prognostic value for long-term functional outcome
after stroke [27, 28], however the strong correlation between
NIHSS and mRS scores does not ensure that the
NIHSS is a valid surrogate endpoint [29]. In fact, we did
not find a significant association between the degree of severity
on the NIHSS scale and mRS at 3 months.
Emergency carotid artery stent placement is expected
to reopen an extracranial ICA occlusion with increase of
cerebral blood flow in the affected hemisphere. Also,
early flow restoration across the tandem lesion in the
MCA and/or distal ICA after extracranial ICA stent
placement would reverse the ischemic process by stopping
the expansion of the ischemic core into the penumbra.
The use of stents certainly allows immediate flow
restoration but also increases the technical complexity of
the procedure. TICI 2B-3 was reported in 95 % of patients
in which a stent was deployed compared to 73 %
among those who did not undergo stenting (p = 0.064).
Stents were used both on isolated ICA lesion and in TL,
with a TICI 2B-3 of 100 % in the first group and 94 % in
the second group. Therefore, stent placement led to a
good angiographic result also in the TL group, even
though these patients have a less favorable prognosis.
In our study, antiplatelet therapy with a glycoprotein
IIb / IIIa inhibitor immediately after stent release was
used in 18 patients (35.3 %). No acute stent thrombosis
was observed, while the occurrence of hemorrhagic
transformation was 17 % in patients who received antiplatelet
therapy and 21 % in patients in whom it was not
administered (p = 0.729). Therefore, in our series this
therapy was not associated with a greater risk of
hemorrhagic transformation. Pre-treatment antiplatelet
therapy was used in 21 patients (41.2 %) and 81 % of
them had a 90-day mRS 0–2, compared to 57 % among
those who did not use antiplatelet therapy (p = 0.081).
This result is in accordance with a previous stuty who
showed that prior use of antiplatelet therapy improves
successful recanalization rate and does not increase the
risk of intracranial bleeding in patients affected by AIS
due to LVO and treated with EVT [30]. In patients who
received pre-treatment antiplatelet therapy, a TICI score
of 2B-3 was found in 86 %, which was slightly higher
than that found in patients in whom pre-treatment antiplatelet
therapy was not administered (80 %).
Among the comorbidities we have considered (diabetes,
hypercholesterolemia, hypertension and atrial fibrillation)
only atrial fibrillation showed a correlation
with worse outcome, with a trend towards significance.
In fact, only 57.1 % of patients with atrial fibrillation had
a TICI score 2B-3 compared to 86 % of those without it
(p = 0.095). Furthermore, considering the Outcome of
mRS < 1 at 90 days, the presence of diabetes showed a
trend towards significance. In fact, in patients not suffering
from diabetes, 54.3 % had an mRS < 1 while in the
group of diabetic patients this value dropped to 25 %
(p = 0.07). This data ara in agreement with a previous
study, which showed a worse functional outcome for
diabetic patients with AIS [31]. There is, however, a paucity
of studies that assessed the relationship between
type 2 diabetes and clinical outcome in AIS [32–34]. It
is also relevant to note that 3 out of 4 patients who died
before the 3-month follow-up belonged to the group of
diabetic patients. Less impactful, but still worth noting,
is the fact that a TICI score of 2B-3 is found in 86 % of
patients without diabetes and in 75 % of those affected
by this disease; however, this difference did not reach
statistical significance (p = 0.43). These data can be supported
by the observation that diabetes, in addition to
being a systemic pathology that affects the patient’s performance,
is also related to greater arteriosclerosis and
stiffness of the vessels, which significantly affect endovascular
technical difficulties.
There were no serious procedure-related complications
in our study, such as dissection or vessel rupture.
Ten patients (19.6 %) experienced post-procedural
hemorrhagic transformation (all asymptomatic), without
a significant increase in mortality.
Similarly to what was shown in a previous study [35]
we observed a lower mortality rate in our series (8 %)
compared to Nedeltchev et al. (20 %) [36]. We
hypothesize that the use of new devices and technical
advances that have occurred since the time of the study
by Nedeltchev et al., such as mechanical clot disruption
and mechanical thrombectomy devices, most likely contributed
to this difference [35].
Several EVT approaches have been described in the literature,
including intra-arterial thrombolysis, microwire
clot disruption, angioplasty, thromboaspiration, stenting
and thrombectomy with stent retrievers [18]. A previous
study showed that emergency stenting in extracranial
ICA occlusions achieves higher recanalization rates, better
outcome and lower mortality [17], but no final
recommendations about the technical procedure are
currently available. The optimal approach might depend
on the nature of the vessel occlusion, and the time to
treatment should be as short as possible [14].
Limitations
The present study had several limitations. First, it was
observational retrospective, so it was prone to selection
and other biases. Second, we used multiple different devices
for the treatment of tandem occlusions, making it
difficult to determine the effect of different thrombectomy
techniques. Third, we did not have a control group
with which to compare outcome rates. Last, since the
main focus of this study is the treatment technique, we
did not analyze perfusion imaging to quantify the ischemic
area before revascularization.
Conclusions
Our study has shown that EVT in the treatment of AIS
due to ICA occlusion (both on an atheromatous basis
and due to dissection) is feasible, safe, and effective in
determining a good functional outcome at 90 days; In
our study the mortality rate was 8 %, which is similar to
the one reported in recent studies [35, 37].
In our experience, stent deployment has proved to be
particularly safe and has led to good angiographic results,
additionally therapy with a glycoprotein IIb / IIIa
inhibitor immediately after stent release did not result in
a greater risk of hemorrhage. The use of post-procedural
dual antiplatelet therapy was associated with favorable
outcome at 3 months, without a significant increase in
hemorrhagic transformation.