Background
Asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis (aCAS) is characterized
by extracranial internal carotid artery stenosis in
the ipsilateral carotid region, usually without a history of
stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) [1]. Increasing
evidence suggests that cognitive impairment may occur
in not just symptomatic patients with a history of cerebral
infarction or other cerebrovascular events, but also
in those with aCAS [2]. Further, it has been shown that
severe internal carotid artery stenosis (> 50%) is associated
with a higher incidence of silent cerebral infarction
[3]. In the mouse model of chronic cerebral insufficiency,
although the mice did not develop motor dysfunction,
their spatial learning ability through the maze
test was reduced and they developed varying degrees of
cognitive impairment [4]. These findings suggest that
aCAS may not, in fact, be asymptomatic.
At present, functional neuroimaging is often used to
reveal brain activity, which has become an important
tool in cognitive research [5]. Brain network graph analysis
provides an intuitive and attractive framework for
studying the functional connections of brain information
transmission and its correlation with behaviors [6],
which may be used to explain some of the cognitive deficits
in other diseases [7, 8]. However, few studies have
investigated whether changes in the brain network are
associated with altered cognitive function in patients
with severe aCAS. Although cerebral hypoperfusion or
infarction may be the cause of severe aCAS, the pathophysiological
mechanism of brain function and network
connectivity changes is still unclear [9–12].
This study aimed to determine the association between
altered brain network connectivity and cognitive impairment
in patients with aCAS using a graph theoretical
analysis. We compared brain activities and cognitive
function between 14 patients with severe aCAS and 15
matched healthy controls using neuropsychological tests
and resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging
(rs-fMRI) scans.
Materials and methods
Participants
The participants in this prospective study consisted of
14 patients with unilateral aCAS who attended our institution
between December 2018 and July 2019. After patients’
baseline data were collated and analysed, 15
healthy volunteers were recruited based on age, sex, and
years of education.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria were as follows: [1] age 53–76 years;
[2] left carotid artery stenosis ≥70% and right carotid artery
stenosis < 50%; [3] right-hand dominance; [4] no
history of stroke, TIA, dementia, and depression; [5] an
education level of primary school or above; [6] The minimental
state exam (MMSE) score was between 27 and 30;
The exclusion criteria were as follows: [1] posterior circulation
stroke/stroke syndrome; [2] neuropsychiatric diseases
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’s disease), severe systemic
diseases, or a history of stroke; [3] contraindications of
MRI scans (e.g., metal implants); [4] take medications that
may affect cognitive function; (5) hunger or fatigue; or [6]
Cannot complete the test task independently.
Neuropsychological assessments and MRI data processing
methods
For the neurocognitive function test, we adopted the
method of He et al. [13] Specific cognitive tests are detailed
in the supplementary materials. The neuropsychologists,
who had no knowledge of each patient’s
clinical data, used a computer workstation to test the
participants. Neuropsychological examination and functional
magnetic resonance examination are separated by
less than 5 days. In the correlation analysis of the connections
between brain regions, the network-based-statistical
analysis was first used to conduct a statistical test
on the edge linkage of the two groups. NBS analysis and
correction were carried out for the connecting edges
based on the level of the mass. For the first time, 0.001
was used to retain all the connecting edges with P value
less than 0.001, and NBS correction was carried out for
the remaining connecting edges with P value card 0.05.
Detailed MRI parameters and fMRI data processing procedures
are shown in the online supplementary
materials.
Statistical analyses
Neuropsychological data were analysed using the Statistical
Package for Social Sciences (IBM SPSS version 20.0
for Windows), and p < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant. For cognitive analysis, the control group was
matched with the patient group in terms of age, sex,
education, and hand dominance. Analysis of variance
was conducted to exclude the influence of sex and risk
factors on cognition performances. A two-sample t-test
was performed to analyse differences between the patients
and controls. All values are presented as mean ±
standard deviation. All participants’ cognitive scores
were correlated with significant brain network attributes
using Pearson correlation analysis. The results for the
model with statistically significant differences were also
adjusted for multiple comparisons using the false discovery
rate (Benjamini-Hochberg procedure).
Results
In order to reduce the limitations of multiple factors on
the study results, 14 patients with unilateral aCAS (average
age, 63.6 years) were included in this study through
strict inclusion criteria, and 15 healthy controls (average
age, 62.4 years) were matched according to age, sex,
years of education, and underlying diseases. No significant
difference in sex, educational status, and other clinical
factors were observed between the two groups
(Table 1). The carotid ultrasound diagnosis of the included
patients was severe left carotid stenosis marked
70–99%. There were no patients with significant unilateral
occlusion.
Values are shown as the number of cases (%) unless
otherwise indicated.
The patients showed significantly poor performances
on the neuropsychological tests, especially the shortterm
memory test for Chinese words (p = .046), and the
picture memory test (p = .014). Raven’s Standard Progressive
Matrices (p = .063), executive function (p =
.058), and choice RT (p = .053) were low in the patient
group, but the differences were not significant (Table 2).
Values are shown as the number (percentage) of cases
unless otherwise indicated. The mean values are presented
with the standard deviation. SD, standard
deviation.
In the graph theory analysis, there were no significant
differences between the patients and the healthy controls
for the node-based network attributes and global parameters
after the false discovery rate (FDR) test (Table 3),
including assortativity (p = .057), hierarchy (p = .080),
network efficiency (p = .596), small-worldness (p = .372),
or synchronisation (p = .881). The small-world attribute
had a significant correlation with short-term word memory
in the aCAS group (r = −.634, p = .015). The functional
connections between the inferior frontal gyrus of
the right hemisphere and the left orbital inferior frontal
gyrus, hippocampus, superior temporal gyrus, and middle
temporal gyrus were significantly low in the aCAS
patients compared with the controls (Fig. 1).
The aCAS patients showed a significantly lower edge
connection than the healthy controls (p = .0316). A reduction
in the edge property of the triangular part of the
right inferior frontal gyrus (AAL label No. 14) connected
to the other 17 nodes was observed.
As shown in Fig. 2, functional connections between
the right triangular inferior frontal gyrus and the left orbital
inferior frontal gyrus, the left hippocampus, the
right superior temporal gyrus and the left middle temporal
gyrus (the AAL brain regions of 14–15, 14–37,
14–84, and 14–85) were all correlated with word shortterm
memory score, with positive correlation in the patient
group and negative correlation in the control
group. In the correlation analysis, functional connections
between the the right triangular inferior frontal gyrus
and the left superior temporal gyrus (the AAL brain regions
of 14–81) were positively correlated with word
short-term memory in the patient group and the control
group.
Additionally, in the correlation analysis of functional
connections between the right triangular inferior frontal
gyrus and the Superior left margin (the AAL brain regions
of 14–63) were all correlated with picture shortterm
memory score, with negative correlation in the patient
group and positive correlation in the control group.
As shown in Fig. 3, compared with the control group,
functional connections related to brain network information
transmission were more sparse in the patient
group.
Discussion
Using rs-fMRI, this prospective study comprehensively
elucidated the alterations in brain functional connectivity
in patients with aCAS, and determined the correlation
between altered brain functional connectivity and
cognitive impairment. Our results suggest that shortterm
memory and other cognitive functions decline in
aCAS patients prior to the onset of clinical symptoms,
and that changes in brain network connectivity may be
associated with cognitive impairment.
A previous study observed that patients with aCAS
gave a significantly poor performance on the MMSE and
the Montreal Cognitive Assessment [14]. However, in
our previous studies, we only observed minor changes in
orientation, recall ability of three things, and language
ability in aCAS patients. Therefore, we conducted a
more detailed and systematic test using computer workstations
to determine the specific extent of cognitive impairment
in aCAS patients who had normal MMSE
scores.
Cognitive impairment seems to selectively affect mental
ability in patients, and some studies have demonstrated
that stroke affects cognitive functions [10, 12,
15]. This study found a statistically significant decline in
short-term word and picture memory ability in aCAS
patients, but not in reasoning and judgment ability, executive
function, and reaction speed. Notably, calculation
ability and spatial imagination ability were well-
preserved in these patients. Some pictures are easier to remember
than words, and educational status may have some
effects on the short-term memory of images and words.
Additionally, studies have also demonstrated that decrease in
image memory becomes less pronounced over time [16, 17].
Therefore, we further analysed the short-term memory decline
after excluding the effects of age and education. We
found that the decline in short-term memory in aCAS patients
was still significant after adjusting for age and education.
Therefore, the ability of short-term memory of words
might be predominantly impaired in these asymptomatic patients.
Numeric-span task was associated with short-term
memory to some extent. Although the results of this task
showed a decrease in the patient group, no statistically significant
difference was found (p = .285), which may be not
related to the sample size of this study. The number - span
task was often associated with executive function. The functional
areas of short-term memory of numbers and words
should be further studied.
One study found that the amplitude of low-frequency
fluctuation values of the bilateral dorsomedial prefrontal
cingulate cortex, praecuneus, superior temporal gyrus,
and inferior parietal lobule decreased significantly in patients
with aCAS, indicating a significant decrease in
neural activity [18]. In this study, we used rs-fMRI data
to construct the brain functional network to analyse the
changes in network connectivity. Our study suggests that
rs-fMRI may be used to detect an early decline in brain
connections and predict the state of patients’ memory.
A study found a markedly decreased blood oxygenation
level-dependent correlation between opposite
hemispheres when the ROI was predefined on the stenotic
side (flipped to the left) in aCAS patients, suggesting
a disruption of interhemispheric connectivity in these
patients; [9] however, this finding is controversial because
there are some differences between the left and
right sides of the brain. Our graph theory analysis
showed reduced connectivity between the brain
hemispheres in aCAS patients, and global efficiency was
not significantly different between the aCAS patients
and the healthy controls. These findings are similar to
those observed in patients with symptomatic carotid artery
stenosis, indicating that cerebral blood supply has a
strong compensatory effect in chronic disease course
[19]. It is thought that the brain of patients with aCAS
could reconcile a good deal of short-range connections
for segregation, while maintaining a sufficient number of
remote connections to ensure processing integration. In
our previous hemispheric network study, we found that
the communication of CAS patients’ coordination and
information on the affected side of the brain was significantly
impaired, but the contralateral brain network has
shown the brain network compensation effect. In the left
cerebral hemisphere of patients with CAO and CAS of
the right carotid artery, connections between the Rolandic
operculum and insula, median cingulate and paracingulate
gyri and postcentral gyrus, and superior parietal
gyrus and precuneus were stronger than those in normal
controls [20]. Therefore, the results suggest that patients
with carotid artery stenosis have different effects on the
affected side, and that hemispheric template results may
be more accurate for the global analysis of graph theory.
In addition, the brain network connection will be reduced
in the affected side and compensated in the
healthy side.
There was no significant difference in node attributes
of the graph theory analysis after FDR correction between
the patient and control groups. However, the
functional edge property was significantly lower in aCAS
patients than in the controls (p = .0316). Additionally, a
reduced efficiency of functional connections in brain
networks was observed in patients with aCAS (Fig. 3). In
asymptomatic patients, the brain network is damaged
and the node response is not significant, which may be
slightly related to the illness, but also represents a higher
sensitivity of functional connections.
The decline of functional connectivity in aCAS patients
was mainly concentrated in the left and right inferior
frontal gyri (IFG), temporal lobe, left cingulate
gyrus, and hippocampus (Fig. 1). Our findings suggest
that the weak association between these areas and the
triangular part of the right inferior frontal gyrus may be
directly related to short-term memory decline in patients.
We further found that five functional connections
between the triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus
(AAL no.14) and other brain regions were significantly
correlated with short-term memory decline. Previous
studies have suggested that IFG may be associated with
affective empathy [21], and abnormalities in this functional
connection have also been found in patients with
depression [22]. At the same time, it has been pointed
out that the two clusters in the posterior extra frontal
flow (IFG) are functionally related to inhibition and implementation,
while the two preclusters are related to
reasoning and social cognition processes [23]. This area
may be involved in different functions, and we found
that reduced connections between this area and other
brain areas may be associated with decreased short-term
memory. This finding may suggest that cognitive function
may be dominated not only by a single brain region
or node, but also by multiple regions or networks.
The correlations between short-term word memory
and the left orbital inferior frontal gyrus, left hippocampus,
right superior temporal gyrus, left middle temporal
gyrus, or right frontal lobe were reduced in aCAS patients,
compared with healthy controls. At present, the function
of the temporal lobe is not understood fully, but the sense
of hearing is one of its main functions. It has been suggested
that some visual resolution, as well as memory, language
and some motor functions, may depend on the
temporal lobe [24] [25]. Notably, increasing evidence suggests
that the hippocampus may be associated with shortterm
memory [26], and damage on both sides of the
hippocampus may cause short-term memory loss, without
affecting long-term memory. Therefore, the reduced brain
network connections between the temporal lobe, hippocampus,
and the triangular part of the right inferior frontal
gyrus might be an important mechanism responsible for
the short-term word-memory decline. These correlations
were not significant in normal controls. It may also be related
to insufficient samples in this study, and we will continue
to conduct longitudinal studies.
Recent studies have shown that the left supramarginal gyrus
is one of the key nodes of the short-termmemory network involved
in retaining an abstract representation of serial order
information, independently from the content information [27].
The decline of functional connections between the right inferior
frontal gyrus and the left supramarginal gyrus is related to
the impairment of short-term memory (r = −.545, p = .044).
This finding suggests that connections in these brain regions
may indeed be important for short-term memory.
The purpose of this study was to increase the understanding
of the mechanism of cognitive impairment by
determining the correlation between cognitive impairment
in aCAS and functional connectivity of brain networks,
and to help define the criteria for intervention in
the treatment of the disease. This study has some limitations.
In order to reduce the limitation of multi-factors
on the study results, we only included patients with unilateral
left carotid artery stenosis in this study, and we
intend to conduct a longitudinal study on patients with
right carotid artery stenosis in the future. Additionally,
the type of cognitive impairment may differ according to
hand-dominance in the patients. Therefore, further studies
including more patients with different handdominance
and stenosis are needed to confirm our
current findings.
Conclusions
We observed that the short-term memory of patients
with left aCAS was highly correlated with an altered
brain network connection. The alterations in network
connections may be an important mechanism underlying
the decline of cognitive function in patients with aCAS.
Further, our findings indicate that rs-fMRI may be used
to identify an early decline in brain connections and predict
the state of patients’ memory through correlation
analysis of the brain network in various brain regions.