Background
Over the last 30 years, stroke has become the leading
cause of adult-disability and death in China, which
causes huge burden to family and society [1–3]. The incidence
and morality of stroke has been increasing year
by year, and ischemic stroke represents the majority of
total strokes [1, 4]. Intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) has
been proven to be an effective way to help patients gain
reperfusion and improve the clinical outcomes of ischemic
stroke [5–7]. However, this treatment is highly
time-sensitive. The number of patients eligible for
thrombolysis is limited due to the 4.5 h therapeutic window,
and the effectiveness of IVT varies with time [5].
Door-to-needle time (DTN time) is defined as the time
from hospital arrival to thrombolysis administration. It
is a rather objective measurement of hospital management.
Guidelines for the Early Management of Patients
with Acute Ischemic Stroke indicates a target DTN time
of less than 60 min [5]. Studies have shown that shorter
DTN time was associated with lower disability, mortality
and better outcomes [8, 9].
Therefore, efforts have been made by hospitals to reduce
the DTN time [10–12]. However, due to the limitations
of material resources and manpower, the median
DTN time varies in different hospitals. The most common
reasons for the time delay were failure to identify
the eligible patients timely, requirement to control
hypertension aggressively, and in-hospital delays [9].
Our stroke center of Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, a national advanced stroke center affiliated
with Stroke Prevention Project, National Health.
Commission, has been arranging a stroke nurse to accompany
each patient suspected to suffer from a stroke
to go through the whole diagnosis and assessment
process since January 2019. We hypothesized that the
joining of a stroke nurse would reduce the time used to
response and cut the procrastination in hospital. This
study includes 418 patients to investigate whether this
modification of protocol helps shorten the DTN time
and improves the prognosis of AIS patients.
Methods
We conducted a single-center retrospective study in the
stroke demonstration center of Nanjing first hospital. Our
center introduced the participation of the 24 h on-call
stroke nurse in January 1, 2019. The role of the stroke
nurse was to escort patients suspected to suffer from
stroke during the emergency diagnosis and treatment.
Once the stroke nurse was alerted, she would take initial
history, help patients get assessment and imaging examinations
and help neurologist on duty to review the indications
and contraindications for recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (rt-PA). During the IVT process,
the stroke nurse would monitor the patient’s symptoms
and vital signs, such as heart rate, respiration and blood
pressure. The stroke nurse’s work would be finished when
she handed the patient to the inpatient department.
There, the patient would get next phase of treatment.
We observed 1003 consecutive acute ischemic stroke
(AIS) patients who arrived within 4.5 h from November
2016 to December 2020 before and after the participation
of the stroke nurse. The inclusion criteria were (1)
AIS symptoms occurred within 4.5 h and received
thrombolytic therapy [rt-PA 0.9 mg/kg] ;(2) NIHSS
score ≥ 5 at admission;(3) age over 18 years old;(4) imaging
evidence suggested anterior circulation infraction.
The exclusion criteria were (1) absence of thrombolysis
therapy including contraindications of thrombolysis (n =
93), thrombolysis was denied because of cost and family
members refused thrombolysis; (2) absence of complete
follow-up; (3) absence of informed consent to join the
study; (4) in-hospital stroke; (5) NIHSS score < 5 at admission;
(6) posterior circulation infarct. We excluded
patients with NIHSS < 5 because we wanted to observe
whether patients experienced early neurological improvement
after treatment. Patients with posterior circulatory
ischemia (POCI) was excluded because stroke
severity was inaccurately assessed by the NIHSS in those
patients and the proportion of those patients was small.
Detailed information is shown in Fig. 1.
The baseline characteristics of patients were collected
including: sex, age, significant medical history (previous
ischemic stroke, hypertension, diabetes, and atrial fibrillation),
cause of stroke (based on the Trial of ORG
10,172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) classification),
the glucose level at hospital arrival, the undergoing
of endovascular therapy (EVT). We recorded the important
duration, including time from stroke onset to hospital
admission (onset-to-door time), from hospital
admission to intravenous alteplase (DTN time) and from
stroke onset to intravenous alteplase time (onset-to-needle
time).
Each patient was assessed by professional neurologists
using National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS)
score at the admission before intravenous (IV) thrombolysis
administration, 1 h, 24 h, 72 h and 7 days from
admission. A face to face/through phone follow-up assessment
was arranged after 3 months using the modified
Rankin Scale (mRS). We compared the important
time consumption and patients’ conditions to find out if
there were connections between the stroke nurse and
patients’ prognosis.
Statistical analysis
The data was analyzed by Statistical software SPSS 26.0
for Windows (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL). Categorical variables such as medical history,
sex and etiology were described by frequencies and
percentages and variables of skewed distribution like the
glucose level, durations, were expressed as medians
(interquartile range [IQR]). The preintervention group
was compared to the postintervention period by chisquare
test for categorical variables, 2-tailed t-test for
normally distributed variables and Mann-Whitney Utest
for nonparametric and abnormally distributed
variables. Variables with P < 0.05 of the univariable logistic
regression analysis were also analyzed by multivariate
logistic regression to obtain independent variables.
We also use the results of regression analysis and
Bootstrap method to create mediation models to explore
the significance of mediation effects among the
join of stroke nurse, DTN time and 90 days mRS
score.th=tlb=
Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study policy was explained detailly and verbal informed
consent was obtained from each study patient or
their family members, which was approved by the ethics
committee of Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University and conducted in full accordance with the
World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki.
Results
These 1003 patients with acute ischemic stroke are patients
arriving within 4.5-hour thrombolysis time
window. We excluded patients that didn’t receive
thrombolysis because of thrombolysis contraindications
(n = 93), denied because of cost (n = 9) and family members
refused thrombolysis (n = 11) as shown in Fig. 1.
Additionally, absence of informed consent to join the
study (n = 17), absence of complete follow-up (n = 27),
in-hospital stroke (n = 15), NIHSS < 5 (n = 362) and posterior
circulation infarct (n = 51) were also excluded. Finally,
a total of 199 consecutive AIS patients who
underwent IV thrombolysis with the accompany of a
stroke nurse (stroke nurse group) and 219 AIS patients
without the stroke nurse (preintervention group) were
included in this study. The baseline characteristics and
demographics are shown in Table 1. There were no significant
differences in the patients’ gender, age, treatment
of embolectomy, initial mRS and NIHSS score.
However, there seems more patients with previous ischemic
stroke in the preintervention group (p = 0.008).
The stroke nurse group shows longer onset-to-door
time, the median DTN time significantly reduced from
36 min (interquartile range [IQR] 28–45) to 25 min
([IQR] 17–35) (p < 0.001). The two groups also share
similar onset-to-needle time. Outcomes and logistic regression
analyses are shown in Table 2 and Table 3. The
results show the intervention of stroke nurse significantly
improved the 90 days mRS score (p = 0.001). Early
neurological improvement which was decided when
NIHSS score reduced 4 scores after the IVT, showed no
statistical difference between two groups.
The created mediation models and analysis results are
shown in Fig. 2, Table 4 and Table 5. It turns out that
DTN time plays a partial mediating effect on the 90 days
mRS score, which indicates that the stroke nurse has direct
influence on patients’ 90-day prognosis to some extent
(p = 0.006).
Discussion
Our single-center retrospective study showed that the
introduction of stroke nurse improves clinical outcome
of ischemic stroke patients regardless the partial mediating
effect of reducing DTN time.
There is a general consensus that the earlier AIS
patients get treatment, the better prognosis would be.
There are three vital periods of time to evaluate: the
onset-to-door time, DTN time and onset-to-needle
time. The DTN time is considered to be measurable
in the hospital management system. The latest guidelines
for the early management for AIS patients released
by the American Heart Association/American
Stroke Association in 2018 suggested a primary goal
of achieving DTN time within 60 min. However,
many researches propose that shorter DTN time
tends to indicate better outcomes and efforts have
been made to reduce accelerate the access to thrombolysis
[13]. There were studies conducted by centers
to analyze DTN time by introducing a stroke nurse,
response unit or designed code [11, 14–16]. Previous
studies showed that good intervention could limit delays
and improve DTN time [11, 16–19]. In our
study, we found that from 2016 to 2020 the median
DTN time significantly decreased from 36 to 25 min.
The join of the stroke nurse helps to triage patients,
communicate between patients and doctors, collect
initial history, accelerate the physical and imaging
examination, monitor and manage patients’ vital signs
during the thrombolysis process. We believe these
methods contributed to the improvement of DTN
time too. Also, the stroke nurse group shows significant
improvement in mRS score (p = 0.001), which indicates
that the joining of stroke nurse may have an
effect on AIS patients’ long-term prognosis.
We found that the preintervention group shows
shorter onset-to-door time which results in the nondifferential
onset-to-needle time. Mediation models and
analysis were performed to clarify whether the improvement
of 90 days prognosis is mediated by DTN time. It
turns out that the initiation of stroke nurse does have a
positive effect on patients’ prognosis despite DTN time
plays a partial mediating effect in the process. Thus, the
implement of specialized and talented stroke nurse may
have some positive effect on AIS patients and can be use
of reference for other centers or hospitals.
The NIHSS is prevalently used to measure the primary
clinical outcome for ischemic stroke patients [20, 21]
and mRS is used in the long-term functional assessment
[22, 23]. In this study, we accessed patients’ neurological
conditions at admission, 1 h after the treatment, day 1,
day3 and day7. We define the reduction of NIHSS
score ≥ 4 as improvement in neurological functions
within 7 days to see if the stroke nurse helps to improve
patents’ early functional recovery. There were no statistical
differences between groups.
There are several limitations in our study. This is a
retrospective study, although a quite large sample size of
patients was analyzed, there was a possibility of bias due
to the selection, treatment and assessment of patients.
Second, we only focused on ischemic patients with obstruction
in the anterior circulation, which account for
the majority of the location of intracranial artery occlusion,
may also lead to deviation.
Conclusion
The introduction of stroke nurse is important in the
early management of stroke patients and has some referential
value to promote in the country. Although our
study has demonstrated the benefits and feasibility to
some point, more clinical samples and studies are
needed to confirm in the future.