Background
Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is a
relatively rare and malignant brain tumour, most frequently
presenting as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), which is characterized pathologically by an
angiocentric appearance, with lymphoma and inflammatory
cells surrounding small blood vessels [1–3]. It is
confined to the brain parenchyma, spinal cord, eyes, or
leptomeninges but without involvement of systemic disease
at the time the patients are diagnosed. Its overall incidence
is 0.47 per 100,000 people per year in
immunocompetent individuals, with a higher incidence
in immunosuppressed patients [4]. The variables of clinical
manifestations, imaging features and localization all
contribute to the difficulty of making the diagnosis of
PCNSL, which can easily be misdiagnosed as other malignancies,
such as glioma and brain metastases. We usually
perform stereotactic biopsy or craniotomy surgery
to confirm the diagnosis. High-dose methotrexate
chemotherapy has become the first-line treatment for
PCNSL in the last 2 decades because it can cross the
blood-brain barrier. Thus, the 5-year survival rate of
PCNSL has increased but remains low at 33% [5, 6].
Currently, many scholars have studied the diagnostic
procedure, treatment strategies and prognostic factors of
PCNSL, but controversies still exist, and the optimal
treatment of this disease remains a huge challenge due
to the low incidence of PCNSL and the difficulty of conducting
large clinical trials. In our study, we retrospectively
reviewed patients treated for PCNSL in Tongji
Hospital. The aim of the study was to identify the common
clinical characteristics and to determine whether
there were any differences in surgical outcomes and
prognosis between stereotactic biopsied patients and patients
who underwent resection.
Materials and methods
Patient selection and data collection
This retrospective study was permitted and sponsored
by Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology. By searching the
database, 70 patients with histological confirmation of
PCNSL admitted to Tongji Hospital between January 1,
2013, and May 31, 2019, were identified. Their medical
records were reviewed. Patients were divided into two
groups according to the diagnostic procedure: a resection
group and a stereotactic biopsy group. We assessed
and reviewed the presenting symptoms and signs, Karnofsky
performance status (KPS), International Extranodal
Lymphoma Study Group (IELSG) score [2], imaging
features, treatment outcomes and survival of all patients.
Two neurosurgeons in our department independently
performed and recorded detailed preoperative evaluations,
including a careful history and a physical examination
of all patients.
Patients underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) on admission. The tumour location, involvement
of brain structures, maximum diameter of the lesion,
and the number of lesions were recorded. Postoperative
complications were classified and recorded according to
the Glioma Outcomes Project system, which involves
systemic complications, regional complications, and
neurologic complications [7].
Based on the experience of our single institution, we
chose stereotactic biopsy in patients who were elderly,
had a poor general condition, or seemed unlikely to tolerate
the surgical resection procedure, or had multiple
intracranial neoplasms or deep involved structures. Furthermore,
we would consider surgical resection in patients
with a good performance status and in a case of a
single lesion where resection seemed safe. Additionally,
when patients presented with signs of increased intracranial
pressure and progressive neurological deficiencies,
surgical resection was performed.
Outcome and follow up
Patients were followed up after hospitalization and received
MRI examinations during the follow-up period
for the assessment of outcomes. Overall survival (OS)
was calculated from the date of the diagnosis to the date
of death or censoring. Progression-free survival (PFS)
was calculated from the date of diagnosis to the date of
disease progression.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics
22.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, New York, USA). Clinical
characteristics, imaging features and treatment outcomes
were compared between the resection and
stereotactic biopsy groups. For the description of
continuous numerical variables, we used the mean ±
standard deviation. The measurements and categorical
data were statistically analysed with t-tests and χ2 tests,
respectively. In addition, Fisher’s exact test and the Wilcoxon
rank-sum test were used for between-group comparisons
when appropriate. Probability values < 0.05
were considered to be statistically significant. We used
the Kaplan-Meier method to estimate survival curves,
and the log-rank test was used to compare different survival
curves. Predictors of selection for resection were
identified by using multiple-variable logistic regression.
Multivariate analysis of variables with statistical significance
in univariate analysis was performed by the Cox
proportional hazards model.
Results
Patient characteristics
A total of 70 patients were identified, with 40 men
(57.1%) and 30 women (42.8%). The mean age of the
population was 53.3 ± 14.3 years, the mean KPS was
77.6 ± 15.8, and the mean duration of symptoms was
5.8 ± 11.2 months. There were no significant differences
in patient age, sex, symptoms and signs or the duration
of symptoms between the surgical resection group and
the stereotactic biopsy group. The preoperative KPS of
the surgical resection group was significantly higher than
that of the stereotactic biopsy group (mean 84.3 ± 16.7
vs 73.1 ± 13.7, P = 0.002). Moreover, there was a significant
difference in the IESLG score between the two
groups (P = 0.006) (Table 1).
Tumour characteristics
Thirty-eight patients (54.3%) had a single lesion, and 32
patients (45.7%) had multiple lesions. In the resection
group, 23 patients had a single lesion, and 5 patients had
multiple lesions. In the stereotactic biopsy group, 15 patients
had a single lesion, and 27 patients had multiple
lesions. There was a significant difference in the numbers
of lesions between the two groups. The mean size
of all lesions was 29.9 mm: 30.2mm in patients who
underwent resection and 29.7mm in patients who
underwent stereotactic biopsy (P = 0.415) (Table 1).
Adjuvant therapies
All patients were given chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy
after resection or biopsy. Thirty-two patients (45.7%)
received only high-dose methotrexate-based chemotherapy,
10 patients (14.3%) were treated with whole-brain
radiation therapy alone, and 28 patients (40%) were
given high-dose methotrexate-based chemotherapy with
consolidation whole-brain radiation therapy. There was
no significant difference in adjuvant therapies between
the surgical resection group and the stereotactic biopsy
group (P = 0.516) (Table 1).
Treatment outcomes
Complications occurred in 3 cases in the resection
group, including 1 patient with intracranial bleeding, 1
with cerebrospinal fluid leak and 1 with meningitis. In
the biopsy group, 1 patient experienced intracranial
bleeding, and 2 patients experienced seizures. Patients
undergoing resection had comparable rates of complications
as those undergoing stereotactic biopsy (10.7% vs
7.1%). However, the rate of improvement of symptoms
of the resection group was significantly higher than that
of the biopsy group (14/28 vs 2/42) (Table 1).
Predictors of selection for resection
There was no difference favouring biopsy versus resection
for sex, duration of symptoms or diameter of the
tumours. On single-variable logistic regression, the following
factors were significant: age, KPS, IESLG score,
single tumour, and not involving deep structures. Multivariable
analysis identified a single tumour and not involving
deep structures as predictors of selection for
resection (Table 2).
Prognosis
With a median follow-up of 30 months (range 1–110),
the mean OS and PFS of all patients were 16.1 months
and 6.2 months, respectively. Patients who underwent
surgical resection had a mean OS of 23.4 months and a
PFS of 8.6 months versus 11.2 months and 4.6 months
for those who had a brain biopsy performed (Table 1,
Figs. 1 and 2). Table 3 summarizes the results from univariate
analyses of OS and PFS. Younger age, lower
IESLG score, not involving deep structures and resection
were favourable prognostic factors for OS. In addition,
deep structure, resection and no complications were
identified as favourable prognostic factors for PFS. Sex,
KPS, duration of symptoms, number of tumours, maximum
diameter of the target, and changes in symptoms
were not significant prognostic factors for survival (P >
0.05). After univariate analysis, multivariable Cox regression
analysis was performed with the 5 statistically significant
variables, which showed that deep structures not
involved and resection were favourable prognostic factors
for PCNSL (Table 4). There is a typical example of
the resection group in Fig. 3.
Discussion
PCNSL is defined as an extranodal non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, accounting for 2–5% of all primary central
nervous system neoplasms, with a more aggressive
course and a poor prognosis compared with other
lymphomas [6, 8, 9]. The clinical characteristics of our
patients were consistent with the literature. Their median
age was 53.3 years, and there was a male predominance
with a sex ratio of 1.33:1, which has been
previously seen in many previous large series [2, 3, 8,
10]. PCNSL mostly presents with neurologic impairment
symptoms as the first manifestation rather than common
B symptoms (fever, weight loss, night sweats). Patients
presented with various symptoms based on the CNS site
involved, the most common being headache (64.3%) in
our cohort, followed by limb weakness and mental impairment,
less frequently presenting with aphasia, ataxia,
seizure and other symptoms. Additionally, seizures are
relatively uncommon because PCNSL tends to involve
deep brain structures. The mean duration of symptoms
to diagnosis was 5.8 months in our study.
PCNSL has typical radiological appearances, which
often show diffuse homogeneous contrast enhancement
and surrounding vasogenic oedema on MRI (Fig. 3).
There are also many atypical imaging features that may
mimic other diseases and add to the diagnostic difficulty.
Recently, various advanced imaging techniques have also
been used in the diagnosis and prognostication of PCNS
L, including diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), diffusionweighted
imaging (DWI) and magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS). Toh et al. [11] found that the fractional
anisotropy of DTI is significantly lower in PCNSL than
in glioblastoma. In addition, PCNSL has markedly higher
choline/creatine and choline/N-acetyl aspartate ratios on
MRS than other glial tumours [12]. In our present study,
we also observed that the most common location of
PCNSL was the supratentorial location (51.4%), followed
by the infratentorial and deep locations (24.3%). This is
consistent with a retrospective analysis of the clinical
data of 100 patients with PCNSL, which was reviewed
and analysed by Küker et al [13] At the same time, we
found that 65% of PCNSL patients had solitary lesions,
and 35% had multiple lesions. The mean maximum
diameter of the tumour was 29.9 mm.
All of these clinical characteristics enable us to better
differentiate PCNSL from other diseases, including gliomas,
metastasis, infections and inflammatory demyelinating
disease. However, to create favourable conditions
for comprehensive follow-up therapy, biopsy or resection
must be performed to obtain histopathologic or cytologic
confirmation of the diagnosis. A series of studies
have been carried out to determine optimal treatment
regimens to obtain a better survival benefit for PCNSL
patients [3, 10, 14, 15], but there is still controversy. Jahr
et al. [16] reported that resection surgery played no role
in significantly improving either OS or PFS in PCNSL
patients. However, Bellinzona et al. [15] demonstrated
that surgery might have a role in a selected subset of patients
presenting with large single space occupying lesions
and deteriorating neurological status. Cloney et al.
[17] suggested that the overall complication rate of resection
for PCNSL is comparable to rates for other CNS
malignancies and believed that resection is safe for selected
patients. In our series of 70 patients, 42 underwent
stereotactic biopsy, and 28 underwent surgical
resection. The complication rate was 7.1% for stereotactic
biopsy and 10.7% for resection, and there was no significant
difference. Resection for PCNSL patients has
been discouraged and traditionally limited due to an unacceptable
morbidity for the procedure according to the
literature from the 1970s to 1990s. However, with the
development of modern surgical techniques, especially
neuronavigation, fluorescein for tumour visualization
and intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring, which
have improved the safety and accuracy of surgery, the
postsurgical complication rates for PCNSL have decreased
to 0–20%, as the recent literature has reported
[10, 14, 17]. For example, Cloney et al. [17] reported that
the complication rate of the resection group (17.2%) was
lower than that of the biopsy group (28.2%) through the
analysis of 129 patients with PCNSL between 2000 and
2015, and they deemed resection safe for selected patients.
Our analysis revealed no significant difference in
the complication rate following resection compared to
stereotactic biopsy. Our complication rate for resection
demonstrates a decrease in comparison with the previously
published literature, which was 40% in PCNSL patients
undergoing resection. We also observed that the
symptom improvement rate of the resection group was
50%, which was significantly higher than that of the biopsy
group (4.8%). Furthermore, when patients present
with signs of increased intracranial pressure and progressive
neurological deficits, they would benefit more
from surgery than stereotactic biopsy.
In our follow-up study, the mean overall survival was
16.1months, and the PFS was 6.2months. In addition, patients
who underwent resection had a mean OS of 23.4
months and PFS of 8.4 months, 11.2 months and 4.6
months for those who had a biopsy performed. Weller
et al. [18] found that OS and PFS were significantly longer
in the resection subset than in biopsied patients through a
large randomized phase III study comprising 526 patients.
Jahr et al. [16] also reported that patients who underwent
resection had an insignificant prolongation of OS compared
with patients who had a biopsy performed. In
addition, Rae et al. [19] performed a study that involved
the largest collective sample of 13,704 patients and
showed an increased OS benefit with resection compared
with stereotactic biopsy. Our results obtained in both
groups are in accordance with those reported in the literature.
We speculate that this may be because of the fractional
cell killing of cytotoxic drugs, that is, the fewer
tumour cells that are present at the start of chemotherapy,
the fewer cycles are needed to induce a complete remission.
Another reason may be that patients who underwent
resection had a reduced likelihood of chemotherapyinduced
mutations, which reduced their risk of developing
chemotherapy resistance. The prognosis of PCNSL is still
poor, and multivariate analysis of various patient characteristics
available for most patients identified tumour location
and the type of surgery as the only significant
prognostic factors for both PFS and OS.
In our study, we also analysed patient characteristics
when making management decisions for resection or biopsy.
We found that age, KPS, IESLG score, a single lesion,
and a not deep lesion location were factors
associated with selection for resection on single variable
logistic regression. However, in multivariable analysis, we
identified that a single tumour and not deep structures
were predictors of selection for resection. Our findings are
consistent with Cloney et al.’s series of 129 patients with
PCNSL [17], which also found that age, multiple lesions
and deep lesions influenced selection for resection. Weller
et al. [18] also found that patients with a single lesion were
likely to undergo resection in their PCNSL series. The
guidelines from the European Association only recommend
resection when there is a mass effect causing
herniation [20]. However, Schellekes et al. [21] found that
specific subgroups of patients with a solitary PCNSL lesion
might gain a survival benefit from resection compared
with undergoing only a diagnostic biopsy.
Additionally, in light of our findings and considering that
surgical resection might benefit additional patients, not
just patients with signs of increased intracranial pressure
and progressive neurological deficits, because it can help
patients to relieve symptoms quickly, such as headache,
limb weakness, vomiting, etc., which in turn can improve
their quality of life and their tolerance of upcoming intensive
chemotherapy and radiation treatment. In brief, resection
surgery might be better for a selected subset of PCNS
L patients, with better OS and PFS and complication rates
comparable to the rates of the biopsy group. When making
management decisions for PCNSL patients, we should
take individual patient characteristics into account.
There are several limitations of our study. The primary
limitations are its retrospective design and the limited
number of patients. Moreover, the findings are clearly limited
by the presence of selection bias, as described previously,
and the lack of multicentre participation. Because of
a relatively small analysed study population of our singlecenter,
data should be cautiously used. However, we found
that surgery might play a positive role in a subset of patients,
which suggest the need for further prospective randomized
studies to better evaluate the efficacy and safety
of surgical resection for PCNSL patients.
Conclusion
The outcomes of patients with PCNSL treated in our cohort
are still poor. In our series, surgical resection might
play a role in significantly improving OS and PFS compared
with stereotactic biopsy in a subset of patients.
The type of surgery and tumor location are the prognostic
factors of PCNSL.