Background
Over the last decade, rising demands for greater interface
between academia and the ‘real world’ have accelerated
transformation in higher education across
disciplines. Academic service partnerships (ASPs) are
established strategic relationships between educational
and clinical practice settings that advance practice, education,
innovation and research, leveraging the talents of
both partners and thus, advancing mutual interests and
priorities [1]. Nursing partnerships between an academic
entity and a healthcare organization serve as a mechanism
for: (a) nurses to develop and lead change across
healthcare systems, (b) students to use the knowledge
and skills learned, optimize their potential to full-scope
practice, and enhance lifelong-learning [2]. Key attributes
of these partnerships include collaboration, leadership
support across both organizations, engagement in
scholarly activities that address community-based needs,
and frequent partner communication [3, 4]. In North
America, and predominantly in the United States of
America (USA), ASPs are abundant. Yet, there is limited
knowledge of their prevalence and characteristics beyond
the North American context, chiefly in Latin America
and the Caribbean (LAC). With renewed interest in service
learning, the purpose of this paper was to identify
academic service-learning nursing partnerships (ASLN
Ps) in the Americas region, describe their characteristics,
main enablers and barriers, as well as offer recommendations
for further development.
History and evolution
Jointly championed since 2012 by the American Association
of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) and the American
Organization of Nurse Executives (AONE), ASPs are
known as organizational structures in support of system
change and service-learning opportunities that advance
healthcare transformation [4]. Following recommendations
by the Institute of Medicine [5] and Beal [1],
AACN and Manatt Health issued jointly in 2016 a seminal
policy document, known as the “New Era Report”
[6]. This report identified “a path for achieving an enhanced
partnership between academic nursing and
academic health centers to advance integrated systems of
health care, achieve improved health outcomes, and foster
new models of innovation” ([6] p.3).
Although the North American literature is replete with
descriptions of ASP pre-requisites, benefits, types, and
workforce development effects, objective evidence of
success is limited [1]. A qualitative study by Dobalian
et al. [7] of a multisite ASP in the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs Nursing Academy Program (VANAP)
offers one of the few data-based reports. When outcomes
associated with ASPs are evident, these are generally
limited in scope to the results of a program
evaluation [8] or one sole dimension, such as financial
performance [9]. A recent integrative review supports
that while mutual ASP benefits include educational, research,
financial, and human resource outcomes [10],
not one comprehensive report captures all these dimensions
together. In the only multi-lingual systematic review
of the global literature, DeGeest and colleagues [9]
concluded that a standardized and methodologically
sound framework to evaluate ASPs was lacking. According
to the same authors, critical evaluation of 114 articles
showed that 85 % of ASPs were located in the USA,
7 % in Canada, 5 % in Australia, and 3 % in other countries
(Taiwan, West Africa, United Kingdom, and
Switzerland). These findings suggest that either other
countries are not publishing about their ASPs or that
“the strategic use of ASPs is more embedded in U.S. settings
and is in an incipient state in other countries” ([9]
p. 451). The authors also observed a subsequent proliferation
in ASPs, most notably in the USA, following publication
of policy papers relative to advancement of the
nursing profession. Hence, there is evidence that ASPs
may be more prominent in the more resourced countries
across the globe and are triggered by policy paper
publication.
Importance of ASLNPs
Service–learning, a key focus for ASPs in English language
literature, is a teaching and learning strategy that
integrates meaningful community service with instruction
and reflection [11, 12]. Goals of service-learning are
multifaceted and include provision of opportunities to
enrich student learning experiences, increase confidence
in problem-solving, teach civic responsibility, and
strengthen communities [11, 13]. Students learn through
purposeful and immersive community-based experiences
integrated into their curriculum, and as a mutual benefit,
patient and community needs are met [12, 14, 15].
ASLNPs are often shaped by multiple stakeholder
needs, and exist in many different forms, serving a wide
range of functions in the community. Mutual benefit is a
critical factor for effective and sustained ASLNPs [12,
15–17]. Therefore, strategies to sustain mutual interest
must be evident throughout the life course of the
organization to promote trust and effective communication,
as well as to ensure that services reflect shared missions
and goals [15, 18, 19]. To this direction, the
Community Campus Partnership for Health [20], a nonprofit
membership organization in North America established
in 1997, has been promoting health equity and
social justice through partnerships between communities
and academic institutions. Recommendations include
the establishment of guiding principles, high-quality
methods, robust metrics, and collaborative experiences
that reflect agency values and goals [15, 20].
Partnering with the education sector to respond to
health system needs for universal health access and
coverage is one of the main objectives adopted by the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). Two documents,
Strategy on Human Resources for Universal Access
to Health and Universal Health Coverage [21], and
Strategic Directions for Nursing in the Region of the
Americas [22] adopt a series of strategies and resolutions
across the themes of policy, leadership, regulation, research,
practice, and education to achieve universal
health access and coverage in the region. Towards this
goal, partnerships can play a critical role. As a technical
arm of PAHO, our WHO Collaborating Center was
tasked to explore how ASLNPs are conceptualized and
operationalized in literature stemming from the Americas
region. Therefore, the objectives of this scoping review
were to: (a) identify community-focused ASLNPs in
the Americas across English-language literature; (b) describe
their characteristics and scope; (c) identify main
enablers and barriers; and (d) offer recommendations for
the Americas region.
Methods
Stemming from the above objectives, a scoping review
was chosen as a preliminary assessment of potential size
and scope of available English-language literature to
map the volume, nature, and features in this given field.
Similar to a systematic review, it provides analytical
transparency and rigor, without attempting to sum up
best evidence or formally appraise the quality of research
methodology [23]. The scoping review presents an overview
of a potentially diverse body of literature generating
hypotheses rather than testing them [24]. We applied
Arksey and O’Malley’s [23] five-stage iterative process:
(a) identifying research questions; (b) identifying studies;
(c) selecting studies; (d) charting data; and (e) collating,
summarizing and reporting results. No ethical approval
was required for this type of methodology. To
operationalize ASLNP, we used the following adapted
definition from Beal [1]: a structured, established relationship
where an academic nursing institution or program
and one or more community serving entities agree
to cooperate in order to advance primary health care
outcomes, resulting in high levels of innovation and effectiveness.
Proof of formal partnership was operationalized
as having any of the following: Memorandum of
Understanding, signed contract, joint funding, measurable
goals, or ongoing program evaluation.
Search strategy
The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [25] were adhered
to in the conduct and reporting of this scoping review.
An electronic database search in PubMed, Scopus,
CINAHL, Google Scholar, and Latin American & Caribbean
Health Sciences Literature (LILACS) was performed
using search terms that originated from indexed
subject headings, the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
terms, and keywords of relevant studies that recurred repetitively.
The following terms, along with the Boolean
operators ‘AND/OR’, were used: “universities”, “academic”,
“service”, “practice”, “community”, “health care”,
“health-service”, “primary health care”, “public-private
sector partnerships”, “partner”, “interinstitutional relations”,
“schools, nursing”, “education, nursing”, “students,
nursing”, “nurses.“ Electronic filters for full-text, English
language, peer reviewed articles, published from 2010 to
January 2020 were applied. A total of 1150 articles were
retrieved and duplicates were removed with the use of
Sciwheel Reference Manager. The resulting 780 articles
were first screened by title/abstract. After excluding 500
articles that did not meet the inclusion criteria, 280 fulltext
articles were assessed for eligibility. During screening
and eligibility steps, inclusion was determined based
on meeting all five of the following content-specific criteria:
(a) partnership between an academic nursing institution
and another education institution or non-profit
organization or professional organization or volunteer
group; (b) partnership focuses on community-based or
primary health care service/practice (including longterm
care and home care); (c) partnership applies
service-learning to teach or mentor or improve practice
for nursing students or faculty of any program (undergraduate,
graduate or professional); (d) partnership is
described and/or measured through mutual goals or outcomes
or deliverables or indicators; and (e) partnership
within PAHO catchment region (North/Central/South
America or Caribbean region). For a detailed search
strategy, see Fig. 1 (PRISMA search strategy).
Data extraction and quality appraisal
To attain validated scoping review processes, two independent
investigators identified, selected, appraised, and
synthesized all English-language literature. Each researcher
independently screened title/abstract and full
text and carried out data extraction and crosscheck.
Through an inductive thematic analysis approach, the
studies were first coded according to the main concepts
addressed. Next, codes were grouped into sub-themes,
which were eventually grouped into themes. Geographic
distribution of the studies, along with the frequency and
density of the themes, were analyzed. Any discrepancies
throughout the above steps were resolved by a third investigator
to reach consensus. Moreover, all selected articles
were appraised for type and level of evidence
according to the adapted Rating System for the Hierarchy
of Evidence [26, 27]. In addition, evidence of ASLNPs
was appraised and synthesized in terms of structure,
process, and outcomes based on the Quality of Care approach
[28]. According to this adapted approach, structural
attributes were defined as the physical and
organizational components of the setting in which the
partnership occurred (i.e. nurse-led clinic). ASLNP processes
were defined as learning methods, services or outreach
provided to individuals, groups or communities
(i.e. stroke risk assessment, health literacy). Last, ASLNP
outcomes were defined as the results of those processes
(i.e. reduced emergency room visits, increased communication
skills, staff retention rates).
Results
A total of 51 articles was included in the final literature
review sample, covering a 10-year period from
January 2010-January 2020 (Supplementary File 1).
Data were extracted for the following characteristics:
author/s and year of publication, countries involved
with ASLNP, study population/setting/sample, design,
level of evidence, framework or model used, aim, type
of ASLNP (formal, implicit or explicit), main findings
(ASLNP structure, process, and outcomes), and
implications.
Forty-six studies were conducted in the USA, two in
Brazil [29, 30], one was a joint study between the USA
and Haiti [31], another one between Canada and
Colombia [32], and one study was conducted by USA investigators
in Guatemala [33]. No English language studies
were identified from other LAC countries. The
majority of studies (76.5 %) involved multiple stakeholders
(i.e. students, faculty, health professionals, preceptors,
patients, community members), while 23.5 %
focused exclusively on nursing students. Most of the
studies were conducted in community-based organizations
(29.4 %), some in public schools (17.6 %), free
standing clinics (11.8 %), multiple settings (11.8 %), universities
(9.8 %), VA medical centers (7.8 %), community
hospital outpatient departments (5.9 %), public health
departments (3.9 %), and one in home care (2.0 %). All
studies involved a formal academic service-learning
nursing partnership (Memorandum of Understanding,
grant, contract or agreement) with 68.6 % of them demonstrating
an implicit service-learning component,
whereas only 31.4 % explicitly described the servicelearning
mission. Appraisal of type of study and level of
evidence showed a prevalence of experiential and nonresearch
evidence (51.0 %) at level VII, followed by descriptive/
qualitative/mixed methods studies (41.2 %) at
level VI, and in third place case-control or cohort studies
(7.8 %) at level IV. A summary of evidence appraisal
is presented in Table 1.
Furthermore, the extracted frameworks and models
used by the sampled articles are presented in Table 2.
Out of 51 selected articles, nine articles did not mention
use of a framework or model. Among the remaining 42
articles, Service-learning Pedagogy, The Future of Nursing
report, the VANAP Logic Model, Cooperative Inter-
Organizational Relationships, Community-As-A Partner,
and Transcultural Nursing/Cultural Care Theory were
the most frequently adopted frameworks or models. Synthesis
of these conceptual frameworks and models revealed
the following six focus areas, mapped in Fig. 2: (a)
communities/populations (26.2 %); (b) nursing (26.2 %);
(c) pedagogy (19 %); (d) targeted outreach (14.3 %); (e) IP
collaboration (11.9 %); and (f) health determinants
(9.5 %).
Last, synthesis of evidence revealed five ASLNP
themes, depicted in Fig. 3. Conceptualizing or implementing
innovative academic nursing partnerships was
the most frequent ASLNP theme (27.45 %), followed by
sustaining educational standards and processes - improving
academic outcomes (25.5 %), enhancing community
services and outcomes (21.57 %), strengthening capacity
for collaborative practice and interprofessional education
(IPE) in the community (21.57 %) and preparing nurses of
the future (11.76 %). The timeline distribution of those
five themes by publication year, in relation to the following
seminal publications, is presented in Fig. 4: (a) Institute
of Medicine “The future of Nursing” in 2011 [5]; (b)
AACN & AONE “Task force on academic-practice partnerships:
Guiding principles” [4] and Beal “Academic-service
partnerships in Nursing: An integrative review” in
2012 [1]; (c) Community Campus Partnership for Health
“Position statement on authentic partnerships” in 2013
[20]; and (d) AACN & Manatt Health “New Era Report”
in 2016 [6].
Main findings addressing the nature, extent, and range
of community focused ASLNPs that promote primary
health care in the Americas region are highlighted
below, grouped by themes.
Theme #1: Sustaining and improving educational
outcomes
A total of 13 articles focused on educational quality [30,
37, 39, 44–50, 62, 71, 72]. The structure of these ASLN
Ps consisted of schools of nursing, municipal health departments,
outpatient clinics and health care networks,
school districts, community clubs, and local community
agencies. Within the unique structure of VANAP, this
strategic alignment of academic and practice goals and
resources targeted raising the capacity and capability of
students, faculty and staff by providing health services to
veterans [50].
Processes that sustained and improved educational
outcomes involved: faculty practice models, faculty and
clinical staff serving as preceptors, exchanging faculty
and nurse practitioners, conducting health screenings,
providing community-based education to elementary
students, comprehensive health needs assessments,
building trust, and making a long-term commitment.
Aquadro et al. [45] found that the faculty practice model
not only acknowledged the value of practice to
academia, but also promoted and drove forward student
and faculty teaching, learning and scholarship. Success
of this model was attributed to being a recognized structure
by the university, and allowing for diversity in professional
practice and scholarship.
Several educational quality improvement outcomes
were reported [30, 44–47, 50]: (a) decreased preceptor
and faculty turnover rates; (b) continuous operation of
nurse-managed clinics; (c) cost savings for training and
on-boarding of new nurses; (d) sharing of nursing faculty
expertise in research and clinical practice; (e) more relevant
curriculum for students at all levels; and (f) integration
of didactic knowledge and critical thinking skills
among nursing students, while providing holistic nursing
services. For example, in a study by Campbell et al. [47],
students performed home safety and cognitive assessments
while learning the challenges of nutritional needs
of an adult population.
Theme #2: Strengthening capacity for collaborative
practice and IPE
A total of seven studies enhanced capacity for collaboration
and IPE in the community [52, 55–57, 60, 65, 73].
These ASLNPs comprised of colleges of nursing, university
health systems, affiliated hospitals, homeless shelters,
VA Patient Aligned Care Teams, community health
agencies, and public-school systems. Collaborative practice
processes involved team-based care, partnering IP
student teams with VA health professionals, preparing
students to collaborate with local partners, providing
care for vulnerable, underserved, high-risk, ethnically diverse
adolescents. Based on the Institute of Medicine
core competencies for IP collaborative practice, a faculty
practice with residential juvenile justice services demonstrated
how faculty and students served as leaders and
experts in care coordination among ancillary providers
[55]. Similarly, by partnering student IP teams with VA
health professionals the students’ ability to link theory
content to care delivery strengthened, resulting in better
understanding of veteran population needs [57]. Other
outcomes included [56, 65]: (a) learning and bonding
together as an IP team; (b) preventing costly hospital
readmissions; and (c) increasing awareness about social
determinants of health. For example, the Interprofessional
Community-Academic Navigation program
facilitated homeless clients to access services while raising
student awareness of the unique needs of this vulnerable
population [65].
Theme #3: Preparing nurses of the future
A total of six articles focused on preparing nurses of the
future through partnerships with colleges of nursing,
non-governmental organizations, a local catholic services
agency, and an international service-learning nurse-led
clinic [31, 33, 38, 58, 61, 66]. Processes involved global
service learning, a train-the-trainer approach, provision
of primary care by students and faculty, and student volunteer
involvement in health promotion and needs assessment
[31, 33, 38]. Through a global health

immersion course that included an international nurseled
clinic, doctoral nursing students improved not only
their clinical diagnostic skills, but also their cultural
competence [33]. A study by Eustace et al. [38] applied
the train-the-trainer approach using reflections and student
peer evaluation to support development of global
health competencies. Reported outcomes included: (1)
increased student’s confidence in diagnostic abilities, (2)
improved public health emergency competencies, (3)
caring for a culturally diverse population, (4) understanding
the impact of homelessness, and (5) learning
how to use citizenship skills. As part of a leadership program
that promoted competence in patient safety, prelicensure
graduate students were assigned to QI projects
and were mentored by clinicians and faculty, preparing
to become the future QI nurse leaders [58]. Benefits of
this service-learning program extended to clinicians and
faculty as well.
Theme #4: Enhancing community services and outcomes
A total of 11 articles enhanced community health service
access, and outcomes [32, 35, 40–42, 63, 67, 74–77].
Partnerships were comprised of schools of nursing,
urban private universities, local health departments,
elementary schools, local organizations, mobile clinics,
and national organizations such as the National Association
of Hispanic Nurses. Reported processes involved
response to actual community health concerns, developing
a home visit program, and building family-student
partnerships. Main outcomes achieved were: (1) healthy
lifestyle promotion, disease prevention and management
by patient and family [41, 63, 75–77], (2) community
support for safe medication disposal [40], (3) professional
growth and development [63], (4) community engagement
[76], and (5) access to care [32]. For example,
one innovative partnership addressed illegal drug use in
a rural setting by developing a sustainable drug education
curriculum that was incorporated within an elementary
public school [41].
Theme #5: Conceptualizing or implementing innovative
academic nursing partnerships
A total of 14 studies conceptualized a new or existing
model or framework for ASLNPs [15, 29, 34, 36, 43, 51,
53, 54, 59, 64, 68–70, 78]. Partners included the office of
health promotion and wellness, the National Program of
Reorientation of Professional Formation in Health
(Brazil), departments of public health, public schools,
community rehabilitation facilities, community stakeholders,
VA medical centers, academic nurse-managed
clinics, and primary care clinics.
ASLNP processes involved implementation of the National
Curriculum Guidelines in health science courses
in Brazil [29], group activities, teaching health literacy,
improved access to health service, and community collaboration
to address social determinants of health.
Within a public-school setting in the USA, the “Bridge
Care Model” was used to access medical navigation support
for vulnerable students and uninsured families [70].
Similarly, a 10-year partnership between the “Living Independently
for Elders” members and a school of nursing
in the USA, established community-based long-term
care for high-risk older adults [69]. As part of VANAP,
an endowed scholarship for students committed to caring
for veterans and an after-hours clinic in a VA Medical
Center were reported outcomes [51]. Other reported
outcomes were: (1) a positive perception of ASLNP [29],
(2) a model for delivering community health instruction
[53], (3) increased cost-effectiveness in terms of school
nurse manpower [68], (4) reduced delays in school enrollment
[70], (5) ability to translate research evidence
into practice [51, 64], and (6) increased engagement with
policy makers at the state and national level [69].
Discussion
This scoping review provided a preliminary assessment
of the potential size and scope of available Englishlanguage
literature and identified the nature and extent
of research evidence on ASLNPs within the PAHO region.
Of note, only two articles [29, 30] originated from
LAC countries. With a constant focus on our objectives
and the inherent limitations, we discuss the main characteristics
and scope of ASLNPs, enablers and barriers,
identified similarities and differences, and offer some
recommendations.
Characteristics and scope
All articles described a formal partnership with presence
of an MOU, grant, contract or agreement. One
third of those partnerships had an explicit servicelearning
mission, whereas two thirds demonstrated implicit
service-learning components. Multiple disciplines/
stakeholders, including nursing students and
faculty, comprised the study populations, with most of
the studies taking place in community-based organizations,
public schools, free standing clinics, universities,
VA medical centers, community hospital outpatient departments,
and public health departments. The vast
majority of articles provided descriptive/qualitative/
mixed methods evidence or experiential and nonresearch
evidence. Academic nursing partnerships with
community, federal, and non-profit organizations in
North America have attempted to bridge gaps in PHC
and population health services by building on the
service-learning component. Among the sampled literature,
only one article reported an ASLNP in affiliation
with a WHOCC in Community Safety Promotion to
prevent opioid abuse through a public health practicum
[40]. Counter-intuitively, six other articles from US institutions
with designated WHOCCs for Nursing and
Midwifery did not appear to stem from a WHOCCrelated
activity. Those ASLNP initiatives focused on:
teaching team-based care through a nurse-led clinic
[56], preparing students for IP collaboration with local
partners [60], establishing a long-term care community
program for high-risk elderly [69], advancing patient
safety competence along with student leadership [58],
and improving quality of care for veterans [50, 51].
Such partnerships have been shown to be further enhanced
by the use of an IP collaborative practice model
for chronic disease management coordination [79].
Hence, all evidence points to the link between successful
leveraging of resources among partners and advancing
health with underserved populations.
Synthesis of conceptual frameworks and models, used
by the sampled articles, showed the following focus
areas: communities/populations and nursing, followed
by pedagogy, targeted outreach, IP collaboration, and
health determinants. The small number of articles focusing
on IP collaboration and health determinants is not
surprising given the academic disciplinary approach that
has been prominent in the past. This trend seems to be
changing over the last 2–3 years, with a more accelerated
pace expected in the U.S. literature brought about
by the COVID-19 pandemic and the widespread movement
to address social justice and healthcare inequalities.
Given the convergence of these urgent demands on
healthcare systems and nursing’s frontline role across
the Americas, new focus areas may potentially evolve in
ASLNPs.
The scope of ASLNPs, illustrated in Fig. 3, was captured
through five emerging themes: (1) sustaining educational
standards and processes - improving academic
outcomes (i.e. clinical placement, preceptorship, quality
improvement); (2) strengthening capacity for collaborative
practice and IPE in the community; (3) preparing
nurses of the future (recruitment, mentorship, job transition,
mobility, civic responsibility, either faculty or student);
(4) enhancing community services and outcomes
(extended hours, access to PHC services, wide scope of
services, universal coverage); and (5) conceptualizing or
implementing innovative academic nursing partnerships
(agenda, policy, funding, frameworks/models). Not surprisingly,
the timeline distribution of those themes in relation
to seminal document publication year (Fig. 4)
showed that theme #3 has been more prevalent since
2018, whereas themes #4 and #5 peaked in 2014, following
publication of seminal policy documents. Hence, the
earlier observation by DeGeest et al. [9] of a proliferation
in U.S. articles, triggered by nursing policy paper publication,
is confirmed.
Enablers and barriers
Four enablers for strong ASLNPs were identified: (1)
guiding principles, (2) quality processes, (3) meaningful
outcomes, and (4) transformative experiences. All were
consistent with those reported among seasoned community
and academic partners engaged in authentic partnerships
[20]. However, for ASLNPs with a specific
focus on collaborative practice and IPE (theme #2), an
array of inherent barriers to IPE were reported in relation
to: curriculum, leadership, resources, stereotypes
and attitudes, variety of students, teaching, and enthusiasm.
In agreement with a 2014 systematic review across
developing and developed countries [80], the presence of
flexible, enthusiastic institutional champions and resources
were key determinants of success in embedding
meaningful IPE learning opportunities as part of a health
professions core curriculum and overcoming administrative
barriers. Faculty and workforce development were
also an essential component for successful ASLNPs that
promote IPE and IP practice [30, 32, 45, 46, 50, 51, 54–
56, 60, 73]. In addition to investment in educational
technology, partnerships enabling faculty practice to
build expertise and spark the cultural change were essential
for overcoming the pervasive stereotypes,
skepticism, and long-held attitudes about other professions.
Most of these ASLNPs were developed individually,
rather than systematically, through established
public health or governmental programs. Similarly, many
were started from grants and/or philanthropic and inkind
donations based on individual relationships which
contributes to sustainability challenges. The need for
further research to identify best-practice models for integrating
IPE as core curriculum, communicating consistent
expectations for ASLNP outcomes, and seeking
perspectives of patients and community partners regarding
their experiences in partnership with learners has
been underscored [15]. Being aware of these challenges
and barriers in advance, academic nursing institutions in
LAC countries will be more prepared and can enhance
the partnerships’ potential success.
Similarities and differences
Despite recognized challenges and barriers in establishing
and sustaining ASLNPs, evidence points to numerous
benefits including fostering collaborative practice
and IPE, improving professional satisfaction, and ultimately
improving patient care and outcomes. However,
the majority of evidence comes from North America,
with only five articles from LAC countries. Additional
analysis of the literature sample showed consistencies
across service-learning structures, processes and outcomes.
ASLNPs provide enhanced clinical experiences
for nursing students, targeted population health for vulnerable
or marginalized groups, student/faculty engagement
in community awareness and well-being, and
cultural/global health competency development.
Twenty-one articles from the USA demonstrated integration
of public health perspectives/needs with nursing
program accreditation standards, and student leadership
enhancement. Fourteen articles focused on health promotion
and disease prevention, especially in the school
setting. Eleven articles examined development of faculty
practice, clinical skills, and preceptorship through innovative
partnerships for clinical placement. Among
those innovative partnerships, VANAP allowed for
transformation of veterans’ health care through educational,
research, and clinical practice outcomes achieved
by students, practitioners, and faculty [50, 51]. Designed
to address the nursing workforce shortage, the VA
framework contextualizes the local needs and demands
of all partners [7]. Recipients of VA services have access
to an array of essential services comparable to universal
health coverage. In comparison, articles from Brazil [29,
30], Haiti [31], Guatemala [33], Canada and Colombia
[32] focused on the engagement of nursing faculty and
students with culturally diverse, underserved populations
and the acquisition of cultural competence skills gained
while performing community diagnostics, home visits,
and health education.
Beyond the value to partnering practice organizations,
the benefits of ASLNPs for students included greater
confidence in problem solving, and development of professional
competence. Learners were able to build
relationships with patients and community agencies,
some of them longer term, and gain insight into unique
needs as well as strengths of the community and its
members. There was also evidence that students grew
personally in their understanding of other cultures, some
gaining cultural competencies in an international context,
through collaboration with other professions and
engagement in multi-disciplinary teamwork. These benefits
are consistent with those previously reported [13].
Likewise, the benefits of ASLNPs for faculty included
opportunities to engage in social justice and real-world
scholarly activities that build grass-roots communitybased
capacity. Yet, there was no evidence of the effect
of structural or systemic inequalities on ASLNPs, despite
the emerged importance of cultural competence and
safety in Preparing Nurses of the Future. These experiences
expand academic nursing’s contributions beyond
traditional acute care settings, broadening nursing’s social
impact.
Recommendations for nursing practice and policy
This scoping review was based primarily on North
American literature and academic-service policy statements.
Given the lack of geographically broad evidence,
adoption of ASLNPs in LAC countries based on assumptions
and tools derived mostly from the US experience
may need modification. According to the two Brazilian
studies [29, 30], the authors describe a “cooperative
inter-organizational” relationship that integrates education
and service in PHC. Clearly this model differs from
the ones adopted by investigators of North American
studies. Hence, successes and challenges encountered
across USA academic nursing partnerships focusing on
service-learning, might be culturally biased and therefore,
one should proceed cautiously with a broad plan of
action for LAC countries.
Developing a joint policy paper with representation
from key stakeholders in the Americas, while adapting
the AACN toolkit, could facilitate ASLNP proliferation
throughout the region. According to the New Era Report
[6], partner representatives from each side of academia
and service should have “a seat at the table” to plan the
advancement of ASLNPs that address joint needs and
objectives. Considering the ability of each partner to leverage
joint resources for advancing a shared agenda is
critical. However, the cultural differences in nursing
education across the Americas predicate that a sequence
scoping review of multi-lingual studies be conducted,
before these frameworks are generalized. It is indeed
plausible that academic-service community-based partnerships
in LAC countries are already integrated in
nursing education programs; therefore, they are not
viewed as novel or unique. According to Santos [81], the
theoretical frameworks of the global South differ greatly
from those of Western societies (the global North). Acknowledging
the different ways of knowing, by which
people across the global South live their lives and provide
meaning to their existence, is an important step as
we explore ASLNPs in the future. Building upon diverse
sources of knowledge and experience in nursing is an
important step towards achieving global social justice in
health.
Following the release of the “State of the World’s Nursing
− 2020” report [82], and the rapidly deployed
changes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, optimizing
and re-evaluating ASLNPs is highly recommended.
The National Academy of Medicine’s [83] vision and
path for the nursing profession to create a culture of
health, reduce health disparities, and improve the health
and well-being of the USA population in the 21st century
could offer a starting point. Countries where nursing
has a seat at the national health policy table should
partner with institutions from less-privileged countries
to build the evidence from different geographical, cultural
and political contexts. The previously identified
need for a stepwise model to accommodate countries of
varying academic nursing capacity and resources within
the same region should be considered [84]. Future reviews
should include the grey literature on the topic (i.e.
government reports, policy papers, academic documents,
etc.), while research studies should address literature
gaps through empirical inquiries. A more comprehensive
understanding of expected outcomes for service-learners
and recipients of services, as well as ASLNP challenges
in countries with different educational and healthcare
systems will facilitate next steps.
Strengths and Limitations
This review was based on an extensive search of five
electronic databases spanning ten years. Special emphasis
was given to resources from Latin America and
the Caribbean by searching through the LILACS database,
a comprehensive index of scientific and technical
literature from this region. All articles were independently
reviewed, and level of evidence was appraised with
an adapted hierarchy scale [26, 27], classifying the vast
majority as level VI or VII which indicates a low level of
evidence. However, it is important to note the ongoing
debate over the applicability of the hierarchy of evidence
when evaluating qualitative nursing research [85].
Furthermore, we only searched for English-language
peer-reviewed publications, which would have excluded
any relevant grey literature from the targeted region
published in Spanish or Portuguese languages. the grey
literature on the topic (i.e. government reports, policy
papers, academic documents, etc.) should be scanned as
well in order to get a comprehensive picture. As the
search yielded only five articles from the LAC region, we
first reviewed the 46 articles from the North American
region. Then, after identifying common challenges and
barriers, we compared them to the five articles from
LAC countries to develop recommendations for the
PAHO region. The outcomes of interest, barriers and
challenges, were mostly measured qualitatively which
was consistent with the qualitative nature of our aim.
Other potential limitations included selection bias and
variation in criteria application, upon appraisal. Last,
cross-country differences in the education and health
system, such as regulation and accreditation of nursing
programs, existence of a national health system, as well
as cultural and linguistic variations are acknowledged.
Conclusions
This scoping review illustrated that ASLNPs are more
prominent in the U.S. literature, rather than in literature
from LAC countries, and seem to be detected when
nursing policy papers are published. The expansion of
nursing’s role in the community, coupled with increased
focus on primary health care, public health, and population
health capacity in the nursing workforce in North
America are contributing factors to the development
and growth of these strategic partnerships. The embrace
of these partnerships across the Americas, drawing on
the strengths and challenges of each country, and their
impact on education and practice environments of future
nurses remains to be further explored. Collaboration
for ASLNP knowledge development and
integration will strengthen and advance academic nursing
education in response to PAHO’s call for universal
health access and coverage across the Americas.