Background
Delirium is a common state of acute confusion which
can manifest as cognitive impairment, altered consciousness
levels and behavioural change usually caused by disrupted
homeostasis within the body [1]. The condition
can be distressing for the individual, their family members
and can lead to long-term complications and can
result in death [2]. The prevalence of delirium tends to
rise with increasing age but it also common in very
young children [1, 2]. Reporting of delirium is traditionally
very poor and this indicates that awareness about
the condition needs to be improved [1–4]. It is postulated
that delirium affects up to 30% of hospitalised patients,
nearly 80% of mechanically ventilated patients
and 60% of people living in care homes [5]. Crucially,
delirium is a symptom of acute illness that is often
avoidable and reversible [6, 7].
Internationally, delirium is poorly recognised, and this
is due to a lack of a unifying definition, a lack of education,
and a lack of consistent application of clinically effective
assessment tools [7–9]. In the context of the
recent COVID-19 pandemic, evidence also suggests that
people who contract the virus are more likely to develop
delirium as a consequence [10–12]. Promoting awareness
and improving healthcare professional knowledge
about delirium prevention, recognition and management
is therefore a key global public healthcare priority. It is
demonstrated in research that the education of healthcare
professional audiences is strongly correlated with
improvements in knowledge about delirium and improvements
in the care of people experiencing the condition
[13–16].
There have been few studies that have examined the
impact of delirium education on nursing students and
this is surprising given their role in the assessment, planning,
implementing and evaluation of patient care across
primary, secondary and tertiary care settings [17–19]. In
a previous paper, the authors (GM GC & CBW) described
how they worked with people who had experienced
delirium, specialist delirium nurses and nurse
academics to co-design a face-to-face ‘delirium awareness’
programme for year one nursing students at
Queen’s University Belfast [20]. This intervention
showed statistically significant improvements in student
nurse knowledge and confidence about delirium [20].
However, because of the recent COVID-19 pandemic
and social distancing measures face-to-face delivery of
this programme could not take place. As a result, the
team modified the delivery of this programme to facilitate
asynchronous remote learning about delirium during
this period.
As a modern approach to meet the everchanging demand
for nursing education, podcasts are now a widely
used intervention providing learning resources [21, 22].
Podcasts can be one-off audio recording or be used to
produce a series relating to a theme [21]. The evidencebase
suggests that podcasts can be an engaging way to
capture attention and increase engagement as often they
will be able to be played at a time suitable to the individual
[22–24]. This study aimed to determine the effect of
a delirium awareness podcast in increasing nursing students’
knowledge of delirium and confidence in caring
for individuals who experience the condition.
Methods
Design/setting/population
A quantitative pre-test/post-test design was used to investigate
the impact of the podcast. The study was conducted
with a convenience sample of year one
undergraduate nursing students (n = 320) from Queen’s
University Belfast in Northern Ireland during May 2020.
All undergraduate nursing students (n = 320) in their
first year of this nursing programme were eligible for inclusion
in this study.
Intervention
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, all undergraduate
nursing education at Queen’s University Belfast was
modified for remote delivery in mid-March 2020. One
topic of learning that was affected was delirium awareness.
Year one nursing students were scheduled to receive
a two-hour face-to-face workshop on delirium
which was originally co-designed by people who had experienced
delirium, expert clinicians, and academic staff
[20]. The project team worked together to adapt delivery
of this co-produced content to a podcast format. The
podcast was developed using free software from audacity
(https://www.audacityteam.org/), an external microphone
and laptop computer. The time to produce this
delirium awareness podcast was approximately 6 h and
there were no other external costs associated with recording,
editing, or publishing the podcast.
The project team worked together to design and record
a 60-min podcast on delirium which was delivered
by one member (GM) of the team. Due to the difficulty
in supporting nursing students to engage in reflective
group discussions about delirium, the podcast was embedded
with two real-life stories from the experiences of
the podcaster. These stories focused on a hospitalised
patient living with hyperactive delirium (introduced approximately
1 min into the podcast) and a care home
resident living with persistent hypoactive delirium (introduced
approximately 40 min into the podcast). These
narratives articulated key facts about the different types
of delirium and were threaded throughout the podcast
to support student understanding of the topic. In nurse
education, real-life stories have a unique quality where
emotion, tone and imagery illustrate the storyteller’s
perspective [25]. The research team believed these
meaningful stories would stimulate personal reflection
and facilitate nursing students to recall important information
about delirium recognition, management, and
prevention.
To ensure that the previously agreed learning outcomes
were met, the podcast used the previous running
order from earlier co-designed education about delirium
[20]. The delirium podcast threaded the two real-life
stories throughout the three core elements of defining
delirium, recognition of delirium and management of
delirium. Table 1 provides an overview of the running
order of the delirium awareness podcast.
The delirium awareness podcast was made available
for 320 nursing students for 4 weeks throughout May
and June 2020. Students were informed that listening to
the delirium awareness podcast was a mandatory requirement
of their year one nursing programme and
they had a period of 4 weeks to do this. Students could
listen to the podcast at a time convenient to them during
this four-week period. The podcast was uploaded as
an MP3 audio file within year one nursing student’s own
Canvas Learning Management System. Canvas is the
University-wide virtual learning environment for all students
at Queen’s University Belfast and this system is
used to support learning and teaching activities. The
podcast was not available for external download. While
this education formed a mandatory part of student
learning, completion of the pre/post-test questionnaires
did not and was voluntary.
Data collection
Students who wished to participate in this study were informed
that they needed to complete the pre and post
questionnaires during the same four-week period as they
received access to the podcast.
A 35-item true-false Delirium Knowledge Questionnaire
(DKQ) developed by Detroyer [26], based on the
work of Hare [27], was available to students to complete
before and after listening to the podcast. Both pre and
post questionnaires were available to students via a
weblink on their University module homepage. These
questionnaire weblinks were placed on the same page as
the podcast and information sheets about the study.
The DKQ was developed to gauge knowledge about
delirium from the perspective of healthcare professionals
like nurses and doctors. This questionnaire [26] was
used by the authors in their previous co-design study
[20]. The DKQ was not modified and is divided into
three main sections which focus on: 1) Presentation,
symptoms and outcomes of delirium (n = 10 items), 2)
Causes and risk factors of delirium (n = 11 items), and 3)
Delirium prevention and management strategies (n = 14
items) [26]. The overall DKQ score received by the participant
equates to the total of questions answered correctly
and this ranges between 0 (lowest) and 35
(highest). Nursing students received their overall score
out of 35 for each test immediately on completion. After
data collection concluded, all students (including those
who did not participate in this study), received a copy of
the DKQ items and the correct answers to aid in the
consolidation of their learning.
As in our previous delirium education study [20], the
research team also administered a three-item pre−/post
questionnaire about their perceived confidence of nursing
patients with delirium. This short questionnaire was
co-designed by people who had experienced delirium
[20]. The questionnaire asked students to rate their confidence
about recognition, management and communicating
with family members about delirium using Likert
scale items. The Likert scale items included: extremely
confident, very confident, slightly confident, and not at
all confident. These three items were completed after
the 35-item DKQ.
The final part of data collection related to the posttest
phase of the study and this focused on evaluating
the effectiveness of podcasting to deliver nursing education.
The authors designed a seven-item questionnaire
in consultation with current university teaching evaluation
guidance and the input of four current undergraduate
nursing students at Queen’s University Belfast.
Six items of this questionnaire were comprised of Likert
scale items, for example: I strongly agree, I agree, I am
uncertain, I disagree, and I strongly disagree. The seventh
item provided nursing students with a free-text
comment box to express their overall impressions about
podcasting in nurse education.
A copy of these questionnaires, and corresponding
study results, can be viewed in Table 2 (delirium knowledge
questionnaire), Fig. 1 (perceived professional confidence
about delirium) and Table 3 (delirium podcast
evaluation questionnaire).
Ethics
This study received ethical approval in May 2020 by
Queen’s University Belfast, Faculty of Medicine, Health
and Life Sciences Research Ethics Committee (Ref:
MHLS 20_53). Participants did not provide verbal or
written consent but were informed that they were under
no obligation to complete any of the questionnaires. Participants
gave their consent to complete the questionnaire
when they actively accessed the survey web links.
Consent/recruitment
All students (n = 320) received information about this research
project via email by an individual independent to
the study. This approach concorded with many of the
asynchronous learning activities that were taking place
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Students were also informed
about the opportunity to participate in this pre/
post-test study. It was made clear that their participation
in this research was voluntary and would not affect their
module grade.
Participants were advised that the pre-test should be
completed immediately before downloading and listening
to the podcast, while the post-test completion should
ideally take place as soon after listening to the podcast
as possible. Due to the nature of asynchronous remote
learning, it was not possible to determine how soon before
or after listening to the podcast that nursing students
completed the questionnaires. While we did not
collect any demographic detail from students, we did ask
them to provide their student identification number at
the beginning of each questionnaire. This enabled the
research team to pair the data to carry out specific statistical
tests.
Students did not have to sign written consent forms
for this study but were informed that they were under
no obligation to complete either questionnaire. It was
implied that students gave their consent to complete the
questionnaires when they actively accessed the web-links
provided on their module homepage. Student participants
were required to use their own laptop, computer
tablet or mobile phone to complete the surveys. There
was no option to complete paper-based questionnaires.
Data analysis
Descriptive statistics were used to analyse overall pretest
and post-test scores for both the DKQ and perceived
professional confidence questionnaire to determine
the overall impact of the delirium awareness
podcast. Descriptive statistics were also used for the
podcast evaluation which occurred post-test. Inferential
statistical analysis was undertaken to illuminate pre and
post-test differences across the three core sections of the
DKQ and the three statements regarding perceived professional
confidence about delirium. Dependent paired ttests
were used to establish statistical significance in the
DKQ and perceived professional confidence questionnaire
(P < 0.05). In these two questionnaires, the average
differences between participant’s overall scores, before
and after listening to the podcast, were also calculated to
highlight the extent of improvements in knowledge and
confidence.
Results
The questionnaires were completed by 298 nursing students
in total, giving a response rate of 93.13%. At the
time of listening, all participating students had completed
two clinical placements, lasting 10 weeks in total,
as part of their degree programme. All participants were
enrolled as a nursing student on one of the four pathways:
adult nursing, mental health nursing, children’s
nursing, or learning disability nursing.
In terms of knowledge, the overall average score
showed a significant increase of 11.54% (p < 0.001) between
pre and post-tests. The standard deviation was
3.24 pre-test and 2.43 post-test. Descriptive statistics
from the DKQ can be viewed in Table 2. Student perceived
professional confidence about delirium was also
extremely positive post-podcast and descriptive statistics
from this 3-item questionnaire can be viewed in Fig. 1.
Finally, students were asked to complete a short 7-item
questionnaire about the use of podcasting for delirium
education post-test. Descriptive statistics from this questionnaire
can be found in Table 3.
Knowledge about delirium
The presentation, symptoms, and outcomes of delirium
(Section A) of the DKQ was positively answered by students
scoring a mean of 88.34% in the pre-podcast test.
Student knowledge surrounding; mortality rate in those
with delirium (62.16%), patients never remembering episodes
of delirium (77.70%) and symptoms of depression
mimicking delirium (78.04%) was inferior in comparison
to knowledge of other questions. These three items improved
the most post-test. After listening to the delirium
awareness podcast the students average score for section
A increased to 96.12% overall. Knowledge improved by
an average of 7.78% among student nurses after participation
in the podcast (P = 0.007).
Students’ knowledge surrounding delirium aetiology is
captured in Section B. On average, nursing students
scored the least in this section pre-podcast with an average
score of 71.33% overall. Questions with the weakest
averages encompassed those in relation to impaired vision
(38.98%), diabetes (14.97%) and those with a family
history of dementia (38.70%) being linked to delirium.
This items improved the most post-test. Post-podcast
knowledge of aetiology increased by 13.34% achieving an
average score of 84.67% (P = 0.003).
Student nurse’s knowledge of delirium prevention and
management is studied in Section C of DKQ. Prepodcast
findings show students scored 75.72% on average.
Questions answered regarding pharmacological
intervention in pre-operative patients, diagnostic tools,
and the stimulation of patient performance were
amongst the poorest answered. Post-podcast knowledge
had a vast increase in questions relating; to diagnostic
tools (49.00% increase), the use of haloperidol in preoperative
fracture patients (24.39% increase), the stimulation
of patients to preform activities (22.58% increase),
early ambulation of patients (19.71% increase) and finally
the importance of visual or hearing aids (19.02% increase).
On average student scores increased by 12.81%
in this section post podcast (P = 0.003).
Based on the average of the student’s overall score, the
post-test showed improvement across all 35-items in the
DKQ. The students overall average score increased by
11.54% noting an average overall post-test result of
89.48% (P < 0.001).
Perceived professional confidence about delirium
Nursing students perceived professional confidence about
delirium increased after listening to the podcast (Fig. 1).
Overall, only 29.21% of respondents stated they felt ‘very’
or ‘extremely’ confident pre-podcast in delirium recognition
and this increased to 75.71% of students’ postpodcast,
representing a 46.50% increase. This was statistically
significant (P = 0.004). Regarding, delirium management,
only 20.47% students felt confident before listening
to the podcast and this increased to 68.79% feeling they
were ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ confident post-podcast. This represented
an increase of 48.32% and this was significant
(P = 0.004). The final item was around communicating
with someone’s next-of kin or care partner about delirium.
Student confidence in this domain improved by 50.71%
overall, with only 18.08% confident pre-podcast and a
68.79% confident post-podcast. This finding was also statistically
significant (P = 0.002).
Podcast evaluation
Nursing students positively evaluated the use of podcast for
promoting their knowledge and confidence about delirium
(Table 3). Overall, 98.66% (n = 294) of respondents believed
that the podcaster presented material on delirium clearly
and that the podcast content was straight-forward and easy
to understand. In total, 96.32% (n = 287) of nursing
students believed that the podcast met their learning needs
about delirium and 97.99% (n=292) stated that they would
recommend the resource to others. Opinion was more divided
on the appropriate duration of the delirium awareness
podcast with 11.75% (n = 35) of students believing the
60-min podcast was too long and 8.38% (n = 25) uncertain
about whether the length was appropriate. Almost four out
of five nursing students (n = 233) stated they would relisten
to the delirium awareness podcast after the study
(78.19%).
The final question provided students with an opportunity
to provide some written comments about podcasting
as a learning resource. 84.23% of the sample (n =
251) provided a response. All responses can be viewed in
supplementary file 2.
Discussion
Audio podcasts have a key advantage of being able to
present information about a topic accessible at any time
or location [28, 29]. Using podcasts can also be a significant
learning aid for auditory learners and have been associated
with improvements in knowledge and practice
amongst healthcare audiences [30–34]. Despite their
growing use in the healthcare education, there has been
limited practical guidance about how to effectively develop
and evaluate podcasts [35, 36]. In the current
study, students favourably evaluated the use of a podcast
to support their learning about delirium. One area that
divided opinion amongst participants was around the
duration of the podcast. Less than half of the nursing
students (47.32%) who took part in this study strongly
agreed that the duration of 60 min was appropriate.
While there are no formal guidelines on podcast duration,
a recent systematic review on the use of podcasts
in medical education suggested educational podcasts are
normally concise and last approximately 20 minutes
[36]. However, there was no evidence to suggest longer
podcasts are associated with poorer outcomes. In terms
of this delirium awareness podcast, it would be possible
to provide three concise audio recordings (i.e. 20 min
each in duration) in relation to; what is delirium, delirium
recognition and delirium management as described
in Table 1.
As an educational tool, the delirium awareness podcast
facilitated students to develop a deeper understanding
about the topic. In particular, the goal of this podcast
was to facilitate student learners to actively construct
their own knowledge and meaning from listening, for
example applying learning from this podcast to their
past personal or professional experiences in healthcare.
This underpinning constructivist theory is a popular
pedagogical approach which has previously been aligned
to podcasting in higher education [37]. Recent literature
reviews on podcasting within nursing and medical education
have found only a small number of studies were
underpinned by a pedagogical theory or alternative
learning framework [36, 38–40].
In this study, statistically significant improvements were
recorded in year one nursing student knowledge about delirium
post-podcast across all three themes: knowledge
about the presentation, symptoms, and outcomes of delirium,
knowledge about causes and risk factors of delirium
and knowledge about delirium prevention and management
strategies. Most importantly, nursing student knowledge
improved in all 35 items post-podcast. These findings
are reflective to the findings of the research team’s original
co-designed delirium awareness programme [20]. In this
previous study, nursing student overall knowledge increased
by 10.00% post-education and this is comparable to
this current study with nursing student overall knowledge
increasing by 11.54% post-podcast. In relation to perceived
professional confidence about delirium, nursing student
confidence about delirium significantly increased postpodcast.
These findings are also consistent with the team’s
original co-designed delirium awareness programme [20].
The results of this study are also consistent with previous
research on delirium education with qualified
healthcare professionals [16, 18, 41–44]. With consideration
to the pre-registration teaching of healthcare professionals,
approaches to delirium education remain
inconsistent and there is a paucity of investigation about
the impact on undergraduate nursing students specifically
[45, 46]. Findings from a recent Delphi-study indicated
some important areas for development in delirium
education amongst undergraduate nursing students at
Universities in Scotland [17]. Key findings from this
Delphi-study included: the lack of education that differentiated
between dementia and delirium, the inclusion
of delirium education as a self-taught component only,
the lack of specific learning outcomes related to delirium
and the reliance on clinical placement areas to provide
education about delirium in the absence of Universityteaching
about the subject [17]. These limitations in the
provision of undergraduate nursing delirium education
are alarming because appropriate education has the potential
to improve student recognition, management,
and prevention of delirium. The present study demonstrated
a novel approach to undergraduate nursing delirium
education through the provision of an audio
podcast.
Recommendations
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed the way in which
nursing students are educated due to more limited opportunities
for face-to-face teaching [47]. In response,
nurse educators have had to move much of their teaching
online and offer alternatives to previous methods of
delivery [48, 49]. While the planning of meaningful
learning can be challenging, this study has demonstrated
that the provision of a co-designed educational podcast
has the potential to facilitate student nurse learning
about a complex medical condition. Audio podcasts also
have the added benefit of reducing learning that takes
place in front of a digital screen, something which has
been identified as a possible risk factor for future eye
disorders [50]. The study authors recommend the use of
audio podcasts as a tool to deliver asynchronous learning
opportunities for nursing students. With consideration
to the aforementioned evidence-base, it is apparent that
student nursing education about delirium is important
given its high prevalence across all clinical settings and
it is our recommendation that delirium education forms
a mandatory part of all nursing curricula. In addition,
the DKQ [26] may also offer nurse educators with a
ready-made 35-item quiz to evaluate student knowledge
about delirium using formative assessment.
Strengths, limitations and future research
This study is novel and to our knowledge there have
been no studies that have investigated the impact of a
delirium awareness podcast amongst year one nursing
students, this is a noteworthy strength. In addition, the
podcast led to significant improvements in student nurse
knowledge about delirium post-intervention and this has
the potential to support participants in the timely recognition
and management of delirium. The original delirium
awareness can be accessed and shared with other cohorts
of nursing via supplementary file 1. Finally, this study reports
on a high number of participants (n = 298) at the
same stage of their nurse training (year one students with
10 weeks clinical placement experience). Although this
represents a large cohort, generalisability of the findings
may be limited because the sample was from one university
in Northern Ireland. This study also did not collect
any demographic data from nursing students which could
have detailed previous care experience of participants.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it was not possible to
compare the delirium awareness podcast to a control
group or alternative teaching delivery method, for example
face-to-face delivery. Further research comparing
an audio podcast verses an alternative method of education
would strengthen the evidence-base. A recommendation
for future research is comparison of delirium
education interventions across multiple universities or
multiple groups of healthcare professionals. It would also
be useful to follow-up with nursing students in this and
future studies to determine if the extent to which they retain
their knowledge about delirium. Qualitative research
may also be important in supporting educators to understand
how student nurses apply their knowledge about delirium
during their clinical placements.
Conclusion
Low costs coupled with ease of production have made
podcasting an appealing approach to pre-registration
healthcare education. There have already been several
studies which have demonstrated that podcasts are both
feasible and acceptable to a wide variety of learners.
While podcasting is clearly an encouraging approach to
education little is still known about how to best develop
and evaluate podcasts in healthcare education.
This study highlights how a 60-min audio podcast
about delirium can enhance both knowledge and confidence
about the condition. The apparent lack of supporting
research on innovative educational approaches
to undergraduate nursing delirium education is surprising
given the high prevalence of the condition in hospitals
and care homes. There continues to be an urgent
need to improve delirium knowledge in healthcare education.
This will support nursing students to prevent,
recognise and manage delirium in their patients more
effectively.