Background
The concept of thriving in nursing homes has been described
as encompassing place-related well-being relative
to the individual and the wider institutional, relational
and environmental context [1, 2]. As the perception of
what constitutes thriving is said to be largely up to the
individual, experiences of ill-being (i.e. physical, functional
and/or cognitive limitations) do not necessarily
impede thriving as a person may simultaneously experience
their life as being positive [1, 2]. Experiences of
thriving for older people living in nursing homes are said
to be influenced primarily by their attitude towards living
in the nursing home, and the quality of their care
and caregivers [1]. Other influential aspects of the social
and spacial lived-environment are thought to include relationships
with family, qualities in the physical environment,
opportunities to get outside and around,
participation in meaningful activities, and relationships
with their peers [1]. Previous studies have explored the
concept of thriving from the experiential perspective of
people living in nursing homes; however, little is known
about how staff identify everyday expressions of thriving
in nursing homes, or how this compares with resident
descriptions of thriving, and no studies have explored
the assessment of thriving from the perspective of Australian
nursing home staff.
There has been limited research regarding staff perspectives
of thriving in nursing homes despite their involvement
in the assessment and measurement of
thriving as proxy-raters in previous studies [e.g.] [3–6].
An American study recently sought to explicate the concept
of thriving in long-term care by amalgamating resident
and staff perspectives into a single definition of
thriving [7]. Several overlapping aspects were identified,
such as engagement in activities, opportunities for involvement
in decision-making and the personality of the
individual. However, understandings of thriving diverged
when describing aspects such as physical characteristics,
as staff perceived that loss of function or independence
hindered thriving, while the residents themselves articulated
that they did not typically experience their health
problems to be a barrier to thriving [7]. The resulting
definition of thriving combined both staff and resident
perspectives, leading to confusion as to which parts of
the definition were reported by whom and which parts
could be meaningfully used when attempting to
recognize or assess expressions of thriving in practice
[8].
Foundational thriving research among Norwegian
nursing home residents linked experiences of thriving to
relationships with caregivers [9] and peer relationships
with other residents [10]. Close caregiver and peer relationships
were important thriving requisites for some individuals;
however, others indicated that professional
and/or social relationships did not greatly impact their
experience of thriving, demonstrating the existent variation
of individual preferences within the unique care
and social context of the nursing home environment [9,
10]. In a study involving Swedish nursing home residents,
feelings of thriving were associated with visits
from loved ones, communication with care providers, a
pleasant physical environment, being secure and met
with respect, and being satisfied with one’s life [11].
Likewise, meanings of thriving were explored among a
group of Australian nursing home residents and were
understood as a combination of acceptance, feeling supported,
cared for and independent, opportunities to
choose relationships, and feeling a sense of home [12].
These previous studies illuminated aspects that nursing
home residents identified as being important to experiences,
feelings and meanings of thriving; however, it is
imperative to also consider the ways in which nursing
home staff recognize these expressions in practice given
that individual experiences and staff evaluations of other
well-being and quality-related concepts have been found
to be inconsistent or incongruent [13–15]. Therefore,
this study aimed to explore how staff recognize expressions
of thriving among persons living in nursing homes.
Methods
Participants and setting
The study was conducted over a four-week period in
March 2018 at a rural nursing home facility providing
residential aged care, palliative care, respite care and secure
dementia care in Victoria, Australia. The nursing
home was located within close proximity to the local
hospital and town centre. The majority of staff employed
at this facility were Enrolled Nurses (EN), however there
was a Registered Nurse (RN) on-site at all times. In
Australia, ENs undertake a minimum of 18 months of
higher education training to receive a Diploma of Nursing,
and RNs complete a 3-year tertiary education program
to obtain a Bachelor of Nursing. To practice in the
clinical setting, both ENs and RNs must hold a valid
registration with the Nursing and Midwifery Board of
Australia (NMBA) and adhere to the code of conduct,
code of ethics, and professional standards for practice
[16].
Following initial contact with the nursing home manager,
the first (RN, PhD Candidate) and last (RN, PhD,
Professor) authors presented the background, methods
and aim of study at the monthly staff meeting. The inclusion
criteria outlined that eligible persons would (a)
be aged 18 years or older; (b) have been working at the
nursing home for a minimum of three months; (c) be
able to read, speak, and comprehend English; (d) hold a
qualification as an RN or EN; and (e) be able and willing
to provide informed consent. Those who were interested
in participating were encouraged to contact the nursing
home manager to schedule an interview time. The nursing
home manager also invited eligible staff to participate
who were not present at the meeting. Reasons for
non-participation were not explored. The researchers
had no pre-existing relationships with participants and
were not involved in the care of residents at the nursing
home. All participants were provided with verbal and
written information outlining the aims and methods of
the study. The information statement reiterated that participation
was voluntary and that all contributions would
remain anonymous. Consent was obtained via a signed
and dated written consent form which outlined that participants
could consent to being interviewed, being
audio-recorded, or both. In total, 14 staff volunteered to
take part in the study, including 2 RNs, and 12 ENs. The
sample was predominantly female (N = 12), with a mean
age of 46.6 years, and between 3 and 40 years of nursing
experience (mean, 21.7 years).
Data collection
Data were collected through semi-structured interviews
which were guided by the aim of the study [17] (see:
Supplementary file 1 - Interview Guide). The first two
interviews were conducted with the first and last authors,
and all remaining interviews were conducted by
the first author. To develop a common understanding of
the concept of interest, participants were first asked to
describe thriving (e.g. Could you tell us about what
thriving means to you?). In the second phase of the
interview staff were asked how they recognized whether
persons residing in the nursing home were or were not
thriving. Follow up questions were guided by participant
responses. All interviews took place in a private room,
were scheduled during daytime hours (0900–1630), and
were negotiated around the participants’ work schedule
and patient care. The interviews lasted between 18 and
41 min and were transcribed by the first author for analysis.
Transcripts were verified against the audio for
validation.
Data analysis
Data were analyzed using qualitative content analysis
with an inductive approach [18, 19]. First, the interview
texts were read in their entirety to establish an overall
understanding of the content. Next, the text was divided
into meaning units. Meaning units were long or short
sections of text that conveyed a single meaning related
to the study aim. The first author condensed and coded
each meaning unit according to content (Table 1). All
codes were compared, and similar codes were grouped
and labelled in relation to content area to develop emergent
sub-categories and categories. The preliminary findings
were compared with the original text to confirm
their application and relevance [18]. The results were
discussed by all authors resulting in minor adjustments
to wording before reaching a final consensus.
Results
The analysis resulted in six sub-categories and three
main categories (Table 2). Supporting quotations have
been provided in italics to demonstrate the interview
content and to support the trustworthiness of the study.
As the participants were from a single nursing home in
a rural town it is not possible to link the supporting
quotes with each individual’s demographic information
(i.e. age, number of years of experience) without risking
the confidentiality of those involved. Instead, the participant
number (1–14) has been indicated in brackets following
each quotation.
Understanding thriving
Describing professional understandings of thriving
Staff understood thriving as a positive concept that was
underpinned by implicit and explicit expressions of
growth, development or contentment across multiple dimensions
of personhood. Staff frequently used metaphors
to describe their understanding of expressions of
thriving, for example one person explained ‘I think it
means growing. You just are blossoming, full of life, getting
the best out of it’ (P2), while another stated ‘you
don’t flourish if you aren’t thriving... So you plant the
seed and the seed is going to thrive into a little seedling
and the flourish is the flower on the top’ (P1). Thriving
was spoken of in terms of being happy, making the best
of it and doing well. In contrast, staff stated that persons
who were not actively thriving were merely existing, being
on hold, or at a standstill. However, it was acknowledged
that thriving was something that could change
over time and that persons who were not thriving could
thrive again given the right circumstances. As one staff
member elaborated, ‘[thriving] is everything, the person
as a whole. Their emotional health can affect their physical
health as well, and vice versa. Thriving to me is
something that is positive, thriving in all aspects I suppose.
If one of those things were down, then it would definitely
affect all of the others. Like their emotional health
– they might not want to get out of bed, and that turns
into physical, and then they aren’t interacting and yeah,
it sort of all goes into one’ (P3).
Reflecting on personal understandings of thriving
Reflecting on personal understandings of thriving in the
professional context seemed to provide staff with greater
insight into how persons in their care thrive in the nursing
home environment. In their descriptions of resident
thriving, staff commonly compared the situation of persons
living in the nursing home to the situation that
they themselves would want based on their personal
interpretations of thriving. For example, one staff
member narrated, ‘some people don’t need to get out
of their rooms. When I am older I am probably just
going to stay in my room and binge watch TV all
day’ (P8), while another mused, ‘I would hate to come
in here and have to share a house with a whole
bunch of people that I don’t know’ (P10). Descriptions
of expressions of thriving therefore seemed to be informed
not only through staff’s professional understandings,
but also filtered through their own
personal expectations and reflections.
Observing thriving
Assessing residents’ physical and mental well-being
Staff described recognizing expressions of thriving
through observing indicators of physical and mental
health. These observations included the presence or absence
of acute illness or injury, weight loss or gain, mobility,
cleanliness and anxious or depressive behaviors.
For example, physical appearance seemed to be important
when observing thriving, as one staff member
recalled, ‘some of them can come in in a very frail state,
emaciated, not eating. You know, they have lost a lot of
weight, they have been isolated, they’ve got no clothes, or
limited clothes that are not suitable. They come here and
after about six months you will notice they’ve flourished,
or thrived I suppose’ (P1). Similarly, mental well-being
was also assessed through nurses’ observations, as one
staff member reflected, ‘you do get residents who come in
here and they just, they see this as the end point, they
don’t enjoy anything and they don’t want to do anything
anymore … if they have made up their minds and they
don’t want to continue then it is hard to make them
thrive’ (P3). Interestingly, staff outlined that residents
could be observed to thrive physically, but not mentally,
and vice versa. Negative symptoms of physical and mental
health were observed to have an impact on thriving,
however, persons could still be observed to thrive with
support from other people and utilization of resources
within the nursing home.
Seeing resident participation and engagement
Recognition of thriving also encompassed observing how
residents interacted and engaged with activities, other
people and the wider nursing home environment. As
one staff member described ‘you find the ones that thrive
the most are the ones that still get out and about and
still get out in the community to do things … They know
what everyone is doing, you know, they seem like they
enjoy it. If they get themselves out there, join in on activities,
go on bus trips, so get out there and embrace it I
guess, instead of closing themselves off’ (P8). Seeing residents
participating in activities and having positive interactions
with others was described as being indicative of
thriving. Conversely, if residents were seen to be withdrawn
or isolated it was perceived as being indicative of
lack of thriving. One staff member reflected, ‘I would say
it is the minority that don’t thrive, not the majority. I
think it is the minority, I really do. You find that when
people first come in, that is when they are very withdrawn
and everything … and then you see them come
out. Once they go out and go to a few activities and get
involved and meet a few people, they do, they start to
thrive’ (P7).
Sensing thriving
Perceiving resident attitudes towards living in the nursing
home
Perceiving resident attitudes about living in the nursing
home was recognized as important to recognizing expressions
of thriving. Staff appeared to compare and
contrast their knowledge of the individual person against
the ‘sense’ of congruence with their overall understandings
and observations of thriving. In this way, staff outlined
that recognition of thriving extended beyond what
could be observed, to what could be intuited. When visual
information did not match a staff member’s perception
of the resident’s situation, staff indicated that they
relied on their senses, for example, ‘some people appear
to be happy but they are not, but other people don’t smile
or they aren’t chatty or they are shy, so they might come
across as withdrawn. So I don’t think you can just go on
what they look like’ (P14). Acknowledging the existence
of individual variations was described as important to
sensing thriving, as thriving may manifest in different
ways among different people depending on their disposition
and circumstances. As one staff member outlined,
‘they are not going to thrive if they are not really happy
about being here. If they are not choosing to be here you
can see the resistance’ (P1). Being close to residents, having
an open dialogue, and developing relationships
assisted staff to differentiate positive or negative attitudes
towards living in the nursing home.
Feeling that residents are content and satisfied
Staff explained that persons who were thriving tended to
express contentment and satisfaction with their life situation
and environment. This was described in terms of
sensing that residents were accepting of their circumstances
and were seemingly at home in the nursing
home. As one staff member clarified, ‘you can pick up a
lot by sitting and having a conversation with someone …
you go in and have a chat with them and they engage
with you and they are laughing and they are talking to
you and they are showing you pictures of their grandkids
… then you know that they are thriving doing what they
are doing. They are happy, they are content … While
others you might go in and they are sitting in their chair
and they don’t have the telly on and they are just in the
dark and you know that they are not thriving’ (P7).
While visual indicators could inform features of contentment,
satisfaction, acceptance and/or at homeness, staff
indicated that oftentimes they simply felt or knew
whether someone was or was not thriving in these aspects.
In this way, staff spoke of honing and trusting
their intuition while also developing their understanding
of the individual person within the unique nursing home
context.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to explore how staff recognize
expressions of thriving among persons living in nursing
homes. Our findings revealed that thriving was recognized
through a combination of understanding, observing
and sensing. This was informed through staffs’ reflections
on thriving, their knowledge of the individual person,
and the overall congruence of these perceptions
with their interpretation of the situational and environmental
context. These categories articulate practical and
descriptive examples that could be used to inform education
and person-centred care strategies to enhance
and promote thriving in nursing homes.
Nursing home staff are said to be well placed to make
clinical assessments and judgements regarding resident
experiences as they play a central role in the daily lives
of persons residing in nursing homes [9, 11, 20]. Despite
this, little is known about the ways in which staff inform
assessments of concepts such as thriving. As reported by
Sullivan and Willis [7], American nursing home staff
described observing resident interactions, engagement,
physical appearance and movement as being indicative
of thriving. Sullivan and Willis [7] also outlined that
nursing staff identified thriving when residents showed
motivation to do things, wanted to get out of bed and
interact with others, expressed optimism, and were perceived
as being friendly or having a sense of humor. The
findings from our study further elucidate the ways in
which staff identify both clinical and conceptual expressions
of thriving, and provides new insights into how
staff process this information relative to their own reflections,
understandings and experiences. For instance, familiarity
and closeness with residents was said to
enhance the potential for identification of expressions of
thriving, or changes in thriving. Previous research has
also emphasized the importance of strong interpersonal
relationships from the residents’ perspective as contributing
to higher perceived quality of care and feelings of
acknowledgment [21]. This seems to highlight the benefits
of incorporating person-centred care principles in
everyday assessments and providing continued education
to cultivate compassionate and empathetic interpersonal
and communication skills [22–24].
While it is not possible for healthcare professionals to
claim to know exactly how persons in their care experience
reality, it is important to consider how clinical assessments
and judgments are informed. As reported in
relation to other concepts such as quality of life, over- or
underestimations can have a significant impact on care
delivery, decision-making and resource allocation, [e.g.
13, 14, 15]. When comparing the congruence of individual
and staff perceptions of thriving, several areas appeared
to correspond, namely, relationships with care
staff, promotion of a sense of autonomy, engagement in
activities, connections with other people and the community,
and attributes within a person’s disposition [7,
9–12]. While it is encouraging that shared understandings
exist around some of these aspects, our findings revealed
that staff included dimensions within their
assessments that were not necessarily present when the
individuals themselves were asked to describe meanings
and/or understandings of thriving. These included aspects
such as physical appearance, behavior or even environmental
characteristics. For example, staff described
that smiling could be viewed as a positive expression of
thriving, while sitting in a dark room could be viewed
negatively in relation to thriving; however, staff did not
examine these expressions in isolation, rather, they considered
numerous influencing factors and made interpretations
based on their knowledge of the concept, the
person, the situation and the environment. As a result,
potential expressions and understandings of thriving
merit further comparison if such assessments are to
meaningfully inform care strategies to optimize thriving.
Nursing home staff described that recognition of thriving
extended beyond what could be seen, to encompass
what could be felt. The use of intuition in clinical assessments
has been discussed as both a type of knowledge
and a way of thinking [25], and is thought to involve a
level of fluidity in the movement from conscious analytic
and sub-conscious thinking modes [26]. This reasoning
process occurs within the continuum of a person’s cognitive
processes, and is influenced by a variety of factors
including knowledge, experience, exposure, rationality,
matching and recognition of patterns [27–29]. Our results
underscore the importance of developing skills
such as insight and receptivity when conducting clinical
assessments [30]. This process could be augmented by
getting to know the person, building therapeutic relationships
and striving to be attentive and responsive to
the individual’s needs [23, 31]. In gaining a deeper understanding
of the various assessment indicators related
to thriving, nursing staff may be better equipped to
recognize expressions of thriving among the persons
they care for, as well as inform potential person-centred
interventions to support and promote thriving.
Methodological considerations
The methods used in this study require consideration.
Nursing staff were invited to volunteer to be interviewed
for the study risking self-selection bias. To our knowledge
this is the first study to explore recognition of
thriving in this context, it therefore seemed advantageous
to recruit participants who were able and willing
to speak on the subject matter. Importantly, the participants
reported differing genders, ages, years of experience
and nursing qualifications, allowing for exploration
of a range of experiences related to the study aim. As
outlined by Sandelowski [32], qualitative research samples
should be large enough to demonstrate varied experiences,
but small enough to allow for thorough analysis
of all relevant aspects of the data. The trustworthiness of
the study is strengthened by the use of an inductive approach
to coding and categorization, and the provision
of supporting quotations to exemplify the sub-categories
and main categories [18]. Given that this study was
undertaken within a single nursing home in rural
Australia the transferability of these findings may be limited
and therefore warrants further exploration in other
settings.
Conclusion
Our study found that staff recognized expressions of
thriving through understanding, observing and sensing;
illuminating the ways in which staff inform their everyday
assessments of thriving for people living in nursing
homes. These findings are important to consider when
measuring, interpreting or comparing staff and resident
understandings of thriving, and may be used to inform
ongoing development of staff education, clinical assessment
tools and person-centred care strategies. Further
research is required to explore how staff use this information
to support and promote thriving in nursing
homes.