Background
Turnover among nurses is a global concern that negatively
affects health services. Hospital settings are characterized
by high complexity owing to the interaction
between patients, nurses and the organization. Nurses
play a pivotal role in delivering care to hospitalized patients.
In the European context, there is a serious
nursing shortage in most countries [1]. The “Registered
nurse forecasting in Europe study” [2] brought together
researchers from 12 European countries to generate a
large evidence basis about nursing workforce issues [3,
4]. As many as 20–50% of nurses in each country
intended to leave their job during the next year. In general,
9% of nurses intended to leave nursing, most of
them after only a few years in the profession [3, 4]. In
Canada, work environment variables explained 45.5% of
the variance in nurses’ intent-to-leave scores [3]. Further
contributing to the problem is that the ageing segment
of the population is rapidly expanding and consuming
more health services with fewer new nurses entering the
workforce. As such, providing a healthy work environment
to retain nurses in their workplace is essential for
sustaining the profession. The present study seeks to
understand the factors that can increase both the professional
longevity of nurses working in hospitals and
nurses’ willingness to remain in work and the
profession.
Previous research
There is extensive research on how nurses experience
their working conditions. Nurses work in environments
that contribute to high stress, job dissatisfaction, burnout
[5], intention to leave the workplace [6, 7], and
intention to leave the profession [8]. As a result, nurses
frequently intend to leave their workplace and sometimes
the profession. In a cross-sectional study in a
Swiss hospital setting, one in six nurses thought frequently
about leaving the profession. According to
Hämmig [8], temporal, physical, emotional and mental
workloads as well as job stressors were strongly and
positively associated with burnout symptoms. A similar
scenario was seen among Taiwanese clinical nurses,
where five main paths were found from job stress to
intention to leave the hospital [9]. In these nurses, job
stress directly affected job satisfaction and depressed
mood, which in turn affected intention to leave the hospital.
The intention to leave the hospital preceded the
intention to leave the profession. These results highlight
how important it is for nurses to be able to deal with
stress in both the short and the long term.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was the focus of
a study among nurses working in a variety of subspecialties
and from 12 different countries [10]. Findings
from this integrative review revealed that PTSD is a
growing concern in the nursing profession. Four themes
emerged from the synthesis of factors that influenced
PTSD among nurses: workplace matters, relationship
matters, the toll of caregiving and interpersonal
strengths. These overarching themes captured a multitude
of factors that occur across three levels of influence:
organizational, interpersonal and intrapersonal. These
four themes are connected to ideas from stress management
and resource-oriented research, which highlight
people’s ability to manage stress and stay well [11]. It is
becoming increasingly important to ask not only how
nurses survive at work but also how they thrive [12–14].
One way to look at this is to explore how nurses create
and maintain a sense of coherence (SOC) and find strategies
for managing stress [13]. Salutogenesis is a
dynamic, flexible approach continually focused on managing
stress [14].
Theoretical framework
The purpose of this study was to understand why hospital
nurses remain in their workplace to better inform
the development of sustainable work environments. The
salutogenic theory of health guided the present study
[11, 13–15]. Salutogenesis is a resource-oriented field of
health research that involves understanding people as
unique individuals with different resources and competencies.
Essential to salutogenic theory is understanding
health as a process that exists along a continuum: the
health/disease continuum. This is a way of looking at
health as a process, as opposed to seeing it as a dichotomy
between health and disease. The key concepts are
SOC, which is the ability to comprehend the whole situation,
the capacity to use available resources, and the
generalized and specific resistance resources against
stress (GRRs/SRRs) [11, 14]. This capacity is a combination
of people’s ability to assess and understand the
situation they are in, to find meaning in investing the
energy needed to move in a health-promoting direction
and to manage the situation – that is, comprehensibility,
meaningfulness, and manageability.
In a Swedish context, the level of the three dimensions
of SOC was shown to vary. Manageability was shown to
be the weakest and to decrease the total SOC, and the
meaningfulness dimension was shown to be the strongest
[16]. On a national level, nurses reported weaker
SOC than the general population, but in an international
comparison, they reported stronger SOC, and hospital
nurses were reported to find their work difficult to manage
but meaningful [14]. Sasso and colleagues [17] described
“push and pull” factors involved in nurses’
intention to leave their job. Dissatisfaction was the most
important reason for intention to leave the job (35.5%),
and among the dissatisfied, 33.1% intended to leave the
nursing profession. Push factors included understaffing,
emotional exhaustion and poor patient safety. Pull factors
for staying included positive perceptions of the
quality of care, patient safety and performing core nursing
activities.
Methods
Study design
The study design was adopted to gain a deeper understanding
of why hospital nurses remain in the workplace
[15]. The study is qualitative and descriptive in design
[18, 19]. Taking this qualitative approach is appropriate
for gathering a maximum amount of information within
a particular domain [20]. The study was conducted in
four phases: 1) a literature review of previous research
focusing on salutary factors that have been shown to
support sustainability in nurses’ working life; 2) interviews
with questions derived from the salutogenic
theory and its core concept SOC [15]; seven question
areas were identified that formed the basis for developing
the interview guide (the guide was specially developed
for this study); 3) a qualitative content
analysis of the data by an inductive (data-driven) approach
[21]; and 4) a deductive approach for theoretically
discussing the findings [13].
Setting and sample
The study was conducted at a hospital in western
Sweden. The hospital includes four speciality areas:
emergency medicine, specialist medicine, surgical care
and adult psychiatric inpatient care. The interview inclusion
criteria were understanding and speaking Swedish
and at least 5 years of experience working as a nurse.
Within the four speciality areas, there are several departments
and clinics where physicians, nurses, physiotherapists
and occupational therapists work. A purposive
sampling method was used. The participants were recruited
by sending an informational letter to the unit
managers, who in turn invited their staff to participate in
the study. The nurses who wished to participate were
encouraged to contact the first author (HN) by e-mail.
The nurses who consented to participate were contacted
by telephone by an interviewer to schedule a time for
the interview.
Data collection
Written informed consent was obtained before starting
each interview. The interviewers had previous experience
conducting interviews for research purposes. Data
collection took place through in-depth face-to-face interviews
conducted at a secluded location the respondent
was asked to choose at the hospital where the participants
worked. The interview guide was employed, using
semi-structured and open-ended questions covering factors
important to explaining why nurses remain in work
and the profession (see examples of items in Table 1).
During the interviews, the participants were asked about
factors that positively affect job satisfaction, factors that
cause them to remain in the profession, organizational
and individual conditions that are important to them
remaining in working life, their learning experiences and
changes they wish to see in their future career.
Data analysis
The collected data were analysed both deductively and
inductively using qualitative content analysis [21]. Initially,
the entire text was read several times to achieve an
overall understanding. In the next step, the texts were
reduced into meaning units, that is, parts of the text related
to the study aim and research questions. The
meaning units were condensed but retained their most
significant content. The underlying messages of the condensed
meaning units were then labelled with codes.
The codes were continually adjusted to make the
inductive process more rigorous [21]. Based on the patterns
emerging from the analysis, the codes were deductively
structured into the dimensions of the SOC – that
is, meaningfulness, manageability and comprehensibility
– which thus constitute the themes presented in the results
section [15]. Subthemes were then identified; they
were categorized together into the three main themes
and described the latent meaning of the overt statements
[21]. An example of how the data were analysed is
shown in Table 2. In this way, we also deepened our understanding
of the three dimensions of SOC through the
analysis of the nurses’ experiences.
According to Saunders et al. [22], data saturation differs
depending on the type of study and on assumptions
concerning whether the data represent an ongoing
process. After each interview, we evaluated the data to
determine whether there were new patterns or variations
in the data to determine saturation.
Ethical considerations
The nurses were informed about the study both orally
and in writing. Informed consent was obtained from the
nurses who were willing to participate. They were told
that participation was voluntary and that they were free
to withdraw from the interview and the study at any
time without giving a reason. Permission to conduct the
study was obtained from the operational managers.
Trustworthiness
Trustworthiness can be defined as including credibility,
dependability, confirmability and transferability. When
evaluating qualitative data, these issues must be considered
[20, 21]. To ensure credibility and provide a broad
understanding of the problem, participants from several
occupational categories with rich experience of caring
were included in the study. Credibility [19] was also
achieved by choosing individual interviews in which the
nurses described what they did to create sustainability in
their working life. The procedures for data analysis and
generating themes and subthemes have been described
above. The analysis process was characterized by critical
review on the part of the researchers, who read the interviews
and jointly defined the themes and subthemes
to ensure the study’s dependability. Confirmability was
attained by checking the codes, themes and subthemes
against the interviews throughout the analytical process.
Confirmability was also strengthened by relating the results
to earlier research. The participants’ unique answers
and the inductive and deductive process ensure
the study’s confirmability. To facilitate transferability, a
description of the context, selection and characteristics
of the participants has been provided. The methods for
identifying and condensing meaning units have also been
clearly described, thus allowing readers to easily understand
the background of the presented results. Furthermore,
excerpts from the interviews have been provided
so that the reader can assess whether the findings are
transferable to other settings.
The Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative
Research (COREQ) Checklist was used to fulfil the standards
of high-quality research.
Results
Data saturation was achieved after twelve nurses were
interviewed. The participants’ sociodemographic variables
are shown in Table 3. The interviews lasted between
53 and 106 min (mean 80 min) and were
transcribed verbatim; they provided rich data, amounting
to more than 200 pages of transcribed text.
The results are presented using the three theoretical
dimensions of the SOC construct – meaningfulness,
manageability and comprehensibility – as themes. The
nurses described factors explaining their ability to remain
in work and the profession as ten subthemes.
(Table 4).
Meaningfulness
In the workplace, the nurses are in a context that is important
to them and feels straightforward. The nurses
have a need for acknowledgement from colleagues, patients
and their relatives, as such acknowledgement
makes the usefulness of their work efforts clear to them
and increases the meaningfulness of their work. In this
way, the nurses feel they are productive; they can see the
results of their own work. The nurses also need to be included
in meaningful healthcare teams that are characterized
by job satisfaction and humour.
Job satisfaction and fun at work
The nurses see job satisfaction as one of the most meaningful
factors for remaining in the workplace for a long
time. This can involve job satisfaction in the team or the
joy felt when a patient expresses something positive.
Job satisfaction for me, it's getting someone to
smile. Try to spread positive emotions. Be happy
and make it easier for others. That gives me job satisfaction;
I feel good. A patient who looks at you
and says “thank you,” and you can see that everything
you did went well (nurse, medical outpatient
care).
Having fun at a workplace marked by humour is also
something the nurses describe as important to
remaining in the workplace for many years. This can entail,
for example, using humorous jargon on the team,
colleagues having a “twinkle in their eyes” or being able
to laugh together. The nurses also describe how
important it is to have work that is meaningful; they go
to work with a positive feeling.
Now, we have a very fine atmosphere. Our students
say that they’ve never been on a ward where they
felt so welcome right away, a basic positive feeling
and that’s how we want it. We are able to joke and
talk to each other. However, I almost see my colleagues
more than I see my family (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
Acknowledgement and productivity
According to the nurses, the meaningfulness of their
work increases when they are acknowledged. It is often
patients who provide this acknowledgement, either directly
or when the nurses have contributed to patients’
improved health. However, it can also be colleagues or
relatives who acknowledge the nurse.
Every day you get this feedback from patients, whatever
it may be, it feels like I've done something
good. But, it's not always so, there are others too.
Most of the time I’ve done something good every
day/…/I feel good about being seen and acknowledged
and seeing and acknowledging others (nurse,
surgical outpatient care).
The nurses have a great need to feel productive and
useful in their work. They can provide selfacknowledgement,
especially when patients recover.
Then, they see how their involvement has contributed to
the positive outcomes.
A workplace where I thrive and feel I go to easily,
that I’m useful, needed in any way. That’s what I get
from both patients and staff (nurse, psychiatric inpatient
care).
Togetherness and team security
Feeling togetherness and security in the work team is
central to nurses’ experience of meaning at work. Cohesion
means a great deal to the nurses, that is, working as
a team and solving problems together, especially in precarious
care situations.
I think togetherness gets a little stronger in crisis
situations. I actually think that there are probably
many institutions that feel that way, that you get a
little tighter during crisis situations. Togetherness
becomes stronger in strained situations (nurse,
medical inpatient care).
The nurses experience togetherness when they are accepted,
involved and part of the work team. They feel
they are not alone and have full responsibility for care
provision. They feel they are part of a greater whole.
Being accepted by the group, that you’re part of the
group, being seen and heard. That people listen to
what you have to say and being involved in making
decisions. I think it’s important to belong to a group
because that's probably what being a nurse means,
that you’re independent but still part of the whole.
Having colleagues and supporting each other (nurse,
medical inpatient care).
Manageability
High demands are placed on the nurses regarding being
able to manage their day-to-day work. These high demands
concern both more routine tasks and stressful situations,
but the nurses find ways to cope with the
different care situations. Factors that make the work
situation manageable include receiving support from
colleagues and managers, being involved and being able
to interact with colleagues and other healthcare professionals.
A good balance between work and leisure makes
the work more manageable. An additional factor is being
able to mentally leave work duties behind at the end of
the workday. Having an individual work schedule is
valuable for nurses, as it gives them a great deal of flexibility.
They also express a need to have a manageable
workload, that is, to have control over various care situations.
Using these factors, they can build sustainable
strategies for managing different care situations and coping
with the work, both physically and mentally, for a
long time.
Manageable workload
Nurses typically have a high workload and must
prioritize tasks if they are to cope with a variety of care
situations. It is important to have enough nurses on the
ward to handle the high workload. Having a manageable
workload means there is a readiness for unexpected and
emergency events.
Enough staff, that is number one, there has to be
enough nurses. Enough, so that both nurses and
auxiliaries feel they are coping with the work and
that there’s a buffer if something happens. That
there are extra staff every day, because there’s usually
someone who is absent, children who are sick.
So that you have a small buffer to rely on, so that
you never have to be understaffed for longer periods
(nurse, surgical inpatient care).
When the workforce is sufficient and the workload is
balanced, there is time for important tasks other than
pure physical care or emergency care. This means that
nurses have the opportunity to take more time to create
care relationships with patients and can perform qualitatively
good nursing. This allows them to finish their
workday with a higher level of satisfaction.
When we’re sufficiently staffed, just enough workload,
then I have time for my responsibilities, I have
time to deal with things that are hanging over me.
That I get a moment to sit and finish, so I can catch
up with my duties (nurse, medical outpatient care).
The workload can vary during the day and across work
shifts. If nurses have opportunities to slow their pace
during the day, they can take a break between more
stressful tasks, which allows a kind of recovery. This recovery,
in turn, can provide extra energy to tackle more
strenuous situations.
I can work at a fast pace one day because then I
know that the next day, maybe, will be a bit calmer,
and then I slow down, and I can manage the work. I
know that I would have burned out otherwise
(nurse, psychiatric inpatient care).
You can work under stress temporarily, you can do
it, you can push yourself and then you have to find
a recovery phase/…/What the recovery phase looks
like is individual, you have to find a recovery phase,
a bit every day, and then you can handle more stress
again. But I have been stressing for 16 years and
then suddenly "Bang!" and I've been there, I know
how it feels and I never want to be there again. I’m
an expert at learning to say "stop and no," even if I
want to (nurse, surgical outpatient care).
Variable work and challenging situations
Nurses’ professional role involves a variety of everyday
tasks and challenges. Although many tasks are based on
experience and routine management, nurses are exposed
daily to challenges and trials. The nurses feel their tasks
are positive challenges in that they create variation,
which means working as a nurse never becomes
monotonous.
No days are identical, there are encounters with different
people, patients and situations. Nothing gets
boring, you have to be on the ball all the time, and
this makes you more mentally alert (nurse, surgical
outpatient care).
I’m very pleased with my situation, that I have a bit
of everything; I come in when someone is sick or
when there is a shortage of nurses, so it feels good
(nurse, psychiatric inpatient care).
The varying tasks mean that the nurses are constantly
learning, especially when their knowledge is tested in
more challenging situations.
That it’s varied, it’s very instructive, it never gets
monotonous, and it never gets old. There are always
new things happening all the time. Both in the way
we work and how we handle our duties. The fact that
the tasks themselves are varied means that you never
really stop learning (nurse, surgical outpatient care).
Workplace and personal space balance
If nurses are to recover properly and cope with their
work, they need to find a balance between work and leisure.
This means having an active leisure time and feeling
good at home while having the energy to deal with
patients.
If you have a good home life and leisure time, it’s
reflected in your work, then you can do a good job.
If you’ve had a good weekend at home and feel that
it’s given something, then you’re more rested and
positive when you come to work (nurse, medical inpatient
care).
The nurses need to be able to leave their duties behind
and feel they are “finished” with them at the end of the
workday. This entails being able to leave their work behind,
both physically and mentally, so that it does not
accompany them home and affect their leisure time.
Work must not take over so that I can’t cope during
my spare time, and the same thing, leisure time
should be energizing and help me cope even better
at work, so that there’s a balance there. So that I feel
I have time for both in a good way (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
The situation at home can affect nurses if they do not
have enough energy for work. If there is an open, accepting
atmosphere in the working team, the nurses can obtain
support from colleagues and thus manage their
work situation more easily.
You have to feel good about your social life at
home. But it should be okay, if you have problems
at home, that you don’t have to forget them when
you come to work/…/What’s nice about my job is
that I can come here and tell somebody that I've
had a hard night or whatever it might be (nurse,
surgical outpatient care).
The nurses report a need to have work schedules that
enable a balance between work and leisure. When there
are opportunities to have individual schedules, the
chance of improving that balance is increased.
I’ve been working daytime for three years. We try to
reschedule as best we can, so that I work maybe
only ten evenings and as much daytime as possible.
It works very well at home, when my husband
works irregularly. Then, I’m at home if he works
early mornings. And when my husband works late
evenings, I’m the one who can pick up the children
and manage the practical things (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
Having a schedule that suits me and that lets me recover.
I have a little difficulty working evenings and
getting up early. I’ve changed my schedule, so I
work evenings before my day off (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
Collaboration and supportive leadership
Interacting with others is an important precondition for
managing the work situation. In interaction with others
in the team, the nurses have the opportunity to obtain
support, which helps them handle different care situations.
Nurses can also receive support and expert help
from other professionals, such as doctors, physiotherapists
and auxiliaries.
We work well together, we all work together, support
each other and discuss things. We cooperate really
well, I think. If there’s something you don’t know
how to do, then you’re not afraid to get help from
someone else, or to say "I can’t, but…" It challenges
you, I think that’s really important (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
For nurses to develop good manageability, clear leadership
is needed and, thus, a clear and strong manager is
required. Such leadership provides security and is a precondition
for the work team to function satisfactorily.
A good manager makes the whole team work; she
does almost everything for us, I almost said. She
plays around with the schedule/…/she makes a special
schedule for those who work until five and
some work every other weekend, then they have
special schedules. She really spends time and energy
on us, which makes people want to stay and enjoy
being on the ward, and you gain confidence (nurse,
psychiatric inpatient care).
Comprehensibility
Creating sustainable work situations for nurses means making
these situations comprehensible. Comprehensibility is
created when nurses can reflect on their role and the work
they do. Comprehensibility helps nurses understand that
they are needed and that they are providing good care for
their patients. The nurses need varying tasks so that their
work is not trivial and monotonous. Nurses develop and
learn when they face new challenges on a daily basis. In this
way, the professional role is constantly evolving. The nurses
are proud of their professional role, and their professional
role and function are valuable in the healthcare
organization.
Valued role and good work
The nurses understand that their professional role is of
great value owing to the knowledge they have and the
tasks they perform, which involve great responsibility.
They feel needed and that they are contributing something
important to patients’ health.
To me, my professional role means feeling I am
capable. Having sufficient knowledge so that I can
help people and have the energy to help when
someone is powerless. Being able to support that
person is a strong driving force for me (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
I’m thriving as a nurse, I enjoy meeting new people,
and I enjoy helping, doing something for someone
else, and as you can see... it usually turns out good
for them (nurse, surgical outpatient care).
Sometimes, it is only the feeling of doing something
that benefits someone else (the patient) that gives this
satisfaction.
Yes, being able to help and provide support gives
me satisfaction that it is working in all ways for our
patients (nurse, psychiatric inpatient care).
It is the best profession in the world. Being able to
help someone who needs it and to alleviate problems
or support or treat in the best way. That's what
I want to do (nurse, medical outpatient care).
Commitment and involvement
The nurses feel highly committed to their work, which
means they get deeply involved in their patients and try
to do that “little extra” for them. It is important for
nurses to not only carry out basic nursing, for example,
patient hygiene care, but also help patients by talking
with them and building trusting relationships.
I try to do that little extra for the patients, "to give
of oneself." If I get good treatment in return, it
means a lot to me. I hear someone say, you did
great, yes, it means a lot to me (nurse, medical outpatient
care).
At the same time, the nurses understand that they
cannot get too deeply involved in patients’ situations;
they must also think about themselves. This is an approach
they have developed over a long period of time
to prevent work-related stress and ill health.
You have to take care of yourself, not get involved in
everything. It’s important that you don’t do everything
yourself, that you can ask others for help and
know your limitations, I think that’s important. That
you don’t wear yourself out, because that helps nobody
if you have to stay at home sick just because
you’ve gotten too involved. Somehow, it’s about getting
involved in the right things (nurse, psychiatric
inpatient care).
Pride in professional role
The nurses are proud of their professional role and the
responsibility it entails. According to the nurses, their
expertise is also of great value, and this further
strengthens their pride.
I’m proud of my professional role. I think like this,
it’s a professional role, you get a salary and you get
to work, earn money, then you can manage your life
(nurse, medical inpatient care).
The nurses are proud of and have positive attitudes towards
the work they do and its effects.
I’m proud of what I and my colleagues do. What I
know we achieve and what we do for the patients.
I’m incredibly proud of this (nurse, medical outpatient
care).
Discussion
The aim of the present study was to explore and describe
factors explaining why hospital nurses remain in
the workplace. In the study, nurses expressed a strong
feeling of togetherness and pride in their profession,
even under conditions involving stress and high workload.
They highlight the importance of giving social support
to and getting support from colleagues and
patients, as this helps them manage daily life. They try
to do the best they can for their patients, which gives
them meaning in life and as professionals. The results
reveal that nurses perceive an SOC and that this is important
to their wellbeing.
Nurses’ engagement in patient care and work is consistent
with previous findings showing that nurses thrive
when they find meaning in their work [13]. Important to
job engagement are feeling an appetite for work and
vitality.
The nurses clearly describe a care-related driving
force that is the source of their great commitment to
their work. There are also clear altruistic elements involved,
such as wanting to contribute something extra
and not just performing tasks in a technical or routine
manner. This influences their experience of doing
something good and giving that ‘little extra,’ which is
largely based on personal commitment to patients’
needs. The nurses experience a strong affinity with
the working group and the collective, from which
they receive a great deal of support and energy, which
help them cope with everyday tasks.
Although the nurses in the present study report feeling
highly committed to their work and patients, they must
not get too involved. The nurses try to set limits – an
approach they have developed over a long period to prevent
work-related stress and ill health. In this way, they
identify strategies for managing stress as well as for creating
and maintaining an SOC [14]. Factors that can
maintain nurses’ good health in stressful work environments
are strengthening nurses’ professional pride, stressing
the great value of their knowledge and duties,
reinforcing their feeling of being needed and doing good,
increasing opportunities for them to work with nursing
duties such as talking with patients and building trusting
care relationships, and creating an SOC that promotes
meaningfulness, manageability and comprehensibility in
work. Previous research has stressed the importance of
job engagement, support from colleagues, personal characteristics
and self-knowledge [13].
The results demonstrate that to achieve good recovery,
nurses need to be able to leave work behind them, both
physically and mentally, after their workday. The nurse
manager can give nurses the opportunity to take some
time for reflection before the end of the workday [23].
Hence, reflection can serve as a sustainability tool, helping
nurses develop a “thought respite” and recovery,
which can in turn help them control their work situation,
provide extra energy to manage workloads and
build a defence against stress – all of which can be sustainable
in the long term.
According to the nurses in the present study, having a
reduced workload, varied tasks, individual schedules,
clear leadership and cooperation between nurses and
other professionals are factors that contribute to a good
working climate, SOC, and meaningfulness. These factors
are important for nurse managers to consider in
their efforts to support nurses’ meaningfulness in their
work and make nurses’ work manageable. The present
results are in line with findings from Furunes, Kaltveit
and Akerjordet’s study [24], which showed how nurse
managers can create a good working climate for nurses
by giving them opportunities to participate in decisionmaking,
develop their skills and provide social support;
such a working climate can encourage nurses to remain
in the job as valuable assets in the organization.
By raising awareness of the importance of the three
SOC dimensions of meaningfulness, manageability and
comprehensibility for nurses and nurse managers, we
can acquire an understanding of and knowledge about
these dimensions as well as develop skills that promote a
better workplace and work environment [25]. In one
study aimed at exploring how engaged people master
intensive work through coping and job crafting in a
salutogenic way, two strategies were identified – i.e.,
an active strategy and a cognitive strategy – involving
both coping and job crafting. The specifics of these
strategies determine whether salutogenic processes are
present [26]. Elements of the active strategy were prioritizing
work, working more hours, and seeking support
from management or colleagues ([25] , p. 634),
while attitudes, redefining thoughts about work, and
hoping for a better future were elements of the cognitive
strategy ([25] , p. 634).
Reflecting on the content of nursing practice and discussing
with colleagues how to manage their work situation
while providing good patient care involve
experience-based learning processes. This approach is a
form of work-integrated learning. In this way, the workplace
and the nurse manager give nurses as individuals
and as a professional group the opportunity to develop a
learning process together with others [27], i.e., an SOC,
which can also ensure that nurses develop experiencebased
knowledge generated through many years of
working with patients and teams at the same workplace.
This applies to their familiarity with technical skills and
the caring approach. Experience-based knowledge is also
an important basis for person-centred care and patient
safety. The working group is an important resource for
learning and sharing experiences; the nurse manager is
important in that he/she can implement new approaches
and strengthen the three SOC dimensions – meaningfulness,
manageability and comprehensibility – thus allowing
nurses to increase their job satisfaction and create a
sustainable working life.
To create a good workplace for nurses, the nurse manager
can develop action programmes for various activities,
such as individual schedules, skill development,
and cooperation between nurses and other professionals,
to reduce the workload and reinforce clear leadership.
The action programmes can promote a sustainable
working life and prevent nurses from terminating their
employment. In this way, nurses can develop
experience-based knowledge generated through many
years of working with patients and teams at the same
workplace. This also applies to familiarity with technical
skills and the caring approach. Moreover, experiencebased
knowledge is an important basis for personcentred
care and patient safety.
Strengths and limitations of the study
The most important strength of the present study is the
focus on the nurse perspective. The application of the
salutogenic theoretical model of health throughout the
various stages in the study was also a strength [11]. To
obtain a broad and comprehensive description of the
study aim, that is, to describe and explore salutary factors
promoting a sustainable working life for nurses,
nurses from various care units were selected. The researchers’
backgrounds (five of the six researchers are
nurses) may also be an advantage in understanding, analysing
and interpreting the success factors promoting a
sustainable working life for nurses. The authors are all
familiar with and deeply grounded in the salutogenic
theory of health, which facilitated both the inductive and
deductive analysis process.
There is always a certain degree of interpretation when
a researcher approaches a text, and therefore the text always
has different meanings; this is an important issue
regarding the trustworthiness of qualitative content analysis
results [20, 21]. An important limitation is that all
the participants were female nurses working in a hospital.
No nurses from community care were included. As
such, the finding might be limited to female nurses
working in hospitals in Sweden. Another limitation is
that no nurses who had already left the profession or
who might have been thinking about leaving were included.
The transferability of the present results to similar
settings in other countries is limited because health
care services are organized differently across settings
and countries.
Conclusion
The main findings of this study have shown the critical
importance of being in a meaningful, comprehensible
and manageable work context that supports nurses in
maintaining their professional identity. This can be
achieved by creating work environments where nurses
feel pride in their professional roles in an organization
that supports collaboration and togetherness with colleagues
and leaders. An important prerequisite is to feel
involved and have opportunities to influence their work
situation.