Background
There are various drivers to promote innovation in clinical
education for nursing students. In one jurisdiction,
the international health workforce shortage projections
[1] were a trigger for innovation. University leaders have
increased intakes into baccalaureate nursing programs to
meet workforce demand [1]. These higher student enrolments
are also associated with increased numbers of
new graduates, who require transition support upon entering
the workforce [2].
However, a key challenge to the supply of undergraduate
nursing students is difficulty obtaining sufficient clinical
placements [3]. To further complicate this situation,
health agencies are experiencing higher patient acuity
and shorter lengths of stay [4], which potentially puts
pressure on staff and supervision capacity. These factors
challenge higher education providers and health services
to co-develop clinical education models that increase
placement capacity without adversely affecting learning
quality and care of health service consumers.
Bachelor of Nursing (BN) curricula are also increasingly
based upon constructivist approaches to learning that assume
that learners process new knowledge by relating it
to that acquired in previous experiences, and make meaning
of new information through social interactions [5, 6].
While nursing students in bachelor’s degrees have been
supernumerary on clinical placement – ie., extra to standard
ward staffing and not allocated a patient load [7] -
models that embed students as part of the team develop
the workplace as a community of practice, and provide
opportunities to make meaning in social collaboration
with others, thus improving learning [8].
Increasing the social capital of clinical contexts by ‘creating
connections, enhancing relationships and fostering
knowledge sharing’ has demonstrated success in increasing
placement numbers and student learning opportunities
during clinical placement [9]. In one jurisdiction,
baccalaureate students were refigured from supernumerary
to members of the nursing team, distributed across
hospital wards and community-based services. Clinical
learning facilitators, called Entry to Practice (E2P) facilitators,
supported the learning requirements for students
and new graduates across the health service. This study
describes the evaluation of the acceptability of this innovative
approach, called the Collaborative Clusters
Education Model (CCEM).
Various clinical placement models are utilised in nursing
education [10]. For example, some schools employ
clinical facilitators (usually external to the host unit)
who work with students, usually on a 1:8 ratio, to assist
and assess their learning. The facilitator is supernumerary
- additional to the standard nursing workforce for
the unit/ward. In other models, students are partnered
directly with Registered Nurses (RNs) who are providing
patient care over a number of shifts. Variations are tailored
to suit specific industry provisions [10]. Facilitator
model limitations include a potential lack of clinical expertise
in a specialty area and staffing and cost restrictions
associated with the standard 1:8 facilitator to
student ratio, and limitations of models where wardbased
RNs support student learning include RNs’ lack of
educational expertise, and situations in which work
overtakes learning [11].
Another educational model, the Dedicated Education
Unit (DEU) is emerging [10]. The DEU - established in
Australia and now used internationally [12] - overcomes
the key limitations of these models by incorporating the
best elements of both [12]. In the DEU, a clinical facilitator
works with ward-based RNs to develop their ability
to facilitate learning while removing the restrictive staff
student ratio [13]. The ward-based RNs are clinical experts
while facilitators understand educational best practice
to guide ward-based RNs help students learn.
Principles of the DEU align with best clinical learning
practice through encouraging the entire clinical nursing
team to engage students in learning, while assigning specific
academic responsibilities, such as assessment, to a
designated person from the education facility [14]. However,
the DEU was developed for integrated placements
in which students attend placement several days per
week over the teaching semester, while the majority of
Australian nursing students complete block placements,
e.g., full time placements for shorter set periods.
Until 2015, our health service employed traditional
clinical education models that utilised a 1:8 ratio. Clinical
facilitators were health service staff, employed in the
facilitator role. Training for the clinical facilitators was
shared between the university and health service.
In 2013 and 2014, an integrated practice model,
where 60 year-three nursing students completed a roster
of continuous shifts linked to nominated wardbased
RNs was trialled. Clinical facilitators supported
the RNs and students without a 1:8 ratio of facilitators
to students. This trial was the impetus for changing
the focus of student placement support to a new
model, more like the DEU.
The collaborative clusters education model
The CCEM, was adapted from the DEU to incorporate
a block placement design. In the CCEM, the facilitator
continues to be a health service employee,
which is a key difference from the DEU, where the
facilitator is usually a university employee. The facilitator
is assigned to several clinical wards/units and
oversees up to 16 students and/or new graduates
across those wards concurrently, thus the use of the
term ‘cluster’ in relation to the model (Fig. 1).

More than one clinical facilitator may share responsibility
for students’ learning depending on shifts. The
clinical facilitators work closely with ward-based RNs. In
terms of student performance, the clinical facilitators liaise
with academic subject convenors and RNs, as well
as with each other to monitor each student’s experience.
Hence the use of the term ‘collaborative’ in relation to
the model.
The clinical facilitator supports RNs to engage with
students and new graduates assimilating into the clinical
setting, providing guidance to RNs on appropriate learning
activities. Consistent with earlier models, the need
for RNs to support others’ learning is an important professional
responsibility [15] in the CCEM. In addition to
guiding RNs, the clinical facilitator conducts formative
and summative assessment of learners, and provides
feedback on their performance, and documents learner
achievements. The clinical facilitator’s expertise is
grounded in work-based learning rather than specialist
clinical expertise.
In the CCEM, the responsibility of the academic staff
from the university is to: review and approve the clinical
facilitator’s assessment of students’ performance using a
standard Clinical Assessment Tool; assign a course
grade; and manage any student performance issues. For
example, students who are not meeting performance
standards are provided with mid placement feedback
and a ‘formative review’ in which their performance is
discussed with the academic subject convenor, and a
learning contract is developed to guide future performance.
For more information on the model, see [16]. To
make the CCEM facilitators easily identifiable to students,
new graduates and staff, they wear a different uniform
and are called Entry to Practice (E2P) facilitators.
The CCEM was implemented in the health service in
2015 over a three-month period.
The transition to the CCEM required shifting students’
and RNs’ expectations about access to learning support,
which is acknowledged as challenging [17]. A process involving
key stakeholders was implemented to bring
about this change. A reference group, consisting of researchers,
clinicians, educators and students, provided
governance of the project, including identification of implementation
activities. Preparations included briefings
for Nurse Unit Managers and masterclasses for the E2P
facilitators on how to work within the model. Earlier
work established that the CCEM was feasible [15]. Understanding
stakeholder acceptability of the model to
support undergraduate nursing student learning is
critical to sustainability [18].
Methods
Design
This study used a convergent parallel mixed methods
design that included a survey and a descriptive qualitative
approach [19]. The convergent design allows the
collection of different, but complementary data on the
same topic to be analysed during the same phase of the
research process, and then merges the results into an
overall interpretation [19]. The topic for this research
was the acceptability of the CCEM for stakeholders,
through examining their experiences of the facilitation
of their learning within the model and their perceptions
of factors that enhanced or created barriers to successful
implementation of the model.
Participants and recruitment
The study was set in a tertiary level Australian health
service in 2015 following initial implementation of the
model. Participants were aged 17–70 years and included
identified stakeholders: undergraduate Bachelor of Nursing
students, new graduates, ward-based RNs, E2P facilitators,
and academics who convened the students’
clinical courses whilst on placement. The data sources
for the study are outlined in Fig. 2.
Students were invited by email to complete an anonymous
online questionnaire. New graduates and
ward-based RNs were invited by flyer to participate in
an interview. The E2P facilitators were provided with
information at a scheduled workshop. Nurse
academics were invited to participate in interviews via
email. All were provided with an information sheet
and consent form.
Data collection
The student questionnaire was the standard postplacement
survey distributed to students who had completed
a placement by the University’s Professional Practice
Office within 2 weeks of placement completion
(supplementary file). It had 19 items on a 5-point Likert
scale (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree) focused
on students’ perceptions of the qualities and behaviours
of the E2P facilitators (14 items) and ward-based RNs (5
items) supporting them. Within the survey, students
were also invited to respond to three open-ended questions
about their experience including what the
strengths of their facilitators were, what were areas for
improvement and other comments they had about the
facilitation of the placement.
New graduates, RNs, E2P facilitators, and academics
were interviewed individually for approximately 30 min
and invited to describe how they participated in the
CCEM, their experiences of learning, or supporting learning,
and their perceptions of factors that enhanced, or
were barriers to, CCEM implementation. Interviews were
conducted by a research assistant or team member (LG),
and held by telephone or in the participant’s workplace as
per the participant’s preference. The interviews were digitally
audio-recorded and professionally transcribed.
Data analysis
For the student survey, descriptive statistics were calculated
for fixed response questions using IBM SPSS Statistics
version 23. Students with missing data were
excluded from the analyses. A comparison of means for
second and third year students using an independent
samples t-test demonstrated no significant differences
(p = 0.142–0.682) between year level groups, so the data
were pooled for the final analysis. Scale reliability was
determined using Cronbach’s alpha.
Thematic analysis was used for the students’ openended
survey comments and all of the interview data.
This involved becoming familiar with the data through
re-reading transcripts, using a systematic process to code
data, clustering codes into named themes, reviewing
these, and reporting themes along with salient quotes
[20]. The student comments and new graduate interviews
were coded and thematically analysed separately
and then the findings were combined to arrive at overall
themes from the learner perspective.
The interview data from the RNs, E2P facilitators and
academic nurses were analysed as a group with shared
experience of supporting student learning in the workplace.
Thematic analysis, as described in the previous
section, was used. Trustworthiness of the findings was
confirmed through the selection of participants with experience
in the CCEM, rich variation in perspectives
provided by a relatively diverse sample of participants
and use of data saturation for the interview data [21].
Data saturation occurred when no new themes appeared.
Themes were derived by two researchers independently,
which were then discussed to determine a final list. A
stakeholder reference group reviewed processes and
findings to encourage researcher reflexivity.
The results of the data produced by each stakeholder
group was then merged to arrive at an understanding of
stakeholders’ acceptability of the model. To do this, data
was initially presented to the stakeholder reference
group, who discussed the data, and together with researchers,
identified areas of convergence, divergence,
and relatedness in order to produce a more complete
understanding [19].
Ethics approval
Ethics approval was obtained from the health service
(15/QGC/152) and university (NRS/30/15/HREC) Human
Research Ethics Committees. Interview participants
provided informed written consent. Confidentiality was
assured through de-identifying transcripts. Study data
are held in secure electronic files. Completion of the anonymous
online survey was considered consent.
Results
The survey was completed by 134 of 990 nursing students
placed in the health service during the study
period (response rate 13.5%): 85 were in the second year
and 49 in the third year of their three-year Bachelor of
Nursing program. The majority were aged 18–25
(56.7%). One hundred and thirteen Bachelor of Nursing
students provided responses to open ended questions on
placement facilitation. Five new graduates, seven E2P facilitators,
four ward-based RNs, and three nurse academics
participated in interviews.
Student and new graduate responses
Scale reliability ranged from 0.77–0.90. Students rated
the effectiveness of their E2P facilitators highly (4.43/5 ±
0.75) and were highly satisfied with the behaviour and
qualities of the ward-based RNs (Table 1) and E2P facilitators
(Tables 1 and 2).
Students’ open-ended survey comments and new
graduate interview findings resonated with each other,
with both data sets grouped into three areas: ‘access to
learning’; ‘source of support’, and ‘lack of clarity about
facilitation.’
Access to learning
Both students (SN) and new graduates (NG) indicated
that the model provided good learning opportunities,
with access to authentic experiences. For example:
‘I had a great experience with all staff and facilitators
and…have learned a lot while on placement’
(SN86)
‘[it provided a] chance to work with a number of
different nurses…that was very good because you
got to see different styles of nursing’ (NG7)
Source of support
Views on the level of learning support differed across
the two groups. For example, students were more likely
to report the absence of E2P facilitators in comments
such as:
‘more support from the [E2P] facilitators would be
good. I think they are too busy with too many
students and some more practical hands on with a
facilitator would be better’ (SN 86).
New graduates largely felt well supported by the E2P
facilitators, and emphasised the support from ward
nurses:
‘The [E2P] facilitators…give you your own chance
to learn and then there’s support if you need it, and
if they think that you’re obviously not doing as well
as what you could be, they’re there to tell you that
and talk you through things and give you feedback
and advice to fix anything so I think there would
just be a perfect amount of support’ (NG4)
Lack of clarity about facilitation
Students appeared to be confounded by the E2P teams
and to seek one person to be ‘their facilitator’ as per previous
models. This was manifest in comments such as:
‘it was a draining experience not knowing who was
the actual [E2P] facilitator’ (SN34).
In summary, the learning was positive for both students
and new graduates, but students appeared to be
more focused on support from E2P facilitators and new
graduates more focused on support from the ward-based
RNs. The transition to multiple E2P facilitators was confusing
for students.
Academics, RNs and E2P facilitators
Thematic analysis of the interviews with ward-based RNs,
E2P facilitators, and academics revealed three main themes:
1) students’ and new graduates’ integration into the workplace
can promote learning; 2) tensions arise in new ways to
approach performance assessment; and 3) aligning expectations
requires high levels of communication.
Students’ and new graduates’ integration into the
workplace can promote learning
Ward-based RNs valued the multiple perspectives that
students would learn by working with different staff and
indicated that the CCEM potentially reduced the impacts
of personality clashes that arose in traditional
supervisory relationships. Although some expressed concern
about the impacts of a lack of continuous facilitator
supervision:
‘they get a variety [of E2Ps]…so if there’s a personality
clash with a facilitator and a student there isn’t
that issue because you've got quite a few that cover
the wards’ (RN1)
‘With the old model…if things were quite busy on
the ward the facilitator would come up and spend a
bit more time with the students to work on any
needs…I worry that the students aren’t getting the
support in that sense because the facilitator does
have so many students to cover…[some may] ‘slip
through the cracks’ (RN1)
E2P facilitators and academic nurses agreed that the
model encouraged greater integration of learners into
the ward culture, developing the student-RN relationship
and students’ problem-solving and independence:
‘With the new model [learners] integrate into the
ward much, much better. They become part of the
team because you’re not on the floor all the time
with nurses [saying] ‘your facilitator can do that
with you’…now the unit staff are taking ownership…
I think it’s a better experience for [learners] in
that they…actually become part of that unit…they
have to develop their problem-solving skills in that
situation a lot better than the old model where you
are problem-solving for them a lot’ (E2P7)
‘it definitely fosters the students to be independent,
and to seek their own learning opportunities’ (E2P5)
[Third years] ‘felt that they were becoming part of
the team and that they could troubleshoot and communicate
with other staff and felt comfortable about
that … (Academic Nurse (AN) 1)
However, this was also identified as an area of concern
for those students who may not be strong communicators
or who are earlier in their career trajectory, such as
second year students:
‘… felt that those who weren’t as confident … would
have difficulty in asking for help from anyone else
but their facilitator, so they were thinking it would
be more difficult for the second years’ (AN1).
Tensions arise in new ways to approach assessment of
performance
E2P facilitators identified other benefits with the CCEM,
including better cover for sick leave, a better relationship
with ward-based RNs, and broadening their perspectives
of student performance through sharing feedback during
handover:
‘you’ve got a lot of people working with the same
students, so you’ve got different perspectives of how
that…group of students are performing’ (E2P2)
There were continuities in how student learning was
facilitated such as ‘giving feedback…[investigating] before
you give that feedback [to moderate it]…timekeeper
for sick leave…written assessments…troubleshooting issues…
role model and mentor’, and encouraging student
reflection (E2P5); ‘helping the buddies [RNs], being able
to educate and giving them support’ (E2P2), ‘building
those relationships with…all the staff’, ‘identifying issues
quickly (E2P6); and ‘[supporting] the students when they
need it clinically and emotionally’ (E2P3).
However, there were also tensions, particularly in relation
to the assessment of student performance such as:
trying to find students and the RNs supporting them
(E2P1, E2P6), feeling rushed (E2P1, E2P4), and insufficient
time to gather enough information to inform assessment
(E2P1, E2P5, E2P 6, E2P7). Academics were
also concerned about assessment:
‘the [Clinical Assessment Tools] that came back…[-
had] generic comments…I really want to make sure
that [students are] clinically sound and I can’t do
that when the comments are just not there’ (AN3).
In summary, while learning appeared to be enhanced
by the CCEM, the tensions associated with multiple staff
and perspectives, particularly around processes for providing
feedback on performance (assessment), required
further development.
Aligning expectations requires high levels of
communication
Good communication and role delineation were considered
integral to the success of the model, for example:
‘constantly keeping that communication line open
with those key people in that area, [which is] pivotal...
in making that student’s clinical placement a
positive experience just by negotiating and ensuring
that they’re learning what they need to learn’ (E2P7)
‘It’s important that the [ward-based RNs] understand
their education role more effectively…[they
think] if the students [or new grads] are getting on
with it and look like they are doing it, they must be
great. But there’s not that in depth asking of questions
or delving a little bit more to see whether or
not that is the case’ (E2P1)
‘Maybe we need to have a bit more discussion on
what is expected [regarding] whether you see every
student every shift’ (E2P1)
Processes for communication across the stakeholder
groups were negotiated through the reference group activities
and discussions. However, further communication
appeared to be required. For example, academic
nurses noted that third year students were expecting the
supervisory model they had previously experienced, and
this was potentially related to insufficient communication
about the changes:
‘I [had] complaints from students because they
didn’t understand why they couldn’t actually get
their [E2P] facilitators as often and now I understand
that they should not be looking to their facilitators
as much for the education as their [wardbased
RN], but that wasn’t the understanding then
when that class was on [placement]’ (AN3)
Academics continued to monitor students on
placement. The academics reported feeling frustration
as they adjusted to the model. For example,
having more than one E2P facilitator confounded
communication:
‘it’s very frustrating from my end trying to contact
the people who are looking after my students’
(AN3)
As the model was transitioning, E2P facilitators adjusted
as well, stressing their perception that their role is
now educational support and liaison rather than clinical
expert:
‘I think someone from general could go to mental
health and step into the role if they had to in
this model. It’s the nurses who are the specialists
in that area…so they do the teaching, whereas
this role now is more liaising and anyone can do
that if they’ve got the skills that they need for
that, so I think the role is better’ (E2P3)
In summary, the transition to the CCEM required
alignment of stakeholder expectations and the communication
strategies to achieve alignment were inadequate
to support the transition.
The students who responded to the survey strongly
agreed that the E2P facilitators supported their learning
and scored E2Ps and ward-based RNs highly on professionalism,
currency of knowledge, flexibility, and willingness
to provide feedback. For new graduates, the
opportunity to work with multiple nurses with intermittent
E2P facilitator support provided structured support
and an opportunity to learn about different styles of
nursing. However, students appeared to prefer, and expected,
supervision from one E2P facilitator whereas
new graduates preferred learning from the staff. The acceptability
of the CCEM for nursing students appeared
limited by their preference for a closer relationship with
a single E2P facilitator.
Academics, E2P facilitators and RNs appeared to find
the model acceptable, noting that improved communication
of expectations is required. They valued the increased
independence of more senior students and new
graduates in their learning, noting that more junior students
may require additional support. Although there
was general agreement that learner exposure to multiple
perspectives is a strength of the model, processes to
communicate about individual learner performance were
confounded by multiple stakeholders and required the
establishment of clear lines of communication in order
to sustain the model.
Discussion
This research focused on the acceptability of the CCEM
during implementation to determine what may still be
required for sustainability of the CCEM program.
The students who responded to the survey valued the
roles of the E2P facilitator and RNs, highly ranking professionalism,
knowledge, flexibility and feedback. These
highly ranked behaviours are recognised as important to
engage students in workplace learning [22]. The CCEM
appears to be acceptable in terms of access to meaningful
learning experiences.
New graduates found the model acceptable, with the
opportunity to work with a variety of staff valued. This
is consistent with nurse transition research that suggests
they are working to find their professional selves, distinguish
themselves from others and be accepted by the
professional culture in the first 4 months [23].
The integration of students and new graduates into
the ward culture occurred relatively easily during the
transition to the CCEM. This experience is similar to
the introduction of the DEU model as increased exposure
provides greater learning opportunities [24].
New graduates preferred learning from the staff,
however, students expressed a preference for continuous
support from a single facilitator. Further work is
required to determine whether this preference is related
to poor communication about the changed
model, concerns about assessment, specifically who
will assess the student’s performance, or a genuine
preference for a single person to provide consistent
feedback.
Assessment of student performance emerged as a critical
area for further development. The lack of a consistent
E2P or ward-based RN was a source of concern for
students and academic nurses. Clear roles, responsibilities
and patterns of communication are required in
order to achieve sustained acceptability of the CCEM.
An unexpected benefit in the assessment process was
the development of E2Ps as assessors through sharing
their perceptions of student performance within their
teams. The value of this form of moderation and skill
development in assessment of students’ clinical performance
requires further investigation.
Acceptability of the model was not achieved for academic
nurses, who were disappointed with the generic
information provided on student clinical performance
assessment instruments. To ensure high quality nursing
graduates, further research into how to enhance clinical
assessment, and in particular providing specific information
about areas for development is required. Practical
developments may include processes for gathering data
on student performance from ward-based RNs, collating
data in a way that can be accessed by multiple E2P facilitators,
or simply be a lack of clarity about accountability
for specific student assessments between facilitators. Determining
the usefulness of standardised instruments,
with relatively strong reliability and validity, such as the
Australian Nursing Standards Assessment Tool [25], in
this model is required.
Lack of alignment between stakeholder expectations
and what the model provided was a key challenge to acceptability.
Students were briefly introduced to the
model in their orientation but were expecting to work
more closely with a single facilitator as they had done
previously. The lack of E2P facilitator continuity is a risk
to acceptability as poor continuity is a potential stressor
[26] and must be addressed if the CCEM is to be
sustained.
While there were new opportunities for communication
between E2P facilitators and ward-based RNs, communication
between stakeholders was often inadequate,
potentially reducing acceptability. Communication can
be improved through an established communication
plan including:
1) a poster with the photos and names of E2P
facilitators mounted in wards;
2) a shared folder so that data collected from direct
observation and RN reports can be recorded and
reviewed by facilitator teams;
3) regular meetings between E2P teams to discuss
student progress, and plan and evaluate
development activities for ward-based RNs supporting
students.
In regard to stakeholder expectations, the E2P facilitators
were clear about their role but this clarity was not
shared by other stakeholders. In particular, the role of
the ward-based RN was unclear. To improve acceptability,
it will be important to build on the foundational relationship
between E2P facilitators and ward-based RNs.
E2P facilitators can work with nursing teams to identify
appropriate nursing activities in their specific health service
settings. Identifying activities for students at different
stages can support scaffolded learning, a key aim for
clinical placement [27]. Other strategies are to encourage
RNs supporting students to attend regular workshops
on giving and receiving feedback, work-based
pedagogies, and clinical leadership. Workshops or masterclasses
for E2P facilitators can also focus on skills
such as coach for RNs to support student learning as
part of their usual work practices [28].
Of note, the RNs preferred the E2P facilitator to
supervise student practice, particularly when the workload
was high. Further training for ward staff on how to
incorporate students into their teams and delegate appropriate
nursing responsibilities to enhance learning, is
required to augment acceptability.
Limitations
There were limitations to this study. Merging results of
quantitative and qualitative data in a meaningful way
can be challenging. This study was purposefully designed
with a focus on the same concept, learners in the workplace,
which is acknowledged as important in convergent
designs [19]. Using experienced researchers is critical in
this design [19]. Data analysis was supervised by doctorally
prepared and experienced researchers (TM quantitative;
LG qualitative).
While survey responses were anonymous, research indicates
that responses to both surveys and interviews
may be subject to social desirability response bias [29],
which may skew results. Historically, the student response
to the clinical experience survey is usually
around 15–25%, thus the low response rate was not surprising.
To manage our expectation of a low response,
we also considered the open-ended comments and included
interviews with new graduates.
While the sample for the qualitative component was
small (n = 19), Braun and Clarke [30], suggest that 5–15
participants is adequate for a small qualitative study, and
qualitative studies do not aim for generalisability. Using
multiple data sources, including multiple stakeholders in
the CCEM provided a rich source of data that may address
these limitations to some extent, although further
research with students and new graduate nurses in this
model is required to assure acceptability in the future
and to determine whether these results could be meaningful
for other health services.
Conclusions
The CCEM was designed to be like a DEU, where students
learn by engagement in authentic clinical practice.
While the E2P facilitators described their role as supporting
ward-based RNs to increase their skills in facilitating
student learning from practice, continued development of
their role in developing their allocated wards as learning
units is needed, including the identification of suitable
cases and learning strategies, and mastery of the process
of continuous feedback on performance to ensure sustained
acceptability. The CCEM provides an opportunity
to gain the benefits for student learning that are found in
a DEU while providing for block placements, such as student
engagement in authentic work as part of a team, and
development of work-based pedagogies. Given a relatively
short implementation timeframe, initial evaluation focused
on acceptability as this was critical to sustainability. The
rapid transition did contribute to communication deficits
that require continued monitoring for improvement. For
others interested in this model, we recommend a good
communication plan, and attending to formal structures
and processes between stakeholder groups. Future evaluations
will include the appropriateness of the model for
specific areas, what elements enhance adoption, fidelity of
the model in different settings, as well as cost and
sustainability.