Background
People with a body mass index (BMI) greater than 30
have a higher risk of a range of illnesses, such as heart
disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) [1]. In high
income countries with an Indigenous population who, as
a result of colonisation, have been marginalised – such
as in the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(NZ) – the Indigenous people have a higher prevalence
of obesity than the dominant European population
[2]. In 2019, Māori and NZ-resident Pacific Island adults
were over-represented among people with obesity compared
to their counterpart groups (Māori versus non-
Māori by 1.8 times; and Pacific versus non-Pacific by 2.5
times) [3].
A range of interventions, from policy to individual
treatment, are required to tackle this disparity. Interventions
that are aimed at helping individuals from Māori
and Pacific populations to lose weight are urgently
needed. It has been proposed that health interventions
for Indigenous peoples could be more attractive and effective
if they are based on Indigenous theoretical frameworks
[4]. As early as 1989, research indicated that a
weight-loss competition may be a suitable strategy for
Indigenous people [5]. There has been a call to adopt a
group-focused approach to weight loss for Indigenous
people in America, so as to: “(a) build and reinforce social
cohesion and collective efficacy, (b) use the motivating
force of friendly competition, and (c) aspire to
change local norms and policies through assuring high
visibility of alternate behaviors and engaging formal and
informal leaders” [6 , p 224]. Group weight-loss competitions,
including social media elements, have grown in
popularity in recent years [7–9] with some finding efficacy
for some participants [10].
Like Native Americans [6], Māori and Pacific people
are tribal groups with a history of friendly inter-tribal rivalry
and competition [11–13]. Māori and Pacific people
have high participation rates in organised competitions
and events [14], such as regional and national cultural
performing arts competitions [15] and traditional sports
such as kilikiti (a Samoan form of cricket), which incorporate
competitiveness with cultural elements [16, 17].
One successful culturally-based intervention in NZ
was a team quit-smoking competition called WERO
[11]. WERO (Whānau [family] End smoking Regional
whānau Ora [health] challenge) combined a number of
culturally salient components: commitment-to-thegroup
and between-group competition and financial incentives,
which were donated to a nominated charity.
The competition was backed up with pharmacological
treatments for cessation, cognitive behavioural treatment
delivered via an interactive website and locally-based
health providers. The WERO intervention achieved a
high biochemically verified quit rate of 36% at three
months, which represented the potential to substantially
reduce smoking for an important NZ population group.
Although the WERO intervention was successful for
helping Māori and Pacific people to stop smoking, it had
not been tested for changing other health-related
behaviours, such as weight loss. Therefore, the current
research aimed to test if a culturally- and communitybased
team intervention (called Reducing Weight
through Eating Healthy and Increasing activity (WEHI)
modelled on the WERO intervention), might be effective
in helping NZ Māori and Pacific people to lose weight
by improving healthy eating behaviours and increasing
physical activity of teams. This paper reports on the
main outcome of weight loss.
Methods
A quasi-experimental trial comparing weight-related anthropometric
changes following a six months intervention
against a control group receiving no intervention,
with a follow-up at 12 months was planned. The rationale
and method for the WEHI trial are described in detail
elsewhere [18]. This section briefly describes the
methodology.
Participants and sample size
Three distinctly different geographical regions in NZ
were selected for recruitment: an urban Māori population
(Palmerston North), a small town/rural Māori
population (Northland) and a Pacific Island community
in a major NZ city (Auckland). Seven teams of seven
members for each region (total N = 147) were recruited
for the intervention. We planned to recruit 150 wait list
control participants, who did not receive any intervention
(see below).
Eligibility and exclusion criteria
The eligibility criteria were Māori or Pacific people, aged
16 years of age and above, having a body mass index
(BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2, and being at risk of or having developed
T2DM or cardiovascular disease (CVD). People
who were of any other ethnicity, younger than 16 years,
pregnant or were breastfeeding and had type 1 diabetes
were excluded. To control for potentially confounding
factors, using nicotine from any source (a known appetite
suppressant [19]) or smoking cannabis (with debated
effects on weight [20]) were additional exclusion
parameters.
Recruitment
The intervention group was purposively recruited by
Māori and Pacific health providers. They used convenience
sampling to find participants, advertising through
their existing networks to staff and in their communities.
Though recruitment of intervention and control participants
occurred concurrently, recruitment for control
participants was done over an extended time period
(four months). Potential participants who declined the
intervention were invited to enrol as a control participant,
or they responded directly to invites to be a control
participant. In lieu of receiving the intervention,
control participants were offered one entry in a prize
draw (one per region) for petrol vouchers (up to $50) for
completing a questionnaire at baseline, six-month
follow-up and 12-month follow-up.
Intervention
The WEHI intervention included four main components:
group support, competition, financial incentives
and Internet-delivered education and support. Teams
were to meet regularly to facilitate their completion of
as many of the competition’s weekly and nine daily challenges
as they could to amass points. The activities were
designed to prompt physical activity, increase consumption
of vegetables, reduce consumption of added-sugar
drinks and foods, and encourage retention in the competition
(see Glover et al. [21] for a fuller description and
evaluation). Each team had seven members and were
self-directing, however, they could receive support from
regional intervention workers. Support was also provided
via the intervention website which provided weight-loss
tips and answers to questions on, for example, staying
motivated, making choices and increasing physical activity.
Each team also had a dedicated team page where
they could post photos, recipes and comments. This was
also publicly visible as was a competition scoreboard displaying
the progress of each team. In each region, three
cash prizes were offered for: the greatest progress at two
months (NZ$1000), greatest progress at four months
(NZ$1000) and greatest progress at six months
(NZ$3000). Progress was based on the number of team
members who had lost ≥4 kg weight in the preceding
two months plus the number of team members who had
lost ≥3 cm in waist circumference during the same
period, plus the team’s position on the competition
scoreboard, which was calculated by tracking team participation
and completion of daily and weekly challenges.
The prizes were paid to the team’s nominated charity or
community organisation.
Measures
Anthropometric measurements (height, weight and waist
circumference) of all participants were performed by the
researchers or research assistants. The equipment used
for measurements were a SECA813 digital floor scale
[22], a SECA portable stadiometer height rod [23] and a
SECA ergonomic girth measuring tape [24]. Based on
those measures BMI was calculated as (weight in kilograms
(kg) / (height meter (m)2)).
Questionnaires (see supplementary file) were selfadministered
at baseline, 6 months and 12 months to
measure changes in Ministry of Health Eating and Activity
Guidelines [25] eating goals, such as eating two servings
of fruit a day, activity levels, perceived acceptability
of WEHI. Other questions at baseline asked about previous
use of dieting/weight-loss programmes, demographic
characteristics and food security. In addition to
food security, being a holder of a community services
card was used as a proxy indicator of socioeconomic status.
Community services cards enable people on low incomes
to receive discounts, for instance on their
healthcare and cost of medications. The questions were
drawn or adapted from other surveys, such as the Adult
Nutrition Survey, Ministry of Health adult health survey,
food security index and relevant literature. The questionnaire
was pilot tested with six Māori and Pacific
people with BMI > 30 from among the researchers’
networks.
Outcomes
The primary outcome was mean weight loss at sixmonth
follow-up. Secondary outcomes included the proportion
of participants losing at least 5 and 10% of baseline
weight, change in waist circumference and BMI at
six-month follow-up. We also looked at weight-loss outcomes
in the intervention group at 12-month follow-up.
Data analysis
A simple descriptive analysis, calculating counts and percentages,
was performed on ordinal data variables. Baseline
weight, waist circumference and BMI were not
normally distributed and so non-parametric tests were
used to examine differences between groups. Where indicated,
additional analyses were calculated for subcategories.
For continuous variables, mean, standard
deviation and maximum and minimum values were calculated.
Differences between groups were compared
using an univariate general linear model, adjusting for
baseline body weight. To assess differences in the proportion
of baseline body weight lost, a chi-square test
was used. An intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis was used.
We used a baseline-observation-carried-forward-analysis
for those who were lost to follow-up. We also undertook
a complete-case analysis. To calculate change in eating
behaviour a non-parametric Related-Samples Wilcoxon
Signed Rank Test was performed to detect if there was a
significant difference (p < 0.05) between eating behaviour
at baseline versus six months. All analyses were undertaken
using IBM SPSS.
Ethics
This study was approved by the NZ Ministry of Health’s
Northern B Health and Disability Ethics Committee (16/
NTB/101).
Results
A total of 181 people expressed an interest in joining the
study, but 12 decided to not participate leaving 140 in
the intervention group and 29 in the control group. Participants
in the intervention group were divided into 20
groups (18 groups of 7, 1 of 6 and 1 of 8). Six participants
withdrew from the study and two never started,
leaving 132 and 29 participants in the intervention and
control groups, respectively. The demographics and
baseline anthropomorphic data are given in Table 1.
Retention rates were low, with only 52 and 27% of participants
recruited into the intervention group being
available for follow-up at six and 12 months, respectively.
The study struggled to recruit participants for the control
group, and follow-up of these participants was difficult.
An initial 29 control participants were recruited
and of those 55% (N = 16) were still in the study at six
months. Due to the high proportion lost to follow-up at
six months and a small sample, 12-month follow-up of
the control group was not conducted. Too few of the
intervention group remained at the 12-month follow-up
to conduct analysis of within group weight-loss difference.
Thus, analysis of weight-loss is restricted to the 6-
month follow-up data.
Weight loss at 6months of intervention
The intervention group lost more weight than the control
group, in both the ITT and complete-case analyses
and the average weight loss from baseline was statistically
significant in the intervention group. However, the
differences between groups were not statistically significant
(see Table 2). A slightly higher proportion of
participants in the intervention group lost at least 5%
baseline body weight, but these differences were not statistically
significant (see Table 3).
Eating behaviour
Changes in eating behaviours were not assessed in the
control group due to missing data and small sample size.
Table 4 summarises the change in selected eating behaviours
that the intervention was designed to change
among the intervention participants. The average is
shown for the whole group, for whom data existed, at
each data collection point. Changes were more likely to
be detected at the end of the competition (at six
months) as opposed to at 12 months (data not shown)
follow-up. Significant changes between intervention
group behaviour at baseline and at six months were
found for several behaviours the Ministry of Health Eating
and Activity Guidelines for New Zealand Adults (25)
provides advice on. These included: increased servings
of fruit per day consumed, increased days per week consuming
vegetables, increased times eating low fat meals
per week and increased quantity of unflavoured water
consumed per day. Reductions were seen in portions of
fat used on bread or added to meals, frequency of consuming
sugar-sweetened drinks and eating sweets, and
fast foods per week.
Discussion
The WEHI intervention appeared to promote change in
eating behaviour but these changes did not result in any
significant change in body weight at six months, compared
to participants (controls) who received no intervention.
There were trends toward a reduction in waist
circumference for the Māori and Pacific groups in this
study.
Two major limitations of this study were the small size
of the control group and high rates of attrition. Both of
these factors limited the power of the analyses to evaluate
the effect of the WEHI trial. The lack of intervention
for control participants was a disincentive to enrol limiting
participation in the study. Further, the control
participants had, on average, a lower BMI and proportionately
higher educational levels (found to attenuate
weight loss programme attrition [26]). This limited the
robustness of comparisons that could be made between
the intervention and control participants.
The current trial suffered from average attrition which
is not uncommon for weight-loss interventions with the
rate of attrition having been found to vary as much as
10–80% [26]. Furthermore, recruiting and retaining Indigenous
people in controlled trials is known to be difficult
[27]. Despite following recommendations from the
literature (see Glover et al. [18]), recruitment of control
participants and retention for both intervention and
control participants were a problem for this study. One
potential reason for the attrition was that two providers
recruited internally to their organisations. Therefore,
staff may have felt compelled to participate, but were
not actually motivated to lose weight or to participate in
the intervention. Unfortunately, motivation to lose
weight was not measured at screening or baseline. The
timing of the WEHI competition which ran through the
Christmas period when most staff of community health
organisations take extended holiday leave was another
cause of intervention participant drop-out [21].
It was anticipated that the financial incentives provided
in this study would support intervention group retention.
It emerged that most participants in the five
teams who won or shared in a progress prize were sufficiently
motivated to persist to the end of the six-month
intervention. The receipt of prizes throughout the competition
may have contributed to team members’ motivation
to maintain behaviours. Interestingly, the five
teams who won some prize money continued competing
after winning. Not winning may have conversely acted
to demotivate continued participation among those
teams who had members drop-out. Chin et al. [28]
found that incentivising attendance versus only rewarding
weight loss was associated with less attrition and
more weight loss, though intervention dose was important
regardless of the incentive strategy. Despite offering
incentives they concluded that enrolment and retention
remained challenging.
Research has indicated that financial incentives are effective
for assisting people to attend and persist with
weight-loss interventions resulting in weight loss
[28–30]. However, despite including financial incentives
in WEHI, the desired weight loss was not achieved. It is
possible that the way and frequency in which the
incentives were delivered needs to be revised. Burns
et al. [30] in their systematic review suggest that an
incentive that is contingent on an outcome and is
continuous throughout the intervention is more effective
than a lottery type reward. Restructuring the
incentives and increasing the reward might make
similar interventions more effective. However, a more
recent review of the use of incentives to change
health behaviours concluded that efficacy is highly
context-dependent and will vary across demographic
groups and target behaviours [31].
A strength of this study was the design of the WEHI
intervention, by and for Indigenous people, which made
it attractive enough to enrol participants who have been
perceived to be difficult to recruit, that is, both as people
with obesity and Indigenous. Another strength is that
WEHI participants were recruited from the general
population, versus a clinical population advised to seek
treatment for obesity. This showed that the WEHI
programme is pragmatic enough to be delivered within
the existing health system. A final strength is enlisting
community providers to conduct some of the research
tasks. This builds both community understanding of research
and local capability.
The WEHI trial showed promise for health behaviour
change, which is important for long-term weight loss.
The intervention appeared to be effective in changing
some dietary behaviours in the short term. Other authors
have suggested that small changes, especially if
triggered by low-cost interventions that remotely facilitate
self-monitored or self-monitored with tailored feedback,
could produce a significant public health impact if
extrapolated over a population [32].
The WEHI trial also contributes valuable information
in an area that has been substantially under-researched:
weight-loss programmes designed by and for Indigenous
people.
Future work
While competitions are attractive for some people, they
are not likely to be attractive to others. Future trials may
need longer recruitment times and more training and
support for community partners in order to improve recruitment
rates. Where an intervention is highly attractive,
a wait-list control design could aid in the enrolment
and retention of a control group.
More research is needed on which combination of
technological and incentive intervention components
will increase efficacy. WEHI incentives were based on
group and individual progress. Interventions could retain
competition, which has been related to weight loss
changes [33], but refrain from publicly displaying how
participants or teams are progressing so as not to disincentivise
teams who see their chance of winning reducing
as others progress at a faster pace. Future research
is needed to identify optimal use of incentives for triggering
behavioural change and adherence to weight-loss
goals, such as increasing the relative reward for higher
impact behavioural change objectives and reduced consumption
of fast foods over the reward for less impactful
goals, such as drinking more water. Potential alternatives
to test include: awarding a proportion of the prize relative
to individual or team effort, for example a nominal
amount per percentage weight lost; increasing the frequency
of incentives to support continuous motivation;
and payment of an incentive to individual participants,
as opposed to donating the award to a charity or community
organisation. This will allow a larger breadth of
participants to be able to receive incentives.
Similar future trials should incorporate qualitative
evaluation tasks to enable analysis of contextual factors
that may impact the intervention. We did analyse adherence
[21] utilising programme data, and we did conduct
some qualitative work assessing the acceptability of the
intervention to a sub-sample of participants’ and
regional co-ordinators’, but that work remains unpublished
(those results are contained in a technical report
prepared for the funder which is available from the
author).
Group weight-loss competitions have predominantly
been researched in workplaces. The involvement of
work-based teams in WEHI suggests that there could be
merit in trialling a version of WEHI specifically focused
on Māori and Pacific health workplaces. One of the benefits
of WEHI being delivered into a workplace is that
social practices that encourage over-eating and or consumption
of foods that undermine weight-loss goals can
be highlighted for change.
Conclusion
Given the dearth of previous weight-loss programmes
available in many Māori communities, and the higher
proportion of Māori and Pacific people with obesity, this
study provides initial information useful for designing
acceptable and attractive interventions for these high
priority groups. The WEHI trial was successful at triggering
some Government recommended dietary changes,
such as eating a minimum of two servings of fruit a day
and some effect on weight loss was indicated. Even
though the effect was small, programmes like WEHI that
can cost-effectively reach a large number of people could
deliver significant public health gains if delivered at a
population level. Like the WERO stop smoking competition,
WEHI could be delivered as a health promotion
programme with the aim of triggering weight-loss attempts,
rather than as a personal health treatment
programme. Its attractiveness and efficacy in supporting
people from dispersed, rural and high priority groups,
and feasibility for use in workplaces suggests the concept
is worth further refinement and testing. Obviously, there
is a need to improve retention of participants in the
intervention, but this is a global challenge for weightloss
programmes.