Background
The 2018 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
(BRFSS) data reported Oklahoma’s prevalence of obesity
among adults at 35% [1]. Additionally, nearly 19% of
children 10 to 17 years of age are obese, making Oklahoma
the fifth highest state in terms of childhood obesity
[2]. Important obesogenic factors include culture,
home environment, corporate advertising, and parental
knowledge [3]. Because parents can only initiate healthy
habits after they understand what those habits entail,
parental knowledge has a strong influence on the diets
of youth and children residing in the home, on their exercise
habits, and on their beverage choices [3, 4]. Parental
beverage choices, as well as beverage availability in
the home, influence the quality of children’s diets [4–6].
Effects of these choices can continue from childhood to
adulthood [7]. Furthermore, children whose parents or
other caregivers encourage healthy eating and who
model a healthy lifestyle are more likely to adopt healthy
living patterns themselves [6, 7].
Research suggests that the consumption of sugarsweetened
beverages (SSBs) is associated with obesity in
both adults and children [8]. SSBs include “any liquids
sweetened with various forms of added sugars including
brown sugar, corn sweetener, corn syrup, dextrose, fructose,
glucose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, lactose,
malt syrup, maltose, molasses, raw sugar, and sucrose.”
[9] Examples of SSBs include regular soda (not sugarfree),
fruit drinks, sports drinks, energy drinks, sweetened
waters, and coffee and tea beverages with added
sugars. Intake of SSBs is positively associated with both
increased body weight and risk of obesity, and is negatively
associated with the intake of important micronutrients
[10].
Social marketing and public health mass media campaigns
have been effective in changing health behaviors,
knowledge, and attitudes [11–16], and are considered an
evidence-based strategy [17]. Specifically, media campaigns
targeting the consumption of SSBs have had success
influencing individual intentions to change behavior
[11, 12], and initiate changes in SSB consumption in
children and adults [17]. Further, these campaigns have
influenced media coverage and reporting of SSB consumption
[18]. To date, few research studies have examined
changes in SSB consumption after media
campaigns in the population of adults with children in
the home. Additionally, the need to examine SSB consumption
in combination with attitudes and knowledge
about SSB consumption is critical to inform and contribute
to the success of future SSB consumption reduction
campaigns.
In 2016, the Oklahoma Tobacco Settlement Endowment
Trust (TSET) launched an ongoing obesity prevention
health communication program aimed at Oklahoma
parents and caregivers of children, ‘Shape Your Future:
Rethink Your Drink (SYF/RYD),‘a program which continued
through 2017 and beyonod [19]. The program developed
and released messages designed to combat SSB
consumption by urging Oklahomans to ‘Rethink Your
Drink,’ and replace SSBs with water. Additionally, the
program was designed to educate Oklahomans about the
health effects associated with SSB consumption and reasons
to limit SSB consumption for their families. The
“Rethink Your Drink” program and messages originated
from the Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention
Branch of the California Department of Public Health
[12, 20].
We previously reported the results of a 2015 crosssectional
study designed to gather information about
Oklahomans’ knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors concerning
SSBs [19]. The study reported baseline SSB consumption
in Oklahoma adults with children living in the
home prior to the launch of the ‘Shape Your Future -
Rethink Your Drink’ (SYF/RYD) health communication
program. The current study reports the results of a second
cross-sectional study, initiated after the first quarter
of the campaign. The objectives of this analysis were
four-fold; first, to report post-campaign SSB consumption
by type of beverage and overall; second, to compare
SSB consumption before and after the SYF/RYD program
launch; third, to measure exposure to the SYF/
RYD program; and fourth, to measure covariates impacting
SSB consumption by type of beverage and overall.
The purpose of this study was to provide data about
adult consumption of SSBs as well as knowledge and attitudes
toward SSB consumption after the launch of the
statewide media program, ‘Shape Your Future: Rethink
Your Drink’ (SYF/RYD).
Methods
Methodology from the 2015 survey, which occurred before
the launch of SYF/RYD, has been reported in another
paper [19], and survey questions were identical for
both time periods, using previously validated survey
items for SSB consumption [14–16]. TheSYF/RYD campaign
was launched in July 2016, with combined television
and cable outlets, digital print, radio, bulletins, and
posters. The program is ongoing. Data collection after
the program launch occurred October 2016 through July
2017 via telephone survey by the Sooner Survey Center
at the University of Oklahoma Hudson College of Public
Health. The population was a random sample of all noninstitutionalized
adults in Oklahoma with at least one
child under the age of 18 years living in the household
and with either a cellular or landline telephone. Data
were weighted to adjust for non-coverage and nonresponse,
creating estimates more representative of the
Oklahoma adult population with children living in the
home. The survey instrument and protocol were approved
by the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center Institutional Review Board.
SSB outcome variables
We measured SSB intake by first asking respondents,
“During the past 30 days, how often did you drink regular
soda or pop that contains sugar?” We then asked,
“During the past 30 days, how often did you drink sugarsweetened
fruit drinks, sweet tea, sports drinks, or energy
drinks?” Respondents were asked to NOT include 100%
fruit juice, diet drinks, or artificially sweetened drinks.
For both questions, respondents could answer in times
per day, week, or month. We converted responses to
average daily intake, and examined daily SSB consumption
for soda and other SSBs separately and in combination.
This analysis includes four outcomes related to
SSB consumption. First, consumption of any SSB; second,
consumption of sugar sweetened sodas (SS sodas);
and third, consumption of other SSBs (not including
soda), each defined as one or more beverages per day.
The fourth outcome was heavy SSB consumption, which
we defined as consumption of three or more SSBs of any
type per day [19, 21].
SSB knowledge and attitude variables
This study included three questions designed to measure
knowledge and attitudes toward SSB consumption. The
first two attitude questions were intended to measure
behavioral intent to change with answers to these statements:
I am able to substitute water for SSBs for my family
and I plan to limit SSBs for my family. The third
question was intended to measure knowledge about the
consequences of SSB consumption with answers to this
statement: SSBs are linked to obesity, diabetes, and heart
disease. We categorized answers to all three items into
two levels, ‘strongly agree’ versus a combined category
including somewhat agree, disagree, and strongly
disagree.
SYF/RYD campaign exposure
We measured confirmed exposure to the SYF/RYD program
by first asking respondents, “Have you seen or
heard any ads in the past month about replacing sugar
sweetened drinks with water?” If yes, they were asked
what the theme, name, or slogan of this program was,
and to describe an ad. Respondents were considered to
have confirmed exposure if they named the slogan as
SYF or RYD or described a SYF/RYD advertisement.
Covariates
Covariates included gender, three categories of age (< 35
years, 35–54 years, and ≥ 55 years), four categories of
race (White, American Indian/Alaska Native, African
American and “other”), two levels of education (high
school degree or less versus some college /technical
school or more), and two self-assessed levels of general
health (excellent, very good, or good, versus fair or
poor). Other covariates included daily water consumption
(eight or more cups versus 0–7 cups), daily fruit
servings (three or more versus less than three), daily
vegetable servings (three or more versus less than three),
two categories of moderate to intense physical exercise
(three or more days per week versus less than three) and
availability of healthy food, “I am able to afford healthy
foods” (strongly agree versus somewhat agree, disagree,
or strongly disagree combined).
Data analysis
Post-stratification weights were calculated along dimensions
of age, gender, race, income, and education using
American Community Survey data to adjust for nonresponse
and sources of under-coverage. Imputation was
used for missing responses in raking dimension variables
[22, 23]. We used SAS version 9.4, for all analyses. Survey
procedures and sampling weights were used to obtain
population-level estimates unless indicated
otherwise. Pearson chi-square tests were used to examine
whether the outcomes varied by the covariates of
interest. P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Separate multivariable logistic regression analyses
were performed for the SSB outcomes, modeling
relationships between outcome variables and the covariates
described above. Variables in the model were removed
using a manual stepwise method, with decisions
based on the t-statistics for estimated coefficients, using
the associated p-values. Adjusted odds ratios with confidence
intervals are reported. Logistic regression equations
used unweighted data in an attempt to provide
unbiased parameter estimates with smaller standard errors,
more accurately representing the variables that impact
SSB consumption in this particular sample [24, 25].
Results
The target population for the SYF/RYD program was
Oklahoma adults with children living in the home. In
2015, prior to the launch of the SYF/RYD media program,
we surveyed 1118 Oklahomans. After the launch
of the SYF/RYD program, we surveyed 1538 Oklahomans.
The American Association for Public Opinion Research
(AAPOR) response rate (RR1) was 10% in 2015
and 5% in 2017; the cooperation rates were 90 and 89%
respectively, both within acceptable ranges for both survey
periods [26, 27]. The demographic characteristics
during both time periods were similar and included predominantly
female (55% in 2015 versus 54% in 2017)
and white (66% versus 68%), with about half (47%)
reporting having a high school education or less. About
two-thirds (69% versus 63%) reported they participated
in moderate to intense physical exercise three or more
days every week. While most (82% versus 85%) perceived
their health status as excellent, very good, or good, only
half or less (50% versus 42%) drank the recommended
eight cups of water or more daily, and less than one
quarter ate the recommended daily three or more servings
of fruits (23% versus 20%) and vegetables (19% versus
21%) [28]. Only one third strongly agreed they could
afford to buy healthy foods in 2015 (34%), compared to
about half (48%) in 2017. Statistically significant differences
between 2015 and 2017 survey results existed for
only two variables, daily water consumption (p < 0.05)
and ability to afford healthy food (p < 0.0001) (Table 1).
Consumption of SSBs
Following the SYF/RYD media program, the prevalence
of daily consumption of any SSB was 36.3% compared to
44.6% in 2015 (p = 0.0232), a decrease of 19%. The
prevalence of daily sugary soda consumption was 21.1%
in 2017 compared to 29.4% in 2015 (p = 0.0119), a decrease
of 28%. The prevalence of daily non-soda SSB
consumption was 22.9% in 2017 compared to 29.3% in
2015 (p = 0.0543), a decrease of 22%, and the prevalence
of heavy SSB consumption was 9.2% compared to 16.1%
in 2015 (p = 0.0083), a decrease of 43% (Table 2).
While there were no statistically significant differences
in SSB consumption between 2015 and 2017 within subgroups
by gender, age, or race, several approached significance
(p < 0.10), Table 2). Conversely, among those
with a high school education or less, the prevalence of
daily SSB consumption decreased 31% from 61% in 2015
to 42% in 2017 (p < 0.01). Additionally, in those who
perceived their health status as excellent, very good, or
good, there was a statistically significant 24% decrease in
SSB consumption between 2015 (33%) and 2017 (24%).
Additional significant decreases in SSB consumption occurred
in those who drink eight or more cups of water
per day (31% ↓), who eat less than the recommended 3
servings of fruit (19% ↓) and vegetables (18% ↓) daily,
and in those who are not able to afford healthy foods
(20% ↓) (Table 2).
SYF/RYD campaign exposure
About 24% of Oklahomans with children in the home
demonstrated confirmed exposure to SYF/RYD (Table 1).
While women were more likely to have confirmed exposure
than men (29% versus 18%), the program reached
similar proportions with respect to age, education, selfperceived
health status, water consumption, dietary consumption
of fruits and vegetables, weekly amount of physical
exercise, and the ability to afford healthy food, a
measure of economic status. One notable exception was
race. Although there was not a statistically significant
difference within that variable, confirmed exposure among
American Indian/Alaska Natives was lower than all other
groups (Table 1).
With respect to outcome measures, there were no significant
differences in total SSB consumption, sugary
soda consumption, or other SSB consumption by campaign
exposure status. Similarly, there was no difference
among those with and without confirmed campaign exposure
in plans to limit SSB consumption for their families
or perceived ability to substitute water for SSBs for
their families. There was, however, a statistically significant
difference in knowledge about the consequences of
SSB consumption by exposure to the campaign. Among
those with confirmed exposure, three quarters (76%)
knew SSB consumption is linked to obesity, diabetes,
and heart disease compared to 64% without confirmed
exposure (p = 0.0045, Table 3).
Factors associated with daily SSB consumption
The results of the multivariable logistic regression analysis
of the 2017 survey data revealed a number of factors were
independently associated with consuming one or more
SSB of any kind per day. These included high school education
or less (aOR = 1.33, 95% CI = 1.02, 1.73), perceived
health status as fair or poor (aOR = 2.02, 95% CI = 1.47,
2.78), and inability to afford healthy foods (aOR = 1.33,
95% CI = 1.06, 1.67, Table 4). Other dietary behaviors were
also associated with total SSB consumption including
drinking less than eight cups of water per day (aOR = 1.77
with a 95% CI = 1.39, 2.25), fewer than three daily servings
of fruits (aOR = 1.70 with a 95% CI = 1.23, 2.34) and fewer
than three daily servings of vegetables (aOR = 1.35 with a
95% CI = 1.01, 1.81). After adjusting for other variables in
the model, the odds of SSB consumption were also higher
in American Indian/Alaska Natives compared to Whites
(aOR = 1.59, 95% CI = 1.10, 2.29).
Factors associated with daily soda consumption
When sugary soda was considered, three factors
remained independently associated with daily consumption.
The odds of sugar-sweetened soda consumption
were higher for American Indian/Alaska Natives compared
to Whites (aOR = 1.66, 95% CI = 1.12, 2.46) and in
those who consumed less than the recommended eight
cups of water daily (aOR = 1.79, 95% CI = 1.36, 2.36).
Additionally, the odds of sugar-sweetened soda consumption
were higher for those who did not meet the
daily dietary recommendation of three servings of fruits
(aOR = 1.49, 95% CI = 1.02, 2.17, Table 4).
Factors associated with daily SSB consumption not
including soda
Five factors were associated with increased odds of SSB
consumption, other than soda. The odds of SSB
consumption not including sodas were higher in men
(aOR = 1.61, 95% CI = 1.24, 2.08), American Indian/Alaska
Natives (aOR = 1.57, 95% CI = 1.05, 2.34), and
among those with a high school education or less
(aOR = 1.55, 95% CI = 1.16, 2.07). Additionally, fair or
poor perceived health status (aOR = 1.82, 95% CI = 1.29,
2.58), and drinking fewer than eight cups of water a day
(aOR = 1.79, 95% CI = 1.37, 2.36, Table 4) were significantly
associated with SSB consumption not including
sodas.
Factors associated with heavy SSB consumption
Heavy consumption of any SSB was defined as three or
more SSBs of any kind per day and was reported by
9.2% of Oklahomans with children in the home in 2017.
After adjusting for other variables in the model, the odds
of consuming three or more SSBs per day were twice as
high among American Indian/Alaska Natives compared
to White (aOR = 2.06, 95% CI = 1.27, 3.36), and among
those who perceive their health as fair or poor (aOR =
2.19, 95% CI = 1.42, 3.38). Heavy SSB consumption was
also significantly associated with drinking less than eight
cups of water per day (aOR = 2.12 with 95% CI = 1.41,
3.18, Table 4).
Discussion
In this study of factors associated with SSB-related
knowledge, attitudes and behaviors, we found differences
in consumption rates before and after a health communication
program specifically designed to raise awareness
and encourage behavior change related to beverage
choice. Although the sample for our 2017 crosssectional
study is independent of our 2015 sample [19],
the populations were only statistically different in two
demographic areas, suggesting comparison between
years is appropriate. Additionally, weighting allowed the
sample to adequately represent the population of the
State of Oklahoma [22, 23]. Results indicate SSB consumption
by Oklahoma adults with children in the home
decreased overall by 19% following the launch of the
SYF/RYD campaign. Subgroup analysis of SSB consumption
before and after the launch of the SYF/RYD campaign
resulted in small sample sizes, which precluded
our ability to make some subgroup comparisons. Those
with less than a high school education experienced a
31% decline in SSB consumption, as did those who reported
drinking eight or more cups of water per day.
Similarly, good or better health status, those consuming
fewer than three servings of fruit per day and those less
likely to afford healthy food experienced significant declines
in SSB consumption following the launch of the
SYF/RYD campaign.
The aim of the SYF/RYD ad campaign was to expose
adults with children in the home to messages designed
to encourage replacing SSBs with water. Following the
launch of the campaign in 2017, 23% of Oklahomans
with children in the home demonstrated confirmed exposure,
meaning they accurately recalled and described
one or more SYF/RYD campaign messages. The campaign
reached Oklahomans somewhat equally. While
women in our study demonstrated greater confirmed exposure
than men, in other categories including age, education,
general health, and the ability to afford healthy
food, there were no statistically significant differences in
confirmed exposure. Although not statistically significant,
American Indian/Alaska Natives had the lowest
levels of confirmed exposure to SYF/RYD at 14%. Interestingly,
this priority population, with significant obesity
burden among adults and children [29] also had the
highest odds of SSB consumption, and this independent
association was consistent across all four SSB outcomes.
Although this study did not demonstrate an association
between SYF/RYD confirmed exposure and SSB consumption
following program implementation, knowledge
about the health consequences of SSB was statistically
significantly higher among those with confirmed exposure
compared to those without. It is also important to
note that confirmed exposure to the SYF/RYD messages
in our study was lower than reported in similar studies,
about half that reported by Farley and associates (54%),
although they included aided recall [11]. Similarly, Barragan
and associates reported 57% exposure to billboards
and other media, as well as 36% recall of television
advertisements in their study [15]. The relatively low
levels of confirmed campaign exposure likely contributed
to this study’s inability to demonstrate an association
between SSB consumption and confirmed
exposure.
Research suggests dietary habits learned in childhood
have a direct impact on adult eating habits and adult
obesity [4, 5, 7]. Our study is especially important because
every respondent had one or more children living
in the home with the potential to be influenced by foods
and drinks their caregivers offer, and by dietary choices
their caregivers make. Zahid and associates found that
home availability of SSBs was positively associated with
child SSB intake (OR = 1.48 p = 0.03) [4]. Our study
demonstrated consistent relationships between SSB consumption
and other dietary behaviors such as not drinking
eight or more cups of water per day and eating less
than three servings of fruits and vegetables each day. An
intervention that encourages parents to adopt healthy
eating patterns and provide healthy foods and drinks can
contribute to a reduction in SSB consumption for children
in the home [30]. In addition, mass media campaigns
are effective in changing beverage choices for
adults [12, 14, 16] and decreasing SSB sales [11, 13]. The
results of our cross-sectional study in Oklahoma are
mixed when compared to those reported by other states
attempting to decrease SSB consumption using mass
media campaigns [12–14, 16]. For example, our study
found a 19% decrease in the proportion of adults drinking
SSBs daily, compared to the 35% decrease found by
the city of New York after their “Pouring on the Pounds”
campaign. The larger decrease seen there is likely due to
an excise tax and cap on SSB portion sizes which were
implemented around the same time [14]. A mass media
campaign targeting parts of Tennessee, Kentucky, and
Virginia in 2017 reported a 3.4% decrease in SSB sales
and a 4.1% decrease in soda sales along with an overall
increase in self-reported SSB consumption, following the
campaign [11]. The incorporation of sales data may be a
more accurate measure of SSB consumption changes
over time as compared to subjective self-reports by
individuals.
An important and consistent finding in this study is
the association between drinking water and SSB consumption
across all four definitions of the SSB outcome.
The odds of drinking one or more SSB daily were about
twice as high among those not drinking the recommended
eight cups of water per day compared to those
who drink eight or more cups of water per day. Similar
to the study reported by Boles and associates [12], this
finding suggests messages promoting a higher level of
daily water intake could decrease SSB consumption, affecting
caloric intake. In a meta-analysis using literature
published from 1990 through 2014, Vargas-Garcia and
associates found a paucity of research about the association
between water consumption and SSB consumption
in adults; this study adds to that body of evidence [17].
Additionally, two studies completed with children suggest
reducing SSB consumption is associated with an
increase in water consumption [17, 19]. These findings
support strategies like cold water bottle re-fill stations in
schools and other public places.
Rates of obesity are rising disproportionately in youth
and children, as compared to adults, leading public
health officials to look for solutions. While changes in
dietary habits are important, they often happen in stages.
Interventions may not lead to immediate changes in SSB
consumption, but may have longer lasting benefits. In
this study we have unearthed important findings. More
than half of participants responded they intend to decrease
SSB for their families (51%), and substitute water
instead (59%). Additionally, about two-thirds understand
the link between SSB and heart disease, diabetes, and
obesity (67%). These positive steps toward change compare
favorably to a study by Boles and associates in
which 80% of respondents intended to reduce SSB consumption,
as well as to limit SSBs offered to a child [12].
Strengths and limitations
A strength of this study includes measurement of SSB
consumption before and after the launch of the program
and a unique study population – adults with at least one
child in the household. Further, the definition of SSB
consumption in our study allowed us to explore consumption
of all SSBs as well as consumption specific to
soda and beverages other than soda such as sports
drinks, juice with added sugar and sugar sweetened coffee
and tea. The additional category of heavy SSB consumption
allowed us to demonstrate consistent, and
even stronger association between important covariates
such as American Indian race, perceived health status
and water consumption. We also recognize the potential
limitations of our study. As with any survey study, the
data presented here are prone to bias, particularly recall
bias. Our study is also limited to SSB consumption in
adults with children in the household; we did not measure
consumption among children. As a cross-sectional
study, outcome, campaign exposure and covariates were
assessed at the same time, thus no causal assumptions
can be made. We also recognize the possibility of Type I
errors due to multiple comparisons. Finally, as is typical
with most evaluations of health communication campaigns,
this uncontrolled design cannot attribute any
change in SSB consumption directly to the SYF/RYD
program.
Conclusions
Health communication and mass media campaigns are
considered an evidence-based practice for improving
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors. The Shape Your Future/
Rethink Your Drink campaign in Oklahoma occurred
in tandem with a significant decrease in SSB
consumption among adults with children in the home.
Understanding factors associated with the consumption
of SSBs will lead to more effective strategies and the
identification of priority populations. Continued targeted
intervention to make adults with children in the home
aware of the association between SSBs and obesity is an
important step toward continuing the downward prevalence
of SSB consumption and to reverse the trends in
childhood and adult obesity.