Background
Adolescent population comprises one-sixth of the world’s
population; of which over 90% live in Sub-Saharan Africa
and South and Southeast Asia [1]. Successful transition of
adolescence to adulthood has a significant role in reducing
problems lie ahead in the future and in breaking the intergenerational
cycle of poverty [2].
Nutritional status is one of the main factors that could
affect academic achievement by limiting students’ ability
to learn [3]. Despite the economic growth observed in
many developing countries, undernutrition continued to
be highly prevalent underlying cause of poor health status
and poor academic attainments’ [4].
Several studies were conducted on the magnitude and
consequences of nutritional status of adolescent students
[5–7]. According to the Global School-Based Student
Health Survey, the mean Body Mass Index (BMI) estimates
adolescents in South Asia, Southeast Asia, East
Africa, West Africa and Central Africa is < 20. The lowest
BMIs were seen in Ethiopia, Niger, Senegal, India,
Bangladesh, Myanmar, and Cambodia [8]. On the other
hand, globally, 10% of adolescents are overweight and
obese with the prevalence of overweight and obesity
varying between 2 and 3%. The prevalence ranges from
10% in Africa and Asia to more than 20% in the United
States of America (USA) and Europe [9].
.According to the World Bank report, academic performance
of students of Sub-Saharan African countries
is less than half of what is expected for their age [10].
Ethiopia is among the countries where adolescent students’
academic achievement is unacceptably low [11].
Adolescence is one of the vulnerable stages of life where
absolute nutrient needs are greater than that of infancy
or childhood [12]. Undernutrition inhibits academic attainment
through poor growth and mental development,
reduced motivation and poor cognitive development [13,
14] while, ooverweight and obesity has the potential to
impair academic performance via social pathways such
as discrimination and stigma [15].
Research evidences also show that academic performance
is affected by factors such as the wealth status of
the parents, the type of school, parents’ educational status,
marital and occupational status of the adolescents
[16–19]. However, the association between nutritional
status and the academic performance of the adolescent
students in Ethiopia is left unknown fully. Therefore, the
aim of this study was to assess the association of nutritional
status with academic performance among adolescent
students in Wolaita Sodo town, Southern Ethiopia.
Methods
Study setting, study design and study period
Wolaita Sodo town is the administrative capital of
Wolaita Zone administration in Southern Ethiopia
located at 380 km South from Addis Ababa. The town
has 3 sub-cities and 11 lower administrative units. The
total population of the town is estimated to be 182,607;
from which 49% are females [20]. According to the information
obtained from Wolaita Zone Agriculture and
education departments, the common staple foods in the
area are cereals, roots, tubers, and vegetables and there
are two private and five public secondary schools in the
town respectively. A facility-based cross-sectional study
was conducted among adolescent students from April to
June, 2019.
Population and sampling
The source population for this study was all adolescents
of secondary schools of Wolaita Sodo town and the
study population are adolescent students of the selected
schools. Pregnant adolescent girls, adolescents who were
ill at the time of the study and with physical or visual
disability were excluded from the study. A single population
proportion formula was used to calculate the sample
size with the following assumptions; 95% confidence
level, 5% margin of error, an estimated magnitude of students’
academic performance of 72.8% taken from a
similar study in Ethiopia [21], design effect of 2 and 10%
non-response rate and the final sample size calculated is
670. There are seven schools in Wolaita Sodo town, two
private and five public, and were stratified into public
and private by assuming socio-economic differences
among the families of the students and differences in
teaching and learning resources between public and private
schools. Among the seven secondary schools, one
private and three public were randomly selected. The
total sample size was allocated to the schools proportional
to the number of students in each selected school.
The study participants were selected by systematic sampling
technique using the list of students enrolled in
each school as a sampling frame. The sampling interval
was determined by dividing the total number of students
in the respective school grade level by the allocated sample
size and was found to be five. The first participant
was selected randomly by the lottery method, and then
every fifth adolescent student was included in the study.
Data collection
Data were collected using a structured intervieweradministered
questionnaire. The questionnaire was developed
and adopted from the Ethiopian Demographic
and Health Survey (EDHS) validated tool and other related
literature reviews [22–24] (Additional file 1). The
questionnaire was pre-tested on 5% of the sample size
on adolescent students from schools which were not selected
for the actual data collection but no modification
has been made. The data were collected by four data
collectors and two supervisors after training was given
for 2 days on the objective of the study, data collection
procedures, anthropometric measurements, the confidentiality
of the information and participant rights.
To ensure the reliability of anthropometric measurements,
standardization test was done on five participants
prior to actual data collection. First, the expert has taken
the measurements and then the data collectors repeated
the measurements on the same participants with some
time intervals. The collected data were entered into
ENA SMART software to check relative Technical Error
of Measurements (TEM) and was found to be in the acceptable
range, < 2.0%. Weight was measured using a
portable digital flat Seca scale (Scale electronic scale, 770
Hamburg). Height was measured by Seca body meter
(Seca 274 body meter). All measurements were taken
three times, and the average was recorded as the final
measurement. Academic performance and absenteeism
data were taken from respective schools’ records.
Variables
Dependent variable
The academic performance of the students which was
calculated using two consecutive semesters mean mark
scores out of 100.
Independent variables
Socio-economic and socio-demographic variables Age
of the adolescents, sex of adolescents, marital status of
parents, educational and occupational status of parents
and wealth status of the adolescents households. Wealth
status was generated by using principal component analysis
(PCA) and based on the results household wealth
index/status was converted into quartiles and categorized
as First, Second, Middle, Fourth, and Highest [22].
Nutritional status measurements and indices Underweight-
is BMI for age z-score (BAZ) of < − 2 standard
deviation (SD) on the WHO growth reference cut-off
point [25].
Overweight- was computed with BMI for age z-score
(BAZ) of > + 1 SD on the WHO growth reference cutoff
point [25].
Obesity- was computed with BMI for age z-score
(BAZ) of > + 2 SD z-score based on the WHO reference
cut-off point [25].
Stunting- is the height for age z-score (HAZ) of <− 2
SD on the WHO growth reference cut-off point [25].
Dietary diversity score Dietary diversity was determined
by using the Dietary Diversity Score (DDS). Three
non-consecutive days 24-h recall of adolescents’ consumption
of commonly consumed foods in the area was
used to collect information on the DDS [23]. Foods were
categorized into 10 groups based on FAO recommendations
[1]; starch stable food [2], vegetables, 3) fruits [4],
meat [5], egg [6], fish and other sea foods [7], legumes,
nuts and seeds [8], milk and milk products [9], oil and
fats [10], sweets, spices, condiments and beverage [26].
The response categories were “Yes” if at least one food
item in the group was consumed and “No” when a food
item in the group was not consumed. The results were
summed and classified into < 4 food items and > 4 food
items [27].
Behavioural factors Alcohol consumption, the purpose
of spending much time on the internet and being absent
for 10% or more of school days for any reason in a calendar
year.
Data management and analysis
Data were entered into Epi-Data version 3.1 and analyzed
using Stata version 15 statistical software. Anthropometric
data were analyzed using the WHO Anthro-plus software
version 1.0.4 and nutritional status of the adolescents was
determined using WHO reference 2007 cut-off point [28].
Normality assumption was assessed for the dependent
variable and the data were normally distributed (p-value is
0.77). Descriptive statistics such as frequencies, percentages,
mean and standard deviation of the mean were done.
Binary and multiple linear regression analysis were conducted
to check the association between the dependent
and independent variables. Variables with a p-value of less
than 0.25 in the binary linear regression analysis were candidate
variables for multiple linear regression analysis.
Variables with the p-value < 0.05 in the multiple linear regression
analysis were considered as statistically significantly
associated with the dependent variable and
parameter estimate (ß) with its 95% CI was reported.
Results
Socio-demographic characteristics
In this study, a total of 670 adolescents participated
making the response rate of 100%. The mean age of the
respondents was 16.2 ± 1.7. Of the total respondents,
50.6% were girls. The majority (81.3%) of the parents
were currently married. More than one-fourth (27.3%) of
the mothers and 47.5% fathers of the students completed
college or university education. More than one-third
(34.8%) of the mothers were merchants, while 42.4% of
the fathers were government employees. Regarding the
wealth index, 23.6%, of the study participants were from
the fourth class households (Table 1).
Nutritional status, dietary diversity and behavioural
factors
The overall prevalence of any form of malnutrition was
29.3%; 6.3% (95% CI: 4.5, 8.5) were underweight, 9.7%
(95% CI: 7.6, 12.2) overweight, 4.1% (95% CI: 2.8, 5.7)
obese, and 9.2% (95% CI: 7.2, 11.4) were stunted. The
majority (76.4%) of the adolescents spend much their
time on the internet for social media purpose and about
one-fourth (24.8%) reported drinking alcohol at least
once before the study. About (24.3%) of the adolescents
were absent for 10% or more of school days in the studied
academic year. More than half (59.0%) of the adolescents
had a dietary diversity score of ≤4 food items
(Table 2).
Description of participants according to their academic
performance
More than three-fourth (74.7%) of the adolescents aged
15–19 years performed below the mean academic score.
Nearly one-fifth (79.2%) of the boys and 68.7% of the
girls had below the mean academic performance respectively.
More than half (56.4%) of the respondents who live
in the first wealth quintile performed below the mean.
The majority (89.2%) of those who live in a household
with the highest wealth quintile performed above the
mean academic score. The majority (88.1%) of the respondents
who attended public schools and 66.7% who
attended private schools academic performance was
below the mean score. Fifty six (88.9%) of the overweight
and 89.3% obese respondents performance was below
the mean academic score. Two hundred twenty eight
(83.2%) of the participants with a dietary diversity of
more than four and 71.9% who spend their time on the
internet for social media purposes performed below the
mean academic score. Three-fourth (75.2%) of the participants
who consume alcohol also performed below
the mean (Table 3).
Proportion and predictors of academic performance
The mean academic performance of the students was
69.2 ± 11.0 SD (95% CI: 68.4, 70.0%) out of hundred. Being
a girl decreased the mean score of academic performance
by 2.6 (β = − 2.6; 95% CI: − 4.3, − 0.9). The
mean score of students from separated parents decreased
by 4.7 (β = − 4.7; 95% CI: − 6.7, − 2.7) as compared
to students from married parents. Being from the
first-class wealth index decreased the mean score of students
by 9.9 (β = − 9.9; 95% CI: − 12.8, − 7.0). The mean
mark score of students from a wealth index of the second
class decreased by 5.7 (− 5.7; 95% CI: − 8.1, − 3.2) as
compared to students from the highest wealth class. Attending
private schools increased the average mark score
of students by 4.2 (β = 4.2; 95% CI: 2.5, 5.9) compared to
their counterparts. BAZ was positively associated with
academic performance. A unit increase in BAZ increased
the mean mark score of students by 1.9 (β = 1.9; 95% CI:
1.1, 2.6) (Table 4).
Discussion
This study has attempted to determine the association
between nutritional status and academic performance
among adolescent students. The result of the current
study shows the mean academic score of students was
69.2 ± 1 (95% CI: 68.3, 70.0%). The study findings also
revealed that being a girl student, nutritional status measures
(BAZ and HAZ), being from the first-class wealth
index household, attending private schools and separation
of parents were statistically significantly associated
with the academic performance of the students.
In this study, the mean academic score of the students
was 69.2 ± 1 (95% CI: 68.3, 70.0%). This result is consistent
with a study from Hawa Gelan (Ethiopia) where the
mean academic performance was (67.2 ± 15.4%) [24].
However, the result is higher when compared with a
study result of Nigeria which reported the mean academic
performance of (53.3 ± 7.2) [29]. The result of this
study is lower than the other study result in Debre-
Tabor (Northern Ethiopia) where the mean academic
score was (71.7 ± 12.6) [30]. This difference may be
owing to the differences in the students’ assessment
techniques, the curriculum and teaching-learning resources
availability and accessibility. The other possible
reason for the difference might be, in Ethiopia, although
there exists nationally standardized testing system, the
test is given only for 8th and 12th grades and the testing
scheme and types of the tests depend on the school and
the teachers.
There was a statistically significant and positive association
between nutritional status (HAZ) and academic
achievements. This finding agrees with studies from
Northern and Southeast Ethiopia, where HAZ was associated
with students’ academic performance [30, 31].
Despite the agreement with these studies, the correlation
coefficient in the current study is relatively low. The
possible reason might be the small sample size used in
the mentioned studies. This finding is inconsistent with
a study finding of Meskan District in Southern Ethiopia,
where the study reported the absence of a statistically
significant association between HAZ and academic performance
[32].
In this study, the nutritional status measure (BAZ) is
also statistically positively and significantly associated with
the academic performance of the students. This result is
not in line with another study conducted in North
Ethiopia where the study reported that there was no statistical
association between BAZ and academic performance
[30]. This might be due to differences in sample size or
variation of the variables considered during analysis.
In the current study, being a girl student decreased
academic performance, this result is reported similarly
in studies conducted in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Nigeria
[33–35]. ,The most possible reason could be the differential
and higher workload, lack of time to work on the
assignments and shortage of time to eat meals timely
and adequately among girls in the households when
compared to boy students. A different finding was reported
from Ghana where the academic achievement of
girls was significantly higher than boys [36]. This difference
might be due to the socio-cultural difference in the
study settings.
The findings of the present study also disclosed that
separation of parents has significantly lowered the academic
performance of students when compared with
students whose parents are in marital union. This result
is consistent with the results of studies conducted in
Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) and Ghana [37, 38]. This could
be due to psycho-social and financial crises caused by
separation or divorce the associated parental instability.
Academic performance of the students from a household
of first wealth index or second wealth index class
family was decreased students’ when compared to the
students from the highest wealth index household families,
This finding is in agreement with studies conducted
in Dessie (Northwest Ethiopia) and Hawa Gelan district
in Southwest Ethiopia [24, 39]. Similarly, another study
from Goba town in Ethiopia depicted that a higher
wealth index is associated with better mathematics
scores [31]. This might be explained by the enabling environment
created by providing educational materials
and other resources which could have motivated
students.
In the present study, a significant difference in academic
performance among students attended private
and a public school was found. Attending private schools
increased the mean mark score of students as compared
to their counterparts. This finding is in line with a study
finding of Northwest Ethiopia [40]. Studies conducted in
Nigeria and India also revealed that students who
attended private schools scored better in reading, writing
and mathematics as compared to students from public
schools [41, 42]. This difference might be attributed to
private schools better equipment in a library and laboratory
facilities, regular and tight monitoring and evaluation
of the teaching and learning process and students
who attend private schools are mostly from a well to do
families to provide better, adequate and timely nutrition
than students of public schools.
Limitations
The study sample consisted of adolescents students in
Wolaita Sodo town secondary schools and therefore, the
study results cannot be generalized to other schools elsewhere
in Ethiopia or other Sub-Saharan Africa or other
developing countries. The mean academic score used to assess
the academic performance of the students is also not
from standardized testing across the whole country. Thus, it
might be difficult to extrapolate the proportion to the overall
adolescent population in the country. We used crosssectional
data and the estimate might be better represented if
longitudinal follow-up data were used. In this study, only anthropomorphic
measurements were used to determine the
nutritional status and did not assess the micronutrient status
and its possible association with the academic performance
of study participants. In the present study, other covariates
such as cigarette smoking and time devoted to physical exercise
have not been assessed. Furthermore, this study did not
assess Intelligence Quotient (IQ) test due to a lack of standardized,
culturally appropriate and contextualized testing
systems in Ethiopia.
Conclusions
This study ascertained poor academic performance was reported
among female sex adolescent students, students
whose parents were separated, and students of the first or
second wealth index status households. Better academic
performance was also seen in students with better nutritional
status indicators such as BAZ and HAZ.
Wolaita Sodo town health office should design interventions
targeted at improving adolescents’ nutritional
status. A school feeding program should be launched
particularly for underweight students. Microfinance
institutions and other development and incomegeneration
activities should target students from households
of the first wealth status. Schools should give
tutorial classes for girl students. Further studies to
determine the association of nutritional status with
school performance by including the micronutrient status
data are recommended.