The Goji plant (primarily Lycium barbarum and L.
chinense) has been used for traditional medicine and cuisine
in East Asia for centuries, and recently, these uses of
Goji plant have been receiving more attention in western
countries [1, 2]. The Goji fruit, also known as the wolfberry
or Goji berry, is the main product commercialized as
health food. Goji berry contains high amount of functional
components, including sugars [3], carotenoids [4], and
essential fatty acids [5].The polysaccharides extracted from
wolfberries contain high antioxidative properties and have
the ability to treat and prevent multiple chronic diseases,
including cancer, diabetes, atherosclerosis, and male
infertility [6–9]. The root bark of Goji (Lycii Radicis
Cortex) has been used in treating hypertension and
reducing serum glucose and lipids [10–12]. Other
functions of the Lycii Radicis Cortex extract include
inhibition of CCl4-induced hepatic damage and protection
of skin from UVB radiation [13, 14].
Goji leaves are herbs that are traditionally used in tea
and cuisine and has been recognized as a health food. It
has also been found that the extracts of Goji leaves possess
multiple pharmacological effects, including antimicrobial,
antioxidant, and anti-diabetic effects [15–18].
However, the comprehensive profiles of biochemical
compounds in Goji leaves have only been identified in
recent decades. Goji leaves contain high amounts of
specific flavonoids and phenolic acids, such as chlorogenic
acid, quercetin, and rutin [16, 19]. Comparative
studies have demonstrated the differences in compound
contents between the leaves of L. babarum and L. chinense,
with higher amounts of chlorogenic acid present
in the leaves of L. chinense [16]. After comparing the
compounds in the fruit, leaves, and root barks of Goji,
results indicate that Goji leaves are valuable sources for
obtaining chlorogenic acid and rutin [18]. Moreover,
Goji leaves also contain polysaccharides that exert high
superoxide and DPPH scavenging abilities, therefore
having high antioxidative activity.
Goji plants are susceptible to the Goji gall mite, Aceria
kuko [20], which is a pest that induces yellow-green,
bead-like galls in the gall sector of the leaves. Severe infection
causes the loss of photosynthetic ability and
eventually reduces fruit production, and the infected
leaves are regarded as waste. Pesticides are often used in
controlling gall mite-induced damage; however, the
application of pesticides is dependent on environmental
temperatures and on the growing season in order to
maximize effectiveness, yet its impact is still limited [21].
Pesticide residue is also one of the concerns when using
chemicals on leaves. Although defoliation of galled
leaves is relatively effective in practice, this method is
costly and time consuming [22].
The infection of galls has been found to induce the biosynthesis
of bioactive ingredients, such as flavonoids and
phenolic acids, in both plant and gall tissues [23–25], thus,
it might be a good idea to take advantage of the gall infection.
An excellent example of benefiting from gall infections
is the use of infected Rhus chinensis Mill. in biomedical applications,
as it was found to have high antioxidant activities
in infected leaf tissues, as well as antiviral, antibacterial, and
antitumor function in the gall tissues [26, 27]. Therefore,
the purpose of this study was to estimate the effects of gall
infection on the contents of health-related compounds in
the leaves of L. chinense. Our data show that the contents
of polyphenol and the level of chlorogenic acid and rutin
were increased in the infected leaves. Leaf extracts also
exhibited higher antioxidant activities after infection. Our
results indicate that infected leaves have potential use in
pharmacological applications and may possibly be consumed
as health food.
Methods
Plant material and sample collection
Goji (L. chinense) seeds were obtained from Miaoli District
Agricultural Research and Extension Station (MDAIS) in
Taiwan. Goji were planted in the MDAIS and the plant
material was identified by Jhin-Syuan Wang in MDAIS.
Plant specimen of local grown L. chinense is available in
Herbarium of National Taiwan University (TAI, Link:
https://tai2.ntu.edu.tw/specimen/specimen.php?taiid=2065
26). Normal uninfected and gall mite-infected Goji leaves
were harvested in the winter, which is the appropriate season
for growing Goji in Taiwan. Dried Goji berries (i.e. the
fruit of Goji from L. barbarum) were purchased from the
local market.
Histology of gall tissues
Three different developmental stages (initiation, enlarging,
and maturation) of gall tissues were collected and
were fixed by formalin-acid-alcohol (FAA) fixative. After
dehydration and paraffin wax infiltration, samples were
sectioned using a tissue dissector (Leica RM2125 RTS,
Leica, Germany) and were subsequently stained with
Safranin O and Fast Green.
Determination of chlorophylls and carotenoid
Dried samples were ground using liquid nitrogen, and the
pigments were extracted with 80% acetone. After centrifugation,
the supernatant was used for the measurement of
absorbance at 663.6 nm, 646.6 nm, and 440.5 nm. Contents
of chlorophyll and carotenoids were determined according
to our previous report [28].
Determination of flavonoids and polyphenols
The flavonoid content was determined according to
Lesjak et al. [29]. A Range of 3.2 mg/mL – 8 mg/mL dried
sample was ground for flavonoid extraction by using 90%
methanol. After centrifugation, 30 μL of supernatant was
diluted with 90 μL of methanol, following by adding 6 μL
of 10% AlCl3 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 6 μL of 1M sodium
acetate (CH3COONa, Sigma-Aldrich). Absorbance was
read at 415 nm after adding 170 μL of distilled water and a
30 min of waiting. Calibration curve was constructed by
using 10 concentrations of quercetin (Sigma-Aldrich) ranging
from 0.625 μg/mL to 320 μg/mL. R2 of calibration
curve was 0.9983. Total flavonoid content was demonstrated
as mg of quercetin equivalents (QE) per g of dried
sample weight (DW).
Content of phenolic acids in the collected Goji samples
were analyzed based on the method established by
Singleton and Rossi [30]. Briefly, 90% methanol with
0.3% (v/v) HCl was added to 10 mg of powdered sample.
After centrifugation, 100 μL of supernatant was mixed
with 2 mL of 2% Na2CO3 solution and the absorbance at
750 nm was analyzed using spectrophotometry (Multiskan
GO, Thermo Scientific). Gallic acid (Sigma) was
used for plotting the calibration curve. The concentration
of polyphenols was determined and presented as
gallic acid equivalent (GAE).
Determination of chlorogenic acid and rutin
The UPLC-MS system was using Agilent 1290 Infinity II
ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system
(Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) coupled
online to the Dual AJS electrospray ionization (ESI)
source of an Agilent 6545 quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF)
mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Palo
Alto, CA, USA). The sample was separated by using
ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 μm, 2.1 × 100
mm, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). The column
temperature was 35 °C. The mobile phase used for this
study were double-distilled water (eluent A) and acetonitrile
(eluent B). The gradient condition was: 0–2 min,
3% B; 2–9 min, 3–20% B; 9–17 min, 20–50% B; 17–25
min, 50–100% B; 25–27 min, 100% B; 27–28 min, 100–
3% B, 28–30 min, 3% B. The flow rate was 400 μL/min
and the injection volume of sample was 2 μL. The instrument
was operated in negative full-scan mode and
collected from an m/z of 100–1100. The MS operating
conditions were optimized as follows: Vcap voltage, 3.0 kV;
nozzle voltage, 1.0 kV; nebulizer, 30 psi; gas temperature,
250 oC; sheath gas temperature, 325 oC; sheath gas flow
(nitrogen), 11 L/min; drying gas (nitrogen), 9 L/min. The
chromatogram acquisition, detection of mass spectral
peaks, and their waveform processing were performed
using Agilent Qualitative Analysis 10.0 software (Agilent,
USA). Quantitative determination was performed with reference
to the calibration curve of internal chlorogenic acid
and rutin standard. The R2 of calibration curves are 0.9941
of chlorogenic acid and 0.9968 of rutin.
Determination of antioxidant capacity
The 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging
method that was previously reported [31] was modified
as follows: 20 mg of sample powder was dissolved in
1 mL of 90% methanol prior to reaction with a methanolic
solution of DPPH. Two hundred μL of extract/DPPH solution
(1:3) were loaded to 96-well plate and the plate was
placed in dark for 90min for reaction. The absorbance at
517 nm was determined by spectrophotometer. The
DPPH scavenging capacity of Goji extract was expressed
as proportional (percentage) inhibition (% inhibition). The
DPPH scavenging capacity of Goji extract was expressed
as proportional (percentage) inhibition (% inhibition). The
half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of Goji extract
on DPPH scavenging activity was calculated using a
three parameter logistic regression model:
Statistical analysis
Statistics were assessed using the Student’s T test,
and significant differences were presented as *p < 0.05,
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Results
Figure 1 shows the three developmental stages of leaf
galls. In early development (stage I), the gall chamber
was small and was surrounded by nutritive
parenchyma cells. The gall chamber was enlarged during
development, but the number of parenchyma cells
decreased (Fig. 1b). The analysis of photopigments
showed that the contents of chlorophyll (chlorophyll
a + b) and carotenoids were slightly decreased in galled
leaves (Fig. 2).
In plants, polyphenolic compounds and flavonoids are
molecules that introduce defense-related mechanisms
against pathogens and other types of stress. In this study,
no significant change of flavonoids was shown in the
galled leaves (Fig. 3a). The polyphenol content was
higher in galled leaves, showing an elevation of content
by ~ 30% (Fig. 3b). The content of polyphenols and flavonoids
were relatively lower in the Goji berry.
The content of chlorogenic acid, which is one of the
main polyphenolic compounds in Goji leaves, in each
sample were detected by UPLC-MS/MS and the MS
chromatogram was showed in Additional Figure 1.
Chromatograms of identified chlorogenic acid and rutin
in NL, GL, and fruit were showed in Fig. 4. The average
level of chlorogenic acid in infected leaves was ~ 36%
higher than that in non-infected leaves (Table 1). Table 1
also reveals the content of rutin in galled leaves and Goji
berry. The content of rutin in normal leaves, however, was
beyond the lower limit of detection.
Antioxidant activity of the extracts from the Goji leaves and
fruit are presented in Fig. 5. Results show that infected leaves
contain higher DPPH scavenging ability than that of normal
leaves (Fig. 5, Table 2). The extracts of Goji berry, on the
other hand, showed the lowest ability in scavenging DPPH
and among the three samples analyzed. Principal component
analysis (PCA) showed the relation of the amount of flavonoids
(FLV), polyphenols and antioxidant ability (DPPH radical
scavenging effect) in Goji extracts (Fig. 6).
Discussion
Loss of photosynthesis ability and associate pigments
and proteins is a main change during leaf gall formation.
The lack of photosynthesis-related pigments and protein
complexes in gall tissues on leaves have been
demonstrated in previous studies and was recognized as
a shift from autotrophy to heterotrophy [32, 33]. Commercial
dried Goji fruit were used for comparing the
constituents in the leaves and in the Goji berry that
people usually consume. The data showed that Goji
berry contains a relatively low amount of both chlorophyll
and carotenoids. The carotenoid content of Goji
berry is comparable to that of the previous report [34].
The leaves contained more than a tenfold higher total
carotenoid levels, suggesting higher antioxidant capability
in the leaves. Notably, Goji berry are considered to
be a source of macular pigments [4], it would be worthy
to test if Goji leaves is able to contribute more since it
contain a higher amount of carotenoid.
The higher antioxidant ability may be provided by the
increased contents of secondary metabolites. Reports
done by our group, as well as other researchers, have
demonstrated that infection of the gall usually elevates
the contents of phenolic acids and flavonoids in gall tissue
[25, 35]. In this study, we found that the polyphenol
content was higher in the infected leaf (Fig. 3b) Contents
of flavonoids and polyphenols in the leaves have been
previously reported in the study of methanol or ethanol
extracts from L. barbarum and L. chinense [16, 17, 36].
Higher phenolic acids in leaves could be found in cultivated
L. barbarum compared to that in wild L. barbaraum
[17]. Content of polyphenols in leaf extracts is
comparable to the previous report which used methanol
for extraction as well [17], but is much lower than that
extracted by ethanol [16]. Moreover, reports have also
shown higher amounts of polyphenols and flavonoids in
the leaves of L. chinense than in L. barbarum [16]. Accordingly,
a higher amount of phenolic constituents could
be obtained from the galled leaves of particular cultivars
of L. chinense, as the value of polyphenols in leaves from
this study had doubled after infection (Fig. 3).
Chlorogenic acid is one of the main compounds found
in Goji leaves [15, 16, 36]. Comparing the polyphenols
of extracts from the leaves of L. chinense to those in L.
barbarum, the amounts of chlorogenic acid is twofold
higher [16]. In this study, we compared the galled and
ungalled leaves of L. chinense and showed that the average
level of chlorogenic acid was increased after gall induction.
Both our report and previous reports have
demonstrated higher chlorogenic acid content in leaves
than in Goji berry [18], as seen in Table 1 of the present
study. According to our research, galled Goji leaves have
potential in contributing more of the protective effects
against oxidative stress, inflammation, and other hepatoand
cardio-related syndromes [37, 38]. In this study we
also showed that the level of rutin was increased after
gall induction. Our data have slight differences from a
recent report which showed that the rutin content in
fruits is lower than that in leaves of L. barbarum [18].
This inconsistency might be caused by the difference in
the Goji cultivar analyzed.
After testing the antioxidant activity of the extracts
from the Goji leaves (Fig. 5, Table 2), our data showed
that the antioxidant capacity of leaf extracts was elevated
after gall formation. PCA result demonstrate that three
variables (content of flavonoid and polyphenols, and
DPPH scavenging effect) are positive correlated (Fig. 6).
The smaller angle formed between vectors of polyphenol
content and DPPH scavenging effect indicate a higher
correlation of phenolic acids and antioxidant ability.
PCA analysis also presents the higher contribution of
galled leaves in radical scavenging (Fig. 6). In many other
plant species, including Ficus and Aleppo oak, gall tissues
also have higher antioxidant activity according to
the DPPH assays presented in other studies [39, 40]. The
increase of antioxidant activity in gall tissue, which
partially results from the elevated phenolic compound
content, is a defense response of the plant against
parasites. It was also suggested that the senescence of
gall tissue is inhibited as the level of antioxidants remains
high [41].
Conclusions
Goji leaves are currently considered as a health food. Because
the galled Goji leaves have elevated levels of phenolic
acids and possess stronger antioxidant ability, it
should be considered as a health food instead of being
regarded as waste. The elevation of chlorogenic acid and
rutin level after infection indicates a higher pharmaceutical
or nutraceutical value the galled leaves have. An
examination of the effect of gall infection on the Lycium
cultivar(s) enriching chlorogenic acid is worthy for determining
the application foreground of Goji leaves. The
Goji leaves also being a good choice as alternative to
Goji berry for the people preferring to assimilate less
sugar and have more dietary fiber. In addition, promoting
the non-use of pesticides in controlling gallers will
have environmental benefits. However, our study found
that in Goji leaves, the level of salicylic acid, a plant
defense-related compound that has been suggested to be
allergenic, is elevated after infection (data not shown). A
nutraceutical food should be certain in the case that galls
do not affect human health. Therefore, the pharmaceutical
value of infected Goji leaves also need to be carefully
evaluated.