Background
In Niger, with only one harvest per year and an annual
lean period from June to October, food insecurity is one
of the leading causes of acute malnutrition and mortality
in children [1–8]. To mitigate the impact, a wide range
of nutritional supplements, which differ in energy content,
nutrient composition and packaging, are used for
preventing and treating malnutrition among children
[9–14]. While there is a growing body of evidence on
the individual efficacy of these products, less emphasis
has been placed on how these supplements are perceived
and integrated within familial eating practices [15–20].
This qualitative study was an additional component of
a parent intervention study comparing the effectiveness
of different strategies to prevent acute malnutrition
among children aged 6–23 months: a nutritional supplement
alone, a nutritional supplement and household
support through a food ration or cash transfer, or a cash
transfer alone [21–23]. The objective was to provide
additional understanding of how nutritional supplements
are managed in the home and their acceptability to
guide nutritional programming in settings like Maradi
aimed at reducing the incidence of severe acute
malnutrition (SAM) [24]. The three supplements were a
ready to use supplementary food (RUSF, Supplementary
Plumpy®), a Lipid-based Nutrient Supplement Medium
Quantity (LNS-MQ, Plumpy’Doz®), and improved cornsoy
blend for young children also known as Super Cereal
Plus (SC+).
RUSF is a Lipid-based Nutrient Supplement Large
Quantity (LNS-LQ), packed in individual sachet of 100 g,
recommended for 6 months old children at the dosage
of one packet per day per child. LNS-MQ is packed in
individual pot of 325 g gr, recommended for 6 months
old children at the dosage of 3 spoons per day per child,
one pot per week. SC+ is a Corn Soya Blend, for children
from 6 to 24 months, packed in 1.5 kg bag. Contrary
to the two other supplements described, it is
consumed like porridge by mixing an appropriate proportion
of flour and clean water followed by a cooking
time at simmering point from 5 to 10 min and need to
be consumed immediately (Table 1).
Perception is defined here as how participants described
the products, the impact on their children as
well as beliefs and opinions about the products. Of the
little research to date, ready to use foods appear well accepted
in households [25, 26]. Nevertheless, there has
not been a formal documentation of the utilization of
SC+. Qualitative information can contribute to the design
of nutrition interventions that foster the adequate
use of products, and promote the development of
healthy eating habits [27].
Methods
Design
The qualitative study was embedded in an intervention
study aiming to compare the incidence of malnutrition
and mortality among children aged 6 to 23 months receiving
different strategies to prevent acute malnutrition
[21]. The qualitative study was conducted in February
2012, 6 months after the first distribution. Two villages
in each intervention arm were purposefully selected
from the list of villages selected for the overall research
based on their diversity in terms of population size, location,
access and distance to healthcare facilities and marketplaces.
One has the highest population size, was
nearest from a health center, market and water access,
easily accessible by road and the second had the lowest
population size, farthest from a health center, market
and water access, and not as easily accessible by road.
Data from those villages are reported here. Available female
caregivers of children enrolled in the intervention
study were randomly selected from an exhaustive list of
participants and invited to participate in focus group discussions
(FGD) or in-depth interviews (IDI) [28]. Only
one woman per household or compound was eligible.
Socio-demographic data of the participants were not collected.
Women were selected as they were the adult who
went to collect the products at the distribution sites and
were responsible for giving it to the child. Prior to receiving
the monthly distribution, caregivers took part in
an educational session, focusing on the use of the nutritional
supplements and essential nutrition feeding actions
adapted to each age group [29].
Data collection and analysis
Focus group discussions were conducted in the participating
communities with between 6 to 8 participants
[30–32]. An interview guide (Additional file 1) was developed
using open-ended and semi-directed questions
targeting the themes related to the objectives of the
study: preparation and conservation, consumption and
sharing practices and perceived impact of the consumption
of the nutritional supplements. All the discussions
were conducted in a private area in the villages using
local language (Hausa) and audio-recorded with permission
from the participants. The recordings were directly
transcribed in French by a local translator and then from
French to English by another translator. The transcripts
were verified by both F.B. and C.M.. Data focusing on
supplementary food (RUSF, LNS-MQ and SC+) were analyzed
manually by two researchers. Other qualitative
data concerning cash transfer were analyzed separately
and reported elsewhere [33]. Thematic content analysis,
using both deductive and inductive approaches, was applied
to code the transcripts [34–37].
Results are presented by themes and are supported
with quotes as illustration of participants’ responses.
Results
A total of 114 caregivers participated (Table 2).
When referring to RUSF and LNS-MQ, most of the
participants named the nutritional supplements by a
word in Hausa representing its consistency and appearance,
they were primarily described as “biskit” (biscuit)
or “labou” (groundnut paste).
“Giving the children biscuits protected them against
certain illnesses like diarrhea, vomiting and fever”,
RUSF/Cash.
“We are very happy with the biskit because it protects
our children from malnutrition”, LNS-MQ/Cash.
When referring to SC+, consistency, appearance, perceived
effects on weight gain and overall nutritional status
were also considered. Participants described SC+ as
“gari”, which means “flour”, but also as “garin kwamasso”,
which means flour for malnutrition, or “garin
boudous”, meaning flour that promotes weight gain, or
“garin taimako”, which means aid flour.
Preparation
During the distribution and prior to returning home,
caregivers were invited to participate in an information
session on how to use the nutritional supplements and
answer any questions. During the interviews, some of
the mothers described deviations in the use of the supplement
at the household level. For example, some caregivers
reported that they mixed the LNS-MQ into food
or drink to prevent vomiting or with hot milk to increase
appetite. Some reported that they did not mix the
RUSF, as they were instructed.
“I added water and give him like a liquid, he accepted
to drink it because I noticed that when he eats this compact
paste he had to vomit immediately”. LNS-MQ.
“I give it to my child as it is, I had never mixed it with
something else”. RUSF.
Regarding SC+ consumption, most frequently, the
mode of preparation consisted of cooking it with
water, as presented during the information sessions.
However, some participants said that they use it
“moistened” for which they covered the flour with hot
water, as for preparing local couscous. Other participants
indicated consuming the SC+ in “dry” form i.e.
without any preparation. Some participants explained
that they prepared it depending on the children’s
preferences and some reported adding other ingredients
such as oil, onion, peanut meal, salt, or sugar. A
participant indicated:
“That’s what I do, I buy some oil, some onion and then
peanut meal and I mix it with a little salt”. SC+.
Different forms of preparing the nutritional supplements
emerged.
Consumption and sharing practices.
Divergences in the way in which nutritional supplements
are consumed, emerged as a commonality among
participants. However, although differences in how the
nutritional supplements were given to children emerged,
when referring to LNS-MQ and RUSF, most of the participants
explained that they complied with the daily
dose of one packet, most administered it between meals,
in the morning. However, some participants indicated
dividing the daily dose into two or three feedings, particularly
for the youngest children who were still breastfeeding.
A participant said:
“When the distribution started, my child was not yet
complementary feeding. When I take the packet I divide
it in two, I give one portion in the morning, the rest in
the evening; but now that he is weaned, he eats a packet
by himself”. RUSF.
When exploring how LNS-MQ was used, most of the
participants indicated that they gave “one spoonful in
the morning, one spoonful at noon, one spoonful in the
afternoon.” However, some participants indicated that
their children disliked the product, particularly the first
few days after introduction. These participants explained
that when children disliked the product, they tried to
find ways to make their children like it. Hence, finding
ways to increase acceptability were the main drivers to
find alternative ways to “prepare” LNS-MQ.
A participant explained:
“I mixed it [referring to LNS-MQ] with beans and rice
for him at first when I saw that he didn’t want to eat it. [
…] but now he’s used to it, he eats it without me mixing
it into other things”. LNS-MQ/Cash.
Most of the participants indicated that color and
consistency of prepared SC+ helped them to know if the
child would consume it or not. A participant explained,
“After preparation, we use it for up to 30 minutes. After
this there is a change in color or it may become liquid as
water meaning that it then it becomes less concentrated”.
SC+.
In reference to RUSF, LNS-MQ and SC+ most of the
participants reported that when the supplements were
introduced to the children for the first time, they were
not well accepted, but once they got used to them, they
appreciated the products. Referring to SC+, a participant
explained:
“In the beginning, my child didn’t want to eat it. I
waited and offered him to try again and again, until he
accepted it. Sometimes I buy little cakes and promise to
give him after he consumes the porridge”. SC+.
From the participant’s perspective, nutritional supplements
seem to be shared primarily with siblings in the
household, but also with other family members, neighbors
and friends.
In some households, where men had more than one
wife, it was common for them to share the products with
other children and even with all members of the household.
A participant explained:
“Honestly, all of the members of the household eat it and
some spouses, when you refuse to give them any, they express
their displeasure [ …] our wish is to tell you to give us a little
more or to give us something else other than gari”. SC+.
When referring to LNS-MQ a participant explained:
“... when they provide you with labou the others expect,
hope that you will share it with them, now if you refuse
then trouble starts”. LNS-MQ/Cash.
Some women also indicated sharing the supplements
with close family members who lived in the same compound
and/or had many children to feed. However, although
sharing was frequently reported, many
participants indicated keeping most of the ration for the
children for whom the nutritional supplement was indicated.
When referring to SC+, a participant explained:
“Yes of course his brothers [of the target child] like gari,
I give them a little raw gari but not the same amount as
the target child and I only do it to get them out of the
way because they are big”. SC+.
This practice was also found among participants who
received LNS. A participant indicated:
“I have other children and once I get back to the house,
after I have given half a pot to my co-wife, I give half a
pot to my own children; I keep the remaining three pots
for the target child and that covers about two weeks”.
LNS-MQ/Cash (During the distribution, the participants
received four pots of LNS-MQ per child per month).
RUSF, LNS-MQ and SC+ were shared. Most of the
participants indicated that they need to take care of their
children and please them equally. Feeding them with nutritional
supplements, or any other food, was one way of
taking care of children and to please them.
Some participants indicated:
“We make certain gestures out of obligation without
wanting to when a parent comes to your house to tell
you: today my child hasn’t even had a bite to eat; and so
you are obligated to give them some flour”, SC+.
“...you put some [referring to SC+] in a quart scoop
and you bring it to your mother so she can cook it for
your brothers”, SC+.
“I take two packets that I hide for my daughter and the
rest I give to neighbors, in-laws and my parents”, SC+/
Cash (During the distribution, the participants received
four bags of 1.5 kg per child per month).
Among some breastfeeding mothers, eating one of the
three supplements was perceived to help them to produce
more breast milk and was an important motivating
factor for consuming the supplements themselves. A
breastfeeding mother indicated:
“I’ve noticed that it increases milk supply [ …] I often
mix the gari with oil to eat and it gives me milk”, SC+/
Cash.
“The stock lasts for three weeks because us mothers eat
some from time to time to guarantee our milk supply”,
LNS-MQ/Cash.
Only a few participants indicated that they did not
share RUSF or LNS-MQ. The perception that it would
not have the expected effects on the children who
needed the supplement was the main reason that prevented
them from sharing the products. They also indicated
that the amount of supplements distributed
monthly covered the entire period between two distributions,
thus the product was only consumed by the target
child. A participant explained:
“For me, in principle I tell myself that the complete
contents of the packet must be eaten by the child each
day, but if I share it with a child that was not targeted I
know deep inside that the product will not work because
it was not eaten by the intended child only, so that’s why
I never share it with other children”. RUSF/Cash.
Perception of the impact of supplementary foods.
Nutritional supplements were often described to be a
special kind of food that improves health, intelligence,
physical appearance and protects children from diseases.
After using the supplements for 5 months, the benefits
described from nutritional supplements included children’s
weight gain, physical strength, beauty, intelligence
and health maintenance.
Independently of the type of nutritional supplement,
after participants gave the products to their children for
a 5-month period, the children were described as, “more
healthy”, “more active”, “doing well”, “smoother”,
“brighter”, “more handsome”, “more plump”, and
“stronger”.
“I am happy because giving the gari means that I don’t
have to shuttle back and forth between my house and the
CSI [health center] anymore, he doesn’t have diarrhea,
he doesn’t vomit, he has gained weight and he has become
active”. SC+/ Food ration.
The nutritional supplements were presented by some
participants as a special kind of food, which can provide
protection from disease. Other caregivers compared the
nutritional supplements to vitamins or even to medicine.
When referring to SC+ participants indicated:
“It’s a food but it is mixed with a strong medicine that
makes the child stop being malnourished”, SC+.
“In my opinion, it [referring to LNS-MQ] is an
enriched product that you give to children to protect
them from diseases, improve their appetite, and the child
gets better quickly”. LNS-MQ/Cash.
Furthermore, some mothers who fed their children
with RUSF indicated that feeding their children with the
“biskit” give them independence because children become
satiated and they asked for food less often. A participant
explained:
“Really, the” biskit”, in addition to protecting our children
from illness, has become a means of independence
for the mothers, because as soon as you offer them a “biskit”,
they eat it right away, they drink some water and go
play, thanks to the biscuit there are no more complaints
from children clinging to their mothers’ skirts”. RUSF/
Cash.
Nutritional supplements are also perceived as an additional
financial support to the household. The nutritional
supplements were described as a financial impact
on households by guaranteeing food for their children.
Participants indicated:
“...thanks to the gari the women’s expenses have been
reduced because as soon as the child is full he doesn’t demand
anything else to eat”, SC+.
The financial impact was also described in terms of
decreasing expenses for medical costs because children
were sick less often. A participant explained:
“I can say that husbands are satisfied because they said
that thanks to the flour, they don’t pay medical costs
anymore because the children have stopped being sick all
the time”. SC+.
Discussion
Our qualitative findings provide valuable information on
how household practices and perception can vary depending
on the type of nutritional supplements and how
they are integrated within familial eating practices. The
data show a good acceptance of the supplements at the
household level. Further, participants perceived positive
effects of the supplements on children’s health,
intelligence and physical appearance, and potential effect
on children’s nutritional status particularly toward SC+,
emerged as a possible important driver for giving these
products to the children. This result is important as it is
a possible driver for the parents, who perceive positive
effects, which may then lead them to give the supplements
to the target children to improve health status,
and therefore also respecting the instructions.
The acceptability and use of the supplements showed
the importance of adapted educational sessions. Such information
and education sessions seem to have an impact
on the consumption of the product. Adhering to
the messages, promotion and education sessions should
be considered as a pillar to improve intake of the supplement
in addition to social norms.
Concerning the description of the supplements, findings
highlighted the importance of the consistency.
While RUSF and LNS-MQ were often described as provided
to children adequately, few participants described
the adaptation of the daily dose, interpreted as encouraging
consumption by the child. With respect to SC+, its
consistency was perceived as more similar to customary
foods, which seems to have given more flexibility for
meal preparation to women.
Another topic, which would be important to consider
in a distribution to improve intake by the targeted individual
of the supplement, emerged as sharing of the nutritional
supplement among members of the household
and community. Sharing was interpreted as having potential
negative impact on the expected effect on the
child’s nutritional status. The three supplements appeared
all as being potentially shared. These results
showed that giving the nutritional supplement only to
the target child when there are also other children are
living in the same household and when there is not
enough food available for all household members is difficult,
and not a realistic assumption.
RUSF and LNS-MQ were shared primarily with other
children in the household. This finding was consistent
with findings from other authors who described intrahousehold
sharing of RUSF and LNS-MQ among children
[9, 26, 38]. Our results suggest that this is primarily
because RUSF and LNS-MQ are distributed in small
packages and because they are ready for consumption.
Small packages may contribute to the perception that
the target child should consume the entire dose. In this
specific context, the sharing of nutritional supplements
seem to be part of a deep-seated cultural practice, or social
norm, of sharing, which will have to be integrated
into the sensitization messages or otherwise considered
operationally [39, 40]. Likewise, solidarity toward immediate
and close family members, neighbors and friends
also emerged as socially desirable and as an innate cultural
practice, which heavily influenced sharing of nutritional
supplements with important others.
On the contrary, SC+ is packed in bags and needs to be
cooked. These characteristics may contribute to sharing. It
is important to note that the quantity of SC+ provided also
included the assumption that part of the ration may be
shared. Of note, consumption of RUSF and LNS-MQ as
part of a family meal was not described. This was the case
though for SC+ for which both intra- and inter-household
sharing was reported. This finding is also consistent with
findings of other studies that reported sharing of SC+ [13,
38]. In our study, gifting SC+ to people outside of the immediate
household was also reported in all groups.
Through the educational sessions the importance of
not sharing supplements in order to maximize benefit
for target children was emphasized, however traditional
family customs and community solidarity were important
factors leading to some sharing [26].
Some limitations are worth noting when interpreting
these findings. Only mothers were interviewed, as they
provided the supplements to the children. To better
understand intrahousehold management, perceptions
and practices, other family members, fathers for example,
would be an important group to include. Additionally,
women’s testimonies could have been biased
out of fear of not receiving additional distributions if the
educational information was not practiced correctly. To
mitigate this fear, participants were reassured that their
responses would not impact current or future distributions.
It is possible also that the three-month interval between
the distribution of supplements and the
qualitative study could have led to problems with recall;
however, we believe this to be minimal given that the
distributions were notable events for beneficiary households.
Furthermore, the participants were questioned regarding
their perceptions and practices over a five
months distribution period (August to December 2011).
They could have varied during this period, as harvesting
occurred in October, thus changing the eating practices
of the households, especially concerning sharing
practices.
Previous studies and our findings emphasize the importance
of considering the sociocultural context of participants
for field interventions such as distribution of
nutritious foods for specific target groups [41]. Understanding
of the sociocultural context related to nutrition
is important to better address the needs and better design
the intervention. Implementation of such programs
would need to be contextualized and adapted during distribution,
monitoring and evaluation. Moreover, the impact
of supplements during pregnancy and breastfeeding
could be also a key component to investigate. Ensuring
that pregnant and breastfeeding mothers have adequate
nutrition has a positive impact for the mother and infant.
This is also an important aspect to consider in
terms of sharing as highlighted here. Further research is
needed to improve the impact of distribution of supplemental
products, taking into consideration the context
and also elements such as management and use at the
household level.
Conclusions
The findings showed that the nutritional supplements
were perceived to have numerous positive medical, nutritional
and physical impacts on the target child. Many
women who participated indicated following the recommended
consumption of the nutritional supplements,
but their daily practices of preparation and administration
varied depending on the supplement distributed.
Despite sensitization sessions and household support in
some intervention groups, sharing nutritional supplements
with household members and gifting it to people
outside the household were reported and could have reduced
the actual amounts of the products consumed by
the target children.
Further research using data triangulation method
could explore the conditions to be met to ensure that
operational strategies for the malnutrition prevention
benefits the most vulnerable.