Background
An adolescent is defined as a person aged 10–19 years
which is a period of gradual transition from childhood
to adulthood [1]. Adolescence period is a critical period
of physical growth and development. This period is very
sensitive to malnutrition due to the increased physiologic
need for nutrition. Adolescent malnutrition affects
not only themselves but also their future generation.
Underweight is low Body Mass Index (BMI) for age i.e.
< − 2 standard deviation (SD). Stunting is the low height
for age i.e. <−2SD. Adolescents are key to break the
cycle of the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition,
poverty, and food insecurity. Investing in this group of
population will ensure longer-term sustainable results
for reducing poverty, food insecurity, fertility, and
malnutrition. However, this group has received minimal
attention in the developing countries including Ethiopia.
As a result, adolescent undernutrition is widespread
problem prominently in economically developing countries
including Ethiopia [1–5]. The prevalence of adolescent
undernutrition in Ethiopia is very high and it
increases over time. For example, according to the 2005
and 2011 Ethiopian demographic and health survey
report, the prevalence of underweight in adolescent girls
was 32 and 36%, respectively [6, 7]. In Ethiopia, overweight
or obesity among adolescents is rare. Early marriage
and subsequent pregnancy, lack of educational
attainment, poor access to safe water and sanitation, lack
of health services targeted for adolescents, lack of knowledge
on the existing adolescent health services, cultures
and low utilization of family planning methods were
reported as a contributing factor to adolescent undernutrition.
The consequences of adolescent undernutrition
include delayed growth, retarded intellectual development,
goiter, increase risk of infection, blindness, anemia and
inadequate bone mineralization. In adolescent girls, future
consequences of stunting include increased risk of adverse
reproductive outcomes. E.g. risk for low birth weight,
cephalo-pelvic disproportion, dystocia, and cesarean section.
Again low body mass in adolescent girls is associated
with reduced bone mass in early adulthood and may result
in postmenopausal osteoporosis and its sequel [8–10].
Current efforts and investments in the first 1000 days
of life that focuses on preventing stunting in children
will be realized if there is improved adolescent nutrition.
So far, most of the interventions have either focused on
children aged 0–5 years or on pregnant or lactating
women. However, not much attention has been paid to
adolescents’ nutrition in developing countries. Today’s
well-nourished adolescents will have optimal skills,
talents, energies, and more of they will be healthy and
responsible citizens and parents by tomorrow. To
improve adolescent undernutrition and to break the
intergenerational cycle of malnutrition, there should be
attention and evidence-based interventions for adolescent
undernutrition [11]. Notably, there are different
studies which assessed adolescent undernutrition and
associated factors in Ethiopia. However, they came up
with inconsistency and inconclusive findings. They
documented the prevalence of stunting in this group
ranging from 7.2 to 40.1% [12, 13] and prevalence of
underweight in this group from 5.8 to 80.8% [12, 14].
Moreover, there is no study or review that estimated the
pooled prevalence of adolescent undernutrition and
associated factors. Therefore, this systematic review and
meta-analysis were conducted to estimate the pooled
prevalence and associated factors of adolescent undernutrition,
which could help policymakers and health
professional for decision making.
Methods
Study design and search strategy
A systematic review of eligible articles was conducted
using preferred reporting items for systematic reviews
and meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines [15]. A comprehensive
search of articles published in English from
January 2000 through November 2017 was made from
Pub Med, Scopus, Google, Google Scholar, Cochrane
Library and CINAHL. In addition to these databases,
the reference lists of the included studies were scanned
to find potential articles. The search was performed
using key terms such as adolescent undernutrition
(including stunting, underweight), adolescent malnutrition,
prevalence of adolescent undernutrition, magnitude
of adolescent undernutrition, assessment of adolescent
undernutrition, adolescent nutritional disorders, associated
factors, risk factors, determinants and Ethiopia separately
and/or in combination using the Boolean operator
like “OR” or “AND”. Two of the authors made the search
independently. Articles retrieved from the databases were
exported to Endnote version X6 to facilitate the article
selection process and manage citation.
Study selection and eligibility criteria
This review and meta-analysis included studies conducted
in Ethiopia with the primary objective of adolescent undernutrition
and associated factors. Studies published in
English and conducted at both facility and community
levels were included. Studies conducted in adolescents
who had diseases like HIV/AIDS, renal diseases and
others were excluded. Before including the studies in the
final review, they were assessed for inclusion criteria using
the title, abstract and a full review of the studies. When
the prevalence or associated factors were not reported, we
contacted the authors, and if they did not respond or told
us that the required data were not available, we excluded
the study from the review. When one population was reported
in more than one publication, only the most recent
one or with maximum information was included in the
review to avoid sample overlapping.
Outcome measure
The primary outcome of this review was the prevalence
of adolescent undernutrition i.e. stunting and underweight.
According to the WHO 2006 reference data,
adolescent height-for-age, and Body Mass Index (BMI)
for age below − 2 Standard Deviation (SD) is stunting
and underweight respectively [16]. The second outcome
of this review was the associated factors of adolescent
undernutrition. If one factor was identified as an associated
factor for adolescent undernutrition in two and
above studies (articles) then that associated factor was
included in this review and meta-analysis but not
considered if it identified only from one study. Age, diet
diversity score (DDS), family size, household food
insecurity, residence, sex and water protection were
included in the analysis of associated factors for adolescent
stunting. Age, diet diversity score (DDS), family
size, father education status, household food insecurity,
latrine, mother education status and sex were included
in the analysis of associated factors for adolescent
underweight.
Quality assessment and data extraction
Two reviewers independently assessed the quality of the
studies by adopting the specific protocol. The criteria
proposed in the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for nonrandomized
studies were used to assess the quality of studies
[17]. The following parameters were assessed: sampling
strategy, inclusion/exclusion criteria, sample size, cut-offs
and reference for the assessment of adolescent undernutrition
status, criteria to identify undernutrition and covariates
included in statistical models to identify associated
factors. The final scoring system comprised 10 criteria for
rating different quality elements for each study (Table 1).
Any discrepancy between the two reviewers was resolved
through discussion and by involving a third reviewer. A
predefined data extraction format was used to collect information
on the name of the author/s, year of publication,
study period, study design, sample size, residence (rural,
urban, both), age of study participants, sex of study participants,
prevalence of stunting, prevalence of underweight
and associated factors.
Publication bias and heterogeneity
To assess the existence of publication bias, funnel plots
were scattered and tested for asymmetry. Egger’s test
was computed [18]. A p-value< 0.05 was used to declare
the statistical significance of publication bias. After a
detailed examination of the studies by the authors, I2 test
statistics were used to check the heterogeneity of studies.
I2 statistics described the total variation across studies. I2
test statistics of < 50, 50–75% and > 75% was declared as
low, moderate and high heterogeneity respectively [19].
Statistical methods and analysis
Statistical analysis was carried out using STATA version
14. Initially, data were entered into Microsoft Excel and
then exported to STATA version 14 for further analysis.
The effect size of the meta-analysis was the prevalence
of stunting, underweight and odds ratio of the associated
factors. Random effect model was used as a method of
analysis [12]. We identified associated factors for adolescent
undernutrition that met the meta-analysis eligibility
criteria, by looking at the adjusted ORs and 95% CIs
reported in each study. Subgroup analysis was conducted
by regions of the country and residence of the study
participants. The effect of selected associated factors
which include; Age, diet diversity score (DDS), family size,
household food insecurity, residence, sex and water protection
for adolescent stunting, and diet diversity score
(DDS), family size, father education status, household food
insecurity, latrine, mother education status and sex for
adolescent underweight was analyzed using separate categories
of meta-analysis. The findings of the review and
meta-analysis were presented using tables, forest plots and
Odds Ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Results
Study searches and selection
In the initial search, we found a total of 2100 records
from different electronic search databases which include;
Pub Med (595), Google (563), Google Scholar (490),
Scopus (205), CINAHL (150) and Cochrane Library (97).
From this, 250 duplicate records were removed and
1800 records were excluded after screening by title and
abstracts. We assessed the full texts of 50 remaining
records for eligibility, and 28 records were further
excluded by the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally,
22 studies were considered for the final review and
meta-analysis [7, 12–14, 20–37] (Fig. 1). Of the 22 studies,
16 and 21studies were used to estimate the pooled
prevalence of stunting and underweight respectively.
Characteristics of the studies and systematic review
All the studies included in this review were crosssectional
studies. A total of 17,854 adolescents were
included in the analysis. The included studies reported
sample size ranging from 211 [21] to 3724 [7]. Thirteen
(59.1%) of the included studies were conducted in both
urban and rural areas [7, 13, 14, 20, 22, 28, 30, 32–37].
One of the studies was conducted in Addis Ababa, the
capital city of Ethiopia [12] and one study was conducted
at the national level [7], 5 studies were from
Eastern Ethiopia, 4 studies were from Western Ethiopia,
5 were from Northern Ethiopia and 6 were from Southern
Ethiopia. The highest prevalence of stunting was reported
from Western Ethiopia (40.1%), and the least was
from central Ethiopia (Addis Ababa) (7.2%). The highest
prevalence of underweight was reported from western
Ethiopia (80.8%), while the least was from central
Ethiopia (Addis Ababa) (5.8%) (Table 1).
Prevalence of adolescent undernutrition
Sixteen studies were included in the analysis to estimate
the pooled prevalence of adolescent stunting. The heterogeneity
among the 16 studies used to estimate the
pooled prevalence of adolescent stunting was very high
(I2 = 97.3% and p < 0.001). Using the random-effects
model, the pooled prevalence of adolescent stunting was
20.7% (95% CI: 16.08, 25.33). Twenty-one studies were
included to estimate the pooled prevalence of
underweight. Heterogeneity among the studies used to
estimate the pooled prevalence of adolescent underweight
was very high (I2 = 99.6% and p < 0.001). The
pooled prevalence of adolescent underweight was 27.5%
(95% CI: 17.9, 57.14). A subgroup analysis by region and
residence in Ethiopia was computed to compare the
prevalence of adolescent undernutrition across different
areas and participant characteristics. Thus, the pooled
prevalence estimated for adolescent stunting was high in
western Ethiopia (29.4% (95% CI: 13.39, 45.25)), and the
least was in central Ethiopia (Addis Ababa) (7.2% (95%
CI: 5.63, 8.77)). Similarly, the subgroup analysis by
residence showed that adolescent stunting was high in
rural areas (26.5, 95%CI: 20.62, 32.38). The estimated
pooled prevalence of adolescent underweight was high
in western Ethiopia (44.5, 95%CI: 3.65, 85.38) and least
in central Ethiopia (Addis Ababa) (5.8, 95%CI: 4.43,
7.17). Another subgroup analysis showed that adolescent
underweight was high in rural areas (41.34, 95%CI: 8.32,
74.37) (Figs. 2, 3, 4 5 and 6).
The associated factor for adolescent undernutrition
Eleven studies were included in the analysis of associated
factors for adolescent stunting. Six associated factors for
adolescent stunting were included in the analysis. The
pooled odds ratios were ranging from 0.87 to 3.39.
Heterogeneity wasn’t observed among studies evaluating
a residence, family size≥5, unprotected water source for
drinking, and food-insecure households. From these
associated factors, adolescent age and sex were not
statistically significant factors for adolescent stunting but
residence, family size≥5, unprotected water source for
drinking and food-insecure households were statistically
significant factors (Table 2).
Similarly, 16 studies were included in the analysis
of associated factor for adolescent underweight. Eight
associated factors were included in the analysis. The
pooled odds ratios were ranging from 0.69 to 4.1.
Heterogeneity was observed among studies evaluating
adolescent age, family size, food-insecure household,
sex, latrine availability, diet diversity score (DDS), and
mother educational status. Thus, weights were calculated
using the random-effects analysis. Early adolescent
age (10–14 years)), family size≥5, lack of latrine,
WHO diet diversity score < 4, mothers with no formal
education were statistically significant factors for
adolescent underweight (Table 3).
Publication bias
We assessed the funnel plot for asymmetry by visual inspection
for stunting, underweight and the associated
factors. The funnel plot appeared symmetrical and found
no publication bias and Egger’s test was also computed
for stunting, underweight and associated factors similar
to the funnel plot, it revealed evidence of no publication
bias (Figs. 7 and 8) (Tables 2 and 3).
Discussion
Undernutrition negatively affects adolescents by affecting
their ability to learn and work at maximum productivity,
increases the risk of poor obstetric outcomes, affects
sexual maturation and growth, intergenerational cycle of
undernutrition, and preventing the attainment of normal
bone and teeth strength [38].
This review was conducted to estimate the pooled
prevalence and associated factors of adolescent undernutrition
in Ethiopia. Quality of the studies included in this
review was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale
(NOS) for non-randomized studies. Studies with > 5
score (out of 10 scores) were classified as good quality
studies and those with ≤5 were poor quality studies. All
studies had a score of > 5. In this review, the randomeffects
model was used for meta-analysis, considering
the likelihood of significant heterogeneity amongst
studies. The pooled prevalence of adolescent stunting
was 20.7% (95%CI: 16.1, 25.3). Subgroup analysis using
region and residence showed marked differences in the
prevalence of adolescent stunting. High prevalence of
stunting was observed from studies conducted in western
Ethiopia and rural areas; 29.4 and 26.5% respectively.
Stunting prevalence was low in central Ethiopia (Addis
Ababa) and in the urban areas. The difference in the
prevalence between the regions and residences could be
due to the differences in socio-demographic and economic
characteristics, and the number of studies included
in each category of analysis. The stunting
prevalence of this review is lower when we compared
with the result report from studies conducted in South
East Asia countries (Bangladesh (48%), Myanmar (39%)),
India (54%) [39, 40] and Indonesia (23.6%) [41]. The
prevalence of stunting in this review is within the range
of the prevalence reported from Latin America and
Caribbean countries (7–43%) [42]. The difference might
be due to the difference in sampling and study period,
cultural and dietary practices, access and utilization of
health services.
In this review, the pooled prevalence of adolescent
underweight was 27.5% (95%CI: 17.9, 37.1). Prevalence
of adolescent underweight was high in western Ethiopia
and in the rural areas; 44.5 and 41.3% respectively. Low
prevalence of adolescent underweight was observed in
central Ethiopia (Addis Ababa) and urban areas. The difference
in adolescent underweight between regions as
well as residences could be due to the recurrent drought
and insufficient food production in western Ethiopia, especially
in the rural areas. Drought, insufficient food
production along with the global increased food prices
can result in food insecurity and adolescent underweight
[1]. According to the Ethiopia Demographic Health
Survey Reports (EDHS), adolescent underweight in 2000,
2005, and 2011 was 38.4, 32.5, and 36% respectively [43].
The pooled adolescent underweight of this review
(27.5%) is somewhat less than the underweight estimated
in EDHS. Again underweight prevalence of this
review is lower as compared to underweight prevalence
studied in Bangladesh (67%), Myanmar (32%) and India
(49%) [39, 40] but it is higher than the underweight prevalence
reported from Latin America and Caribbean countries
(3–22%), Zambia (13.7%), Nigeria (18.6%), Tanzania
(21%) [42, 44–46]. The possible explanation for the
differences in prevalence could be due to the
differences in socioeconomic status, study period and
access and utilization of health care services. Prevalence
of adolescent underweight in this review is in
line with the underweight prevalence reported from seven
African countries (12.6–31.9%) [47].
In this review, the effect sizes of associated factors for
adolescent undernutrition were estimated. The odds of
having stunted adolescents were 2.25 times higher in
households with a family size of ≥5 members. Likewise, a
household with a family size of ≥5 members was 2.95 times
higher in underweight than non-underweight adolescents.
This finding is in line with a study conducted in sub-
Saharan countries [48]. There is increased sharing of
the available food among the large household members
causing inadequate consumption of food. In addition to
this, large family size usually found in uneducated parents
who are more likely to accept and practice food taboo that
affecting adolescent nutritional status [46]. Food insecure
households were at increased risk of adolescent undernutrition.
Food insecurity is one of the underline causes for
undernutrition which can result in chronic nutritional
problems in adolescent and cause long term negative
effects in life [49].
Residence (rural) and unprotected source of drinking
water were other significant associated factors for adolescent
stunting. This can be explained by the inequalities
in access to medical services, socio-economic status
and health information in urban and rural settings. The
unprotected source of drinking water is a vehicle for intestinal
parasites and other communicable diseases
which causes poor nutritional status. A similar finding
was found in a study conducted in sub-Saharan countries
[48]. Because of repeated infections, there is depressed
immunity and making the severity and duration
of diseases more severe and cause poor nutritional status
of adolescents [41]. Age of adolescent (early age adolescent)
was identified as an associated factor for
adolescent underweight. There is faster growth and development
in the early age of adolescent (10–14 years) as
compared to late adolescent (15–19 years). Hence, if the
requirement for achieving their maximum need for
growth and development is not fulfilled, they will be
prone to develop underweight [1]. Lack of latrine is
statistically significant factor for adolescent underweight
(AOR = 2.2, 95%CI: 1.1,4,4, p-value = 0.03). In areas
where there is a scarcity of proper latrine utilization,
contamination and infections will be common. Poor
environmental sanitation and barefoot walking may serve
as a means for parasitic infection [2, 3]. Improving dietary
quality is important for increasing micronutrient intake
[50]. In this review, WHO diet diversity score < 4 was
higher among underweight adolescents as compared to the
counterpart (AOR = 1.95 95%CI: 1.3, 2.9, p-value = 0.001).
Low WHO DDS reflects inadequate dietary intake which
can result in undernutrition [10].
Mother educational status was found as an associated
factor for adolescent underweight. Educated mothers are
cautious of what their family eats than uneducated
mothers. Educational attainment of mother could lead to
higher income and may imply a higher availability of food
and household resources. It might be positively associated
with higher nutritional awareness as well as better caring
practices of an adolescent. Educated mothers can allocate
family resources for nutrition and have health decisionmaking
power which ultimately affects the nutritional
status of the adolescent [1, 41]. This review used a comprehensive
search strategy and more than two reviewers
were involved in each step of the review process. PRISMA
guideline was strictly followed during the review process
and in order to explore the source of heterogeneity, a
subgroup analysis was performed.
This review, however, has certain limitations like all
the studies included were cross-sectional which could
affect the temporal relationship between the assessed
associated factors and outcome of interest. The number
of studies for estimation of the effect size of associated
factors was small which could affect the generalization
of the findings. Study participants were not proportional
in sex (female participants were higher in number).
Conclusion
Adolescent undernutrition remains one of the most
important public health problems in Ethiopia. Almost
a quarter of Ethiopian adolescents were affected by
stunting and underweight. Large family size, rural
residence and unprotected source of drinking water
were the associated factors for adolescent stunting.
Similarly, large family size, early age of adolescent, lack
of latrine, low dietary diversity score, mother illiteracy,
and food insecure household were the associated
factors for adolescent underweight. It would be good
to give high emphasis on adolescent undernutrition
and it is important to address the above mentioned
associated factors during adolescent nutritional interventions
in Ethiopia.