Background
Nocturia is defined as ‘the complaint that the individual
has to wake at night one or more times to void’ by International
Continence Society (ICS) [1]. Until recently, the
definition has been revised as ‘waking up to pass urine
during the main sleep period’ [2]. Nocturia can affect all
age groups although the disease prevalence does increase
with age. Bosch and Weiss reviewed the nocturia prevalence
studies in community based, predominantly populations
in the western countries and some Asian countries
(including China, Taiwan, Japan, Korea, Hong Kong and
Singapore) [3]. They reported that prevalence of nocturia
among younger populations (20–40 years old) with one
or more voids per night varies from 11–44% whilst those
with two or more voids per night has been reported to
range between 2–18% [3]. Nevertheless, nocturia is more
frequent among the older populations (> 70 years old),
with 69–93% having one or more voids per night while
28–62% reported two or more voids per night [3]. Similarly,
a longitudinal study conducted by van Doorn and
colleagues in the Dutch municipality Krimpen aan den
IJssel showed that the prevalence of nocturia increases
over time and with increasing age among men aged 50 to
78 years [4].
Several studies have demonstrated that nocturia has
negative impact on quality of life and general health
[5–8]. Increase in the number of voids per night has serious
consequences on sleep, symptoms, morbidity from
fatigue and falls and health-related quality of life [5–7].
Unfortunately, nocturia is often unreported, with the
general lack of knowledge that nocturia is a treatable
medical condition being cited as a crucial barrier to treatment
seeking [9].
In Malaysia, there is lack of up-to-date prevalence studies
on nocturia, only very limited studies are available as
reference. A cross-sectional study had been carried out in
Institute of Urology and Nephrology (IUN), Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia in 2007 and reported that the prevalence of
nocturia was 29% among patients presented with lower
urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) [10]. Similarly, Low and
colleagues reported that high prevalence (19%) of LUTS
was found among women in Northern Malaysia in 2006
and many of them did not seek treatment due to low disease
awareness [11]. Most of these studies were at least
10 years ago, and thus the relevance remains questionable.
Therefore, the aim of this present population-based
study was to investigate the prevalence of nocturia and
awareness pertaining to nocturia among communitydwelling
adults in Malaysia.
Methods
A cross-sectional population-based study was conducted
among community-dwelling Malaysian adults
aged ≥ 18 years old across all states in Malaysia from
May 2019 to September 2019 (Fig. 1). Convenience sampling
was applied to obtain responses from any Malaysian
adult aged ≥ 18 years old. The respondents were
approached based on the age population percentage
reported by Department of Statistics Malaysia (https://
www. dosm. gov. my). Individuals who were unable to read
or understand English, Malay or Chinese, or with cognitive
impairment or active mental illness, and all incomplete
responses were excluded. A complete response was
considered when the respondent answered all required
questions until the last page of the survey, whereas for
the questionnaire that was not done until the last page of
survey was categorised as ‘incomplete response’.
Questionnaire
The questionnaire consisted of three sections was developed
for this study (Additional file 1). The first section of
the research questionnaire consisted of items to extract
the demographic data of the subjects. The second part
was made up of three domains, namely present medical
condition and disease pattern (2 items), night urination
and sleeping issues (5 items) and treatment-seeking
behaviour (2 items). Nocturia was defined as one or more
voids at night based on the definition from ICS [1]. Those
who had to wake up from sleep at night to urinate at least
once were required to answer all items, while those without
night urination were exempted from some questions
pertaining to night urination and sleeping issues and
treatment-seeking behaviour. The questionnaire was validated
by a panel of experts on content validity and clarity.
The English version of the questionnaire was checked
by a native English speaker. The questionnaire was translated
into Malay and Chinese languages based on ISPOR
guideline with two forward-translation and two backtranslation
[12]. Three languages of questionnaire were
pre-tested with a pilot study (n = 40, respectively) to confirm
on the simplicity of language used and to assess the
comprehension of the questions. Feedbacks were taken
into consideration to incorporate into the final questionnaire.
A second pilot study was conducted after the
changes made to the questions, followed by a retest of the
pilot study to assess internal consistency.
Data collection
Previous to the data collection, the researchers or the
trained research assistants used a pre-trained structured
protocol to introduce the instrument to the participants
based on the inclusion criteria. In order to increase the
response rate and outreach nationwide, data was collected
by mixed mode, i.e. face-to-face and online modes.
Face-to-face data collection was important to address the
low level of technology literacy and/or limited access to
the internet among certain segments of the population
i.e. the elderly as well as the suburban and rural folks. It
took place in public areas i.e. shopping malls, parks, restaurants,
cafeteria and markets in rural and urban areas.
The approached subjects spent approximately 5–10 min
on the printed self-administered questionnaires. For the
online mode, a third-party online platform was utilised
to collect the responses. An information sheet about
this research study along with a written consent form
were attached to each copy of the questionnaire. All subjects
signed the written informed consent form prior to
answering the questionnaire.
Data analysis
Continuous variables were presented as mean and standard
deviation; whilst categorical variables were presented
as frequency and percentage. All data collected were
tabulated and analysed using the Statistical Package for
Social Sciences software, version 24.0. Pearson’s chisquared
(χ2) test was used to assess the significance in
prevalence differences between dichotomous variables,
such as sex, age group and employment status (or Fisher’s
exact test when the frequency of respondents was less
than 5 for any category). For ordinal or continuous variables
(e.g. age and degree of bother), the Mann–Whitney
U test was used to determine the difference between two
independent groups (or Kruskal Wallis test if there was
more than two independent groups). Univariable analysis
were performed for the respondents’ characteristics
in relation to prevalence of nocturia using logistic regression
analysis. Variables with an association of p < 0.05
were selected for multivariable analysis using logistic
regression analysis. Significance was defined as p < 0.05.
Results
The response rate was 74.5%, meaning that a total of 6198
respondents across the states in Malaysia participated in
this study. There were 1538 of incomplete responses and
44 duplication of responses, which were excluded from
the study. The demographic data of the study population
was shown in Table 1. The comparison of demographic
characteristics of study population with and without nocturia
was shown in Table 2. Statistical analysis revealed
that there was significant difference in prevalence
between mean age, sex, race employment status and
comorbidities (p < 0.05, respectively).
The overall prevalence of nocturia (at least one void
per night) among Malaysian adults was 57.3% (Table 2),
with 34.1%, 15.3% and 7.9% having an of an average
of one void per night, two voids per night and three or
more voids per night respectively. Figure 2 illustrated the
increasing trend of prevalence with age in both sex and
frequency of nocturnal voids was associated significantly
with sex in different age groups. Younger (18–40 years
old) and older women (> 60 years old) were more likely
to have one void per night than men from the same age
group (p < 0.05). Whereas middle-aged men (41–60 years
old) were more likely to have two voids per night as compared
to the middle-aged women (p < 0.05; Fig. 2).
The variables univariately associated with nocturia are
presented in Table 3. Age group, sex, race, employments
status and comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes
mellitus, renal disease and overactive bladder were
significantly associated with the prevalence of nocturia.
In the multivariate analysis, age group between 31 and
40 or > 60 years old, and those who were presented with
comorbidities included hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
renal disease or overactive bladder were associated with
significantly higher prevalence of nocturia, whereas age
group of 41–50, male and Chinese or Indian were associated
with a decreased prevalence (Table 3). This study
also revealed that the prevalence of nocturia was significantly
increased with the drink consumption in the late
evening, including large volume of water, tea and coffee
(Fig. 3; p < 0.001) although evening drinking habit was
only one of the few factors predisposing to nocturia since
the prevalence of nocturia was also significantly high
among those without any drink consumption in the late
evening (p < 0.001).
From the sub analyses, the frequency of nocturnal
voids among respondents with nocturia and among
different age groups has been depicted in Fig. 4. Those
who were more than 60 years old were more likely to
experience more than one nocturnal void as compared
to their younger counterparts (Fig. 4). The mean age
for those with once, twice and three or more times of
nocturnal voids was 35.51 ± 14.03, 43.41 ± 14.49 and
46.55 ± 14.97, respectively. The association was significant,
which indicated that frequency of nocturnal void
is higher in older age groups (p < 0.001).
The disease pattern of nocturia encountered by the
respondents with nocturia has been summarised in
Table 4. Post urination dribble was the only symptom
that differed significantly in male respondents with
nocturia compared to female (p < 0.001). Those with
higher age (> 50 years old) were more likely to present
with almost all the symptoms (p < 0.05).
In terms of impact of nocturia on sleep disturbance,
37.3% of respondents with nocturia reported that they
faced sleeping difficulty about half the time or more
after waking up in the middle of night, particularly
among those with ≥ 2 voids per night (66.5%), aged > 50
(40.6%) and employed for wages (62.3%) (Table 5;
p < 0.001). As consequences of sleep disturbance due to
nocturia, they complaint of fatigue (60.9%), difficulty in
concentrating (43.2%), bad mood (41.2%), lack of motivation
to work (34.5%), forgetfulness (24.6%), depression
(15.6%), lack of sex drive (4.61%) and erectile
dysfunction (3.5%; only male respondents). On a scale
of 1 to 10 for degree of bother, those who had two voids
as well as ≥ 3 voids per night experienced significantly
higher mean bother score (3.96 ± 2.41 and 3.91 ± 2.20,
respectively) than those who had one void per night
(3.29 ± 2.63) (p < 0.001).
Our study also found that the awareness on nocturia
was poor among study population. Out of 4616
respondents, 56.7% of them were not aware that night
time urination is a medical condition. Unfortunately,
the majority (62.2%) of respondents with nocturia did
not think that it is a medical condition. Only a minority
(25.2%) of respondents with nocturia had sought medical
attention for their nocturia (Fig. 5). There was a correlation
between treatment-seeking behaviour with age,
sex, employment status, frequency of nocturia, degree
of sleep disturbance, bother score and nocturia disease
awareness among respondents with nocturia (p < 0.05;
Table 6). A total of 60.7% out of 4616 respondents had
sought or would consider seeking medical attention for
nocturia from urologist. There were 39.6% and 21.3%
who opted for general practitioner and gynecologist,
respectively. This was followed by 17.7% and 17.2% who
had chosen pharmacist and nephrologist, respectively.
Discusssion
This study presented the first nation-wide report on prevalence
of nocturia (at least one void at night) in a multiracial
population of Malaysia. The overall prevalence
of nocturia among Malaysian adults was high (57%),
which was comparable with those reported from studies
in Asian population, yet relatively higher compared to
Western populations. Liew and colleagues reported that
the prevalence of nocturia among Singaporean adults
was 55% [13]. Meanwhile, the reported prevalence were
46% in the Dutch population [14], 31% in the US population
[5] and 28.4% in the Turkish population [15]. In
the present study, there was a significant higher prevalence
among women. This finding is consistent with the
report from previous studies [13, 14, 16, 17]. Nevertheless,
information on the exact etiology pertaining to high
prevalence of nocturia in women is lacking. Nocturia
was found to be more common among younger women
(18–40 years old). This is congruent with the finding
from study in Finland [17].
In addition, the prevalence of nocturia was found
to increase with age, which corroborated the findings
of other studies [4, 5, 18]. This may be due to various
pathophysiological mechanisms that related to ageing.
In the elderly, nocturia can be resulted from decline in
functional bladder capacity with high post void residual,
deregulation of arginine vasopressin level, sleep disorders
and comorbidities including diabetes mellitus and diabetes
insipidus [19]. This also further explains the finding
in current study that the frequency of nocturnal voids
was higher among the elderly population than younger
population. On the other hand, there was higher nocturia
prevalence among those 31–40 years old than those
between 41 and 50 years old. The underlying etiology for
this finding is unknown, but it may be due to the alcoholic
beverage consumption among this age group. Based
on the previous National Health and Morbidity Survey
2011 in Malaysia, those 30–39 years old presented with
highest prevalence of alcohol consumption than other
age groups and the drinking pattern waned by older
population [20]. Nevertheless, further investigation is
required to reveal the exact etiology of this finding.
Previous studies have reported the differences in prevalence
of nocturia among races in the US population. The
prevalence of nocturia was reported to be higher among
Black and Hispanic respondents compared to the White
respondents [21, 22]. Consistently, similar observation
was reported among the multi-ethnic groups in Malaysia.
Malay respondents had a significant higher prevalence
compared to other races as revealed by the univariate
analysis, yet this prevalence was not significant in multivariate
analysis. Chinese and Indian respondents on the
other hand, had significantly lower prevalence compared
to Malay in both univariate and multivariate analyses.
However, Liew and colleagues reported that there was no
significant difference between Malay, Chinese and Indian
respondents in Singapore [13]. Kupelian and colleagues
reported that socioeconomic status was accounted for
the ethnic discrepancies in prevalence of nocturia [22].
Further investigation is required in order to identify
the underlying etiology of ethnic discrepancies among
Malaysians in term of prevalence of nocturia.
Nocturia is strongly associated with various risk factors
and comorbidities, including cardiovascular diseases,
diabetes, sleep disorders, somatic and mental
health [6, 13, 18, 23, 24]. This supports the findings of
this study which also showed the significant higher disease
prevalence among respondents with comorbidities
such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, renal disease
or overactive bladder. The pathophysiological changes
in hypertensive patients appear to be a significant risk
factor for nocturia [25, 26]. A prolonged hyperglycemic
state in diabetes mellitus patients on the other hand,
may cause an alteration in urinary bladder activity, predisposing
to diabetic cystopathy [27]. Diabetic cystopathy
is primarily induced by paralysis of detrusor muscle
and hyperglycemia-induced polyuria that can further
lead to bladder hypertrophy in patients with diabetes
mellitus [27]. Moreover, microvascular complications
of diabetes, particularly diabetic nephropathy and neuropathy
have been implicated in nocturia [28]. Diabetic
nephropathy is associated with polyuria and an
increase in mean void volume, whereas, diabetic neuropathy
may lead to impaired bladder sensation, poor
detrusor contractility and increased post void residual
[28]. This explains the mechanistic link between diabetes
mellitus and nocturia.
Several studies have reported that nocturia is associated
with chronic kidney disease [13, 29, 30]. This may
be attributed to the failure of kidneys to concentrate the
urine as the renal function worsens, and ultimately leads
to nocturnal polyuria and increased nocturnal urine volume
in patients with chronic kidney disease [31]. Additionally,
overactive bladder was also found to be one of
the risk factors in this study. Indeed, nocturia is a common
urinary symptom in overactive bladder patients [32].
However, in this study, there was no significant association
between nocturia and benign prostatic hyperplasia,
prostate cancer, bladder cancer and snoring, which had
been reported in previous studies [22, 23, 33]. This could
be due to the comorbidities determined by self-reporting
of respondents in the present study, which might have led
to underestimation of the prevalence of these comorbidities
in Malaysia.
Excessive evening intake of fluid, caffeinated drinks
or alcohol is known to be one of the causes of nocturnal
polyuria [1]. In the current study, approximately one
third of the respondents with nocturia have the habit of
consuming large volume of water, tea or coffee in the late
evening. This may suggest that limiting fluid or caffeinated
drink intake in the late evening among Malaysian
could be one of the modifiable lifestyle risk factors for
nocturia. Shiri and colleagues reported that there was
no significant association between coffee consumption
and nocturia among 50 to 70 years old men in Finland,
yet the risk of moderate or severe nocturia was twofold
higher among men who drank 6 cups coffee or more per
day than non-drinkers or those who consumed one cup
per day for this age group [34]. Interestingly, the prevalence
of nocturia was about one third of respondent
despite any drink consumption. The actual prevalence of
nocturia with underlying pathological causes in the population
may be reflected by eliminating the potential confounding
factor of drink consumption in the late evening.
LUTS can be classified according to voiding or obstructive
symptoms (such as hesitancy, poor stream, straining,
prolonged micturition, feeling of incomplete bladder
emptying, post-micturition dribble) and storage or irritative
symptoms (such as frequency, urgency, urge incontinence
and nocturia). In the present study, the disease
pattern of nocturia was not sex-specific, except for postmicturition
dribble. This interpretation is supported by
the fact that post-micturition dribble is more common in
men [35]. Studies also showed that prevalence of LUTS
was comparable between men and women [36, 37]. In
addition, with advancing age, the prevalence and severity
of LUTS increase regardless of sex [36]. This is supported
by the finding of this study where elderly respondents are
more likely to exhibit almost all the LUTS compared to
the younger population.
Nocturia has been regarded as not only ‘bothersome’,
but also negatively affects sleep and quality of life [5–8].
This study also revealed that nocturia was regarded as
moderately bothersome for Malaysians, particularly
those with two or more nocturnal voids. This alluded to
the clinical relevance of at least 2 voids being the threshold
to patient-reported impaired health-related quality of
life [38]. Furthermore, more than one-third of respondents
in this study claimed to have disturbed sleep about
half the time or more after nocturnal awakening. The
sleep disturbance was proportionately increased with
the frequency of nocturnal voids and age. This finding is
consistent with previous studies [5, 13, 14, 39]. As a result
of sleep disturbance, nocturia has also been associated
with excessive daytime sleepiness (7–18%), increased sick
leaves (27–27%), insomnia (43%), psychiatric disorders
(28–35%) and poorer health status (15–40%) [40, 41] In
addition, people with nocturia have a lower productivity
at work and decreased activity levels [6]. Consistently,
the respondents with nocturia in this study also reported
to experience fatigue, difficulty in concentrating, lacking
of motivation to work, bad mood, forgetfulness and
depression as consequences of disturbed sleep. Hence,
it is obvious that nocturia should not be overlooked or
underestimated due to its serious repercussions on sleep
quality, work productivity and quality of life.
Treatment-seeking behaviour for LUTS is correlated
with the symptom severity, degree of bother, costs and
benefits of treatment [42, 43]. Consistently, this study
found that those who had not sought treatment were
presented with less than two nocturnal voids, less degree
of sleep disturbance and lower bother score as compared
to those who had sought treatment. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first study to report on the
association between awareness of nocturia and treatment-
seeking behaviour in Malaysia. Approximately twothirds
of respondents with nocturia in this study were
not aware that nocturia is a medical condition and this
was significantly associated with behaviour of not seeking
medical attention. This finding suggests that poor
awareness might be a factor affecting their treatmentseeking
behaviour. In Taiwan, Chen and colleagues found
that the lack of knowledge on nocturia appeared to be an
important barrier to medical consultation among Taiwanese
women [9]. In addition, a vast majority of those
who had not sought treatment in the present study perceived
that nocturia was not a significant medical issue
to seek treatment. This appears consistent with finding
by Low and colleagues who reported that majority of
women in Northern Malaysia did not seek treatment for
LUTS due to low level of disease awareness [11]. These
findings could be attributed to poor knowledge pertaining
to nocturia among Malaysians. As such, addressing
the misconceptions about nocturia can help to increase
the awareness, enhance treatment-seeking behaviour
and also improve the overall quality of life among people
with nocturia. Interestingly, this study revealed that most
women did not seek treatment for nocturia as compared
to men. This is in contrast with the finding from a study
conducted in the primary care setting in Malaysia, which
revealed the higher tendency for women to seek treatment
when compared to men [44]. Further investigation
is required to identify the sex difference in treatmentseeking
behaviour among nocturia patients.
In the present study, convenience sampling was conducted
instead of stratified sampling to define the population
in Malaysia. Despite this limitation, the pool of
subjects sampled were closely reflecting the real population
in Malaysia. Although there was slightly difference
between the sample and population in terms of age
and sex, these differences were adjusted in the statistical
analysis. Hence, the outcomes of this study are valuable
to provide sights into prevalence of nocturia among
Malaysians.
Conclusions
The prevalence of nocturia among Malaysian adults is
high and strongly influenced by age, sex, race and comorbidities.
There is a significant correlation between frequency
of nocturnal voids with sleep disturbance and
degree of bother. However, the awareness among Malaysians
pertaining to nocturia being a health issue was
generally poor. This affects treatment-seeking behaviour
as many are not aware that it is a symptom that requires
medical attention. Contrary to common belief that it is
a natural physiological symptom associated with ageing,
nocturia as a condition deserves public attention, given
its profound impact on quality of life that may be associated
with increased morbidity and mortality. The findings
from this study may serve as impetus to better address
this issue via educational intervention.