Background
The incidence of primary full-thickness macular hole
(MH) is 7.9–8.7 eyes per 100,000 population per year [1,
2]. MH predominately occur in the elderly population
with a male-to-female ratio around 1:3 [2]. A small percentage
of MHs close spontaneously, varying between
4.0 and 11.5% [3]. If left untreated, the MH size increases
over time and severely reduces the visual acuity (VA) to
less than 20/200 in the majority of cases [4, 5].
The pathogenesis of MH formation is not yet fully
understood. However, it is generally accepted that anteroposterior
traction at the vitreoretinal interface is a
major contributor to the development of MH [6]. Previous
studies on the risk of bilateral MH have estimated the
risk to be between 7.0 and 16.7% [1, 2, 4, 7–10]. The use
of spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SDOCT)
and swept source optical coherence tomography
(SS-OCT) enables detection of subtle retinal abnormalities.
Some studies have investigated changes at the vitreoretinal
interface and showed that foveal or complete
of MH formation [7, 11–13]. Studies on retinal abnormalities
in fellow eyes have revealed certain structural
changes that are associated with an increased risk of MH
formation [7, 11, 14, 15].
Patients with MH often ask for information about the
risk of developing MH in their fellow eye, and selected
patients with a predicted high risk may require regular
follow-up examinations and early surgical intervention.
This present study sought to provide some answers to
these questions based on the evaluation of retinal morphological
changes in the fellow eye of patients with
MH. The aims of the study were to determine the risk of
developing bilateral MH, and to investigate OCT-based
vitreoretinal interface- and intraretinal abnormalities
associated with MH formation.
Methods
Study design and participants
This retrospective, observational study was conducted
at the Department of Ophthalmology at Stavanger University
Hospital in Norway. Stavanger University Hospital
is the only referral hospital for vitreoretinal surgery
in Rogaland County and serves a population of approximately
450,000 inhabitants. As some residents in the
northern part of the county may be referred elsewhere,
we only included patients living in the 18 southern
municipalities of Rogaland County. The medical records
of 276 patients who underwent surgery for MH from January
2008 through December 2018 were reviewed. Inclusion
criteria were primary MH with available OCT scans
of the fellow eye from the time of primary MH diagnosis
or surgery. One patient declined study participation
and 46 patients were classified as having secondary MH.
We categorised the patients into two groups: A bilateral
group comprising subjects who subsequently developed
MH in the fellow eye, and a unilateral group with subjects
who did not develop MH in the fellow eye during
follow-up. Macular OCT imaging was performed at the
initial visit and the OCT features of the fellow eye in the
two groups were compared.
The study was approved by the Regional Committee for
Medical and Health Research Ethics (2018/954 REC west,
Norway) and followed the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki. Written informed consent was sent to all living
patients, and the opportunity to decline study participation
was offered.
Background parameters and optical coherence
tomography imaging
The following patient characteristics were retrieved
from the electronic medical records: sex, date of birth,
duration of symptoms, laterality, VA in logMAR, date of
surgery, and date of death if deceased.
High-resolution OCT images were obtained using
SD-OCT or SS-OCT (Topcon 3D OCT 2000 and Topcon
DRI OCT Triton; Topcon Corp., Tokyo, Japan) of
both eyes when the patient was examined for MH in the
first eye. The scanning protocol used for SD-OCT was
a macula 3D scan, 512 × 128 (6 × 6 mm, spacing 47 μm)
centred on the macula, and for the SS-OCT a macula 3D
scan, 512 × 256 (7 × 7 mm, spacing 23 μm) centred on the
macula. The vitreomacular interface of the fellow eye was
investigated and the PVD status categorised into the following
stages:
I) No PVD: no signs of PVD; the posterior vitreous
cortex attached to the retinal surface.
II) Perifoveal PVD: the posterior vitreous cortex
attached to the fovea, but detached from the retinal
surface around the fovea.
III) Foveal PVD: the posterior vitreous cortex not
attached to the fovea, but attached to the optic
disc. We classified cases where it was difficult to
determine the relationship between the vitreous
cortex and the optic disc as foveal PVD.
IV) Complete PVD: the posterior vitreous cortex
detached from fovea and the optic disc.
Vitreomacular traction (VMT) was defined as the presence
of anatomic distortion of the fovea in combination
with perifoveal PVD, as described by Duker et al. [16].
The presence of other retinal abnormalities, such as
intraretinal cysts, intraretinal splits, outer retinal defects
(ORD), epiretinal membrane (ERM) and foveolar detachment
in the central macular region was also registered
(Fig. 1). Intraretinal splits were defined as tiny horizontal
splits within the foveal region, and intraretinal cysts were
defined as round-shaped intraretinal cavities [11, 17].
Statistical analysis
Continuous data were described by mean and standard
deviation (SD) when normally distributed, otherwise by
median and range. Categorical data were summarised by
numbers and proportions. The chi-square test or Fisher’s
exact test was used for comparing categorical values. The
Student’s t-test was used to compare normally distributed
continuous data, such as age. We used the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test to compare related samples. The Wilson
score interval was used for estimating binomial proportion
confidence intervals (CI). To control the false discovery
rate at 0.05, we applied the Benjamini-Hochberg
procedure. The statistical analyses and graphics were
made using R Project for Statistical Computing, version
4.0.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria). Two-tailed p-values ≤0.05 were considered statistically
significant.
Results
Participants
Between January 2008 and December 2018, 229 patients
underwent surgery for primary MH. Twenty patients
were identified with bilateral disease. Six of the patients
presented with bilateral MH, of whom two had an old
MH in the fellow eye unsuitable for surgery. Two patients
had been operated for a MH in their fellow eye prior to
2008. A total of 12 patients subsequently developed a
MH in their fellow eye and were enrolled in the bilateral
group. Among the 209 patients with unilateral MH, 9
patients did not have an OCT image of their fellow eye at
the initial examination and one patient was excluded due
to poor OCT image quality. One patient was excluded
due to a prosthesis in the fellow orbit, and one because of
previous vitrectomy in the fellow eye. Hence, 197 patients
were enrolled in the unilateral group. When calculating
the overall risk of bilateral disease, we excluded the
two patients with previous surgery in the fellow eye. The
mean age at time of operation was 70.6 ± 8.6 years in the
unilateral group and 71.7 ± 4.8 years in the bilateral group
(p = 0.50, Student’s t-test). The male-to-female ratio
in the bilateral group was 1:5 and 1:1.9 in the unilateral
group (p = 0.35, Fisher’s exact test). Twenty patients presented
with a history of MH or subsequently developed a
MH in the fellow eye. Hence, the overall risk of bilaterality
was 8.8% (95% CI, 5.8–13.2%). The risk of subsequent
MH development was 5.7% (95% CI, 3.3–9.8%). Figure 2
illustrates the cumulative frequency of bilateral MH.
The median observational time was 54 months (range,
3–138 months). In the bilateral group, the median time
interval between the diagnosis of the first and the second
MH was 17 months (range, 5–83 months), and 75% of
the patients developed the MH in their fellow eye within
32 months. Two of the 12 patients in the bilateral group
and 31 of the 197 patients in the unilateral group were
pseudophakic in the fellow eye at baseline (p = 1.0, Fisher’s
exact test). In the period until MH development in
the fellow eye, two patients in the bilateral group underwent
cataract surgery. Consequently, 8 of the 12 patients
in the bilateral group were phakic at the time of MH formation
in the relevant eye. Table 1 summarises the baseline
demographics and OCT features of the two groups.
Optical coherence tomography findings
Foveal PVD in the fellow eye occurred in three patients
(25%) in the bilateral group and in 74 patients (37.6%) in
the unilateral group (p = 0.35). Figure 3 demonstrates the
development of MH in a patient with foveal PVD. None
of the patients in the bilateral group had a complete PVD
compared to 23 patients (11.7%) in the unilateral group
(p = 0.35). Although not significant, the extent of the
PVD in the fellow eye seemed to be more advanced in
the unilateral group compared to the bilateral group. The
presence of VMT and ERM in the fellow eye was not significantly
different between the two groups.
Outer retinal defects were present in 41.7% of the fellow
eyes in the bilateral group and in only 6.6% of the fellow
eyes in the unilateral group (p = 0.001). The presence
of ORD had a sensitivity of 41.7% (95% CI, 19.3–68.0%)
and specificity of 93.4% (95% CI, 89.0–96.1%) in detecting
subsequent MH formation. The presence of pseudocysts
was also higher in the bilateral group with 33.3%
compared to 10.2% in the unilateral group (p = 0.036),
but did not remain statistically significant after correction
for multiple testing. There were no statistically significant
differences regarding the presence of intraretinal
splits and foveolar detachment. All three patients in the
bilateral group with foveal PVD in the fellow eye displayed
ERM, ORD and a visible pseudo-operculum in
the same eye. Among the patients with ORD in the fellow
eye, 27.8% (95% CI, 12.5–50.9%) subsequently developed
a MH. The presence of ORD was the strongest predictor
of MH development in the fellow eye (Fig. 4). Table 2
shows a comparison of VA, MH diameter and duration
of symptoms between the first and the second eye, for
which no significant differences were found.
Discussion
In this study, we found an overall risk of bilateral MH of
8.8%, illustrating a profoundly higher probability of MH
in the fellow eye compared to the risk of first eye MH in
the general population [1, 2]. The risk of subsequent MH
formation was 5.7%. These results are in accordance with
those of McCannel et al., Furashova & Matthè, and Lewis
et al. [2, 4, 18]. Other studies however, have reported a
higher risk of bilateral MH formation [7, 8]. Ezra et al.
reported a bilateral risk of 15.6%, but their study was
based on a subgroup of fellow eyes without PVD, which
may have caused overestimation of the overall risk of
bilateral MH formation [9]. Ali et al. reported that Asian-
Americans had a 177% increased risk of MH formation
compared to Caucasians [19]. Ethnic susceptibility to
MH formation may partly explain why Kumagai et al. and
Choi et al. reported a higher risk of bilateral MH formation
[7, 8]. Our calculated risk may be underestimated
as individuals in the unilateral group may develop a MH
in the fellow eye after ended data collection. Our study
relied on the high probability of patients developing a
MH in their fellow eye being readmitted to the Stavanger
University Hospital. Still, we cannot fully exclude the
risk that some patients have moved out of our catchment
area or been referred elsewhere with a MH in the fellow
eye. We did not investigate the family history of MH in
our patients. Kay et al. reported a significantly higher frequency
of MH among family members of patients with
bilateral MHs, which may indicate a genetic predisposition
in some individuals [20].
Although not statistically significant, PVD had
reached a more progressed stage in the unilateral group,
and no fellow eye with complete PVD developed fullthickness
MH. Several studies have demonstrated that
complete PVD is negatively associated with the development
of MH [7, 18]. Surprisingly, three eyes with foveal
PVD subsequently progressed to a full-thickness MH.
Hence, VMT is not the only contributor to MH development
and foveal or complete PVD does not rule out
the possibility of MH formation. However, the presence
of ORD and a pseudo-operculum in these three cases
indicate previous vitreomacular traction and a weakened
foveal structure. In a study by Takahashi et al.,
five out of 16 patients with foveal PVD subsequently
developed a MH [11]. Besirli & Johnson described two
cases with foveal PVD who developed MH, where OCT
imaging revealed foveal contour irregularities consistent
with previous vitreomacular traction [21]. Peeling
of the internal limiting membrane improves the closure
rates after MH surgery, which indicates the presence
of tangential traction forces on the retinal surface [22].
In a prospective study on 34 individuals with lamellar
MH, Bottoni et al. detected two patients with PVD and
concomitant ERM who subsequently developed fullthickness
MH [23]. A post hoc evaluation of the three
patients with foveal PVD and MH formation in our study
revealed that two of the cases had a thick ERM and one
had a thin ERM. Recently, Bringmann et al. described
different modes of MH formation and emphasised that
MH formation is caused by disruption of both Müller
cell cones and the external limiting membrane [24]. A
plausible theory explaining our three cases with foveal
PVD and MH formation, is that initially, vitreomacular
traction caused structural damage to the fovea. Subsequently,
this vulnerability facilitated the formation of a
full-thickness MH induced by tangential traction by the
ERM on the retinal surface.
Outer retinal defects were significantly more frequent
in the bilateral group. In accordance with Choi
et al., we found the presence of ORD to have the highest
positive predictive value of developing MH, with
a sensitivity of 41.7% in predicting MH formation [7].
However, while Choi et al. reported a specificity of
100%, we found it to be 93.4%. In our study, five out of
18 patients with ORD developed a MH. In contrast, all
five eyes with ORD in the study by Choi et al. developed
a MH. Nevertheless, many of our patients in
the unilateral group had retinal abnormalities in the
fellow eye. This is in accordance with the findings of
Chhablani et al. and Kumagai et al., reporting that retinal
abnormalities and vitreofoveal interface changes
are more common in fellow eyes of patients with MH
than in a matched healthy population [15, 25].
In the bilateral group, we found no significant differences
between the first and the second eye regarding
preoperative VA, MH size or duration of symptoms.
One would expect that patients would seek medical
assistance at an earlier stage when suffering from a MH
in their fellow eye. In Norway, patients need a referral
from a health care professional to access specialised
hospital departments, which may explain some of the
delay from onset of symptoms to treatment.
The present study has several limitations including its
retrospective design and a relatively small sample size.
We only examined the OCT images of the fellow eye
captured at the time when the first eye was examined for
a MH. A longitudinal study design with repeated OCT
examinations could have revealed other transient retinal
abnormalities and vitreoretinal interface changes.
OCT images were available for 94% of the fellow eyes
in the unilateral group and for all of the fellow eyes that
subsequently developed MH. Due to the retrospective
study design, two different OCT systems, SS-OCT
and SD-OCT, were used in the study. SS-OCT provides
narrower spacing and better detection of deeper signals,
posterior to the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE).
However, both SS-OCT and SD-OCT use the Fourier
domain detection techniques and allow detection of
subtle retinal changes anterior to the RPE [26].
Conclusion
Our study provides useful information when counselling
patients with MH. This patient group has a substantially
increased risk of developing a MH in the fellow eye compared
to the general population. The presence of complete
PVD indicates a minimal risk of developing a MH,
while the presence of ORD reveals a significantly higher
risk of MH formation.