Background
Epikeratophakia (EKP) was first described about 40 years
ago [1]. Since then, it has been used as a refractive surgical
procedure to correct the large refractive errors associated
with aphakia, high myopia, and keratoconus [1–6].
EKP uses a corneal lenticule to alter corneal curvature.
The procedure is performed with a lamellar disk from a
donor cornea or a commercial corneal lenticule that has
been optically modified and is then transplanted onto
the anterior surface of the cornea. However, due to its
varying visual outcome, it has been replaced with newer
technologies such as photorefractive keratectomy (PRK),
laser in situ keratomileusis (LASIK), laser epithelial keratomileusis
(LASEK), and small incision lenticule extraction
(SMILE) [7].
Recently, patients who had received EKP in the past
have revisited with ocular disease. Among these patients,
lenticular removal is required for cataract surgery or lenticular
opacity. In the past, there have been studies that
published long-term results of EKP [8], but there have
been few studies about the clinical outcomes after lenticular
removal. To the best of our knowledge, all published
studies are case reports, including a few cases [8–10]. To
inform the patients what happens next after removal of
a lenticule before the surgery, we should know the possible
side effects of the epikeratophakic lenticule (EKPL)
removal procedure. Therefore, we assessed the optical
outcomes and adverse events in post-epikeratophakic
eyes after removal of the epikeratoplasty lenticule.
Methods
This study was approved by the Institutional Review
Board of Seoul National University Hospital (IRB No.
2103–080-1204, Seoul, Republic of Korea) and adhered
to the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent was
waived by the IRB because the study was based on a
retrospective review of old charts. This was a retrospective
case-series study of patients who underwent EKPL
removal between 2002 and 2020 at Seoul National University
Hospital (a tertiary referral center) in the Republic
of Korea. The following data were collected from the
medical chart review: information on demographic outcomes,
general medical and ocular history, ocular biometric
characteristics, and adverse events.
A total of 12 patients and 16 eyes underwent surgery
at our hospital. All EKPs were performed between 1991
and 1992. Cases were excluded if the duration of followup
was less than 3 months, or if the keratometric data
had not been measured. Of the 16 patients, three were
excluded due to lack of follow-up, and another three were
excluded due to the absence of keratometric values.
The EKPL was removed uneventfully. Dissection of the
8 mm optical zone (mid-peripheral cornea) using a Sinskey
hook permitted access to the peripheral wing of the
epikeratophakic button, which was lifted off easily, leaving
a smooth Bowman layer intact over the central cornea.
A 1 mm wide trench was left at the 8 mm optical
zone and closed naturally with fibrosing wound healing,
leaving an annular faint scar.
In the 1990s, before EKP and 6 months after EKP,
all patients underwent an ophthalmic examination
including corneal K value, refractive error measurements
using an auto-kerato-refractometer (Atlas; Carl
Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA), and manual refraction.
Topography was not available at the time.
Since the 2000s, when patients came to remove the
lenticule, ocular biometric parameters including K
value, refractive errors, and corneal thickness were
measured using an auto-kerato-refractometer (Atlas,
Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA), topography (Orbscan
II Bausch & Lomb, Claremont, CA), and ultrasound
(US) pachymetry (Axis II PR; Quantel Medical, Bozeman,
MT).
We compared the clinical characteristics of the
patients before surgery, 6 months after surgery, before
lenticular removal, and after the removal procedure,
and reported optical or ocular surface complications.
Result
Demographics and clinical characteristics of cases
that underwent epikeratoplasty
Demographic and clinical features are shown in
Table 1. A total of 10 cases were available. Four female
(40%) and six male (60%) patients were analyzed. Mean
age at EKP was 24.2 years ±10.6 years (range, 5 years
– 48 years). Nine patients received EKP for correction
of high myopia, and only one patient underwent EKP
for correction of traumatic aphakia. The mean age was
42.9 ± 12.7 years (range, 18 ~ 66 years) when the cases
underwent removal procedure. The average period
after EKP was 18.7 years ±5.0 years (range, 12 years
– 30 years).
We removed epikeratophakic lenticules (EKPL) due
to lenticular opacity in five eyes (50%), intraocular
lens (IOL) insertion (n = 4, 40%) after cataract surgery
(n = 3), or in aphakic eyes (n = 1), and lenticule-induced
irregular astigmatism in one eye (10%).
Long‑term outcome of epikeratophakia and biometric
parametric changes after removal of lenticule
Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and ocular biometric
parameters obtained by an auto-kerato-refractometer
(Atlas; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA) are
revealed in Table 2.
The mean BCVA was 20/30 ± 20/57 (range, 20/400–
20/20, n = 8) preoperatively. Six months after EKP,
it was maintained at 20/33 ± 20/57 (range, 20/100–
20/20, n = 7). However, it decreased to 20/80 ± 20/800
(range 20/100–20/40, n = 10) at pre-EKPL removal and
did not improve after EKPL removal (20/100 ± 20/100,
range 20/1000–20/28, n = 8).
The mean of spherical equivalent refraction (SE) of
high myopia cases was − 21.4 D ± 7.0 (range, − 12.75
– -30.75 D, n = 7) preoperatively, and − 4.64 D ± 5.26
(range, − 15.0 – + 1.25 D, n = 6) postoperatively. The
average corrected refractive error quantities were 16.3
D ± 8.3. In the aphakia case, the preoperative manifest
refraction was + 10.0–1.00 × 90, and postoperative
manifest refraction was + 7.0–1.5 × 180.
Compared with Post-EKP (mean SE, − 3.2 D – ±
2.4, n = 3), excessive myopic shift was observed at pre-
EKPL removal (mean SE, − 20.4 D ± 6.4, n = 3). Even
the mean SE of the pre-EKPL removal state was more
myopic than the preoperative mean SE (− 16.8 D ± 2.3,
n = 3).
After EKPL removal, mean refractive power of the
cornea (Km) revealed a tendency to increase from 43.8
D ± 3.4 (range, 36.62–50.75, n = 9) at pre-removal to
46.6 D ± 6.1 (range, 33.15–57.5, n = 10) at 6 months
post-removal. The average amount of change in Km
before and after removal was − 5.82 D ± 3.72 (range,
0.43–12.8 D). Out of nine cases, six cases showed
corneal steepening and three cases revealed corneal
flattening.
Contrary to prediction, corneal flattening was
observed in two cases (Cases 8 and 10) who underwent
EKP for high myopia correction.
To analyze whether the curvature of the cornea
could restore the initial curvature after EKP removal,
keratometric readings of pre-epikeratoplasty and
post-lenticular removal were compared. Km was 44.6
D ± 1.0 (n = 8) preoperatively, and 47.1 D ± 6.8 (n = 8)
at 6 month after EKPL removal.
When the keratometric readings of pre-epikeratoplasty
and post-lenticular removal were paired and
compared within the same case, the average difference
was 5.1 D ± 4.0 (n = 8).
All five patients who underwent lenticular removal
due to graft opacity showed reduced corneal opacity
(Fig. 1).
Topographic changes after removal of lenticule
Table 3 presents an analysis of the topographies of six
cases’ taken at pre-removal, and at one, six and twelve
months after removal.
Simulated keratometry astigmatism (Sim K astig)
increased in three cases after EKPL removal and
decreased in the other three cases. Km increased in four
cases (Fig. 2A-C, Fig. 3A-C) and decreased in the other
two cases (Fig. 2D, Fig. 3D-E).
Depending on the different types of refractive errors
to be corrected, the lenticule is shaped as a plus lens for
aphakic hyperopia or a minus lens for myopia. Thus, in
aphakic patients, the central cornea steepened in curvature
by a lenticule that is thickest in the centre, and the
central cornea is flattened in high myopic patients.
Therefore, the central cornea is supposed to flatten in
patients with aphakia (Fig. 3D-E) and steepen in high
myopia (Fig. 2A, C, Fig. 3A-C) after lenticule removal.
However, the central cornea steepened in the two high
myopic cases (Fig. 2B, D). These ectatic changes may be
caused by the abnormal tensile strength of the collagen
fibrils in high myopia [11].
When the Km at 1 month postoperatively and the
Km after 6 months or more postoperatively were compared,
they showed a relatively similar values (1 month
vs 6–12 months; 50.2 D ± 4.84 vs 49.8 D ± 4.92, n = 5).
Center corneal irregular astigmatism (IRA) within 3 mm
also showed little change over time after removal, except
for case 7, who developed keratoectasia (1 month vs.
6–12 months; 4.25 D ± 1.4 vs. 4.45 D ± 1.31, n = 4).
Compared to pre-removal data, IRA within 3 mm
increased in three cases (pre-removal vs. 6–12 months
post-removal; 5.5 D ± 1.4 vs. 8.0 D ± 2.8, n = 3), and
decreased in the other three cases (pre-removal vs.
6–12 months post-removal; 7.73 D ± 3.2 vs. 3.3 D ± 2.0,
n = 3). The central corneal thickness decreased significantly
from 707 μm ± 156.5 to 519 μm ± 93.3 after EKPL
removal (n = 6).
Additional adverse event after removal of lenticule
Seven cases revealed a normal recovery process after
removal without adverse effects (Fig. 4A-D), but complications
were observed in 3 of 10 cases.
As post-lenticular removal complications, excessive
corneal flatness was observed in case 4 (Fig. 3D, E), and
corneal ectatic changes were observed in case 7 (Fig. 3AC).
Likely keratoconus, inferior corneal thinning, and
protrusion were clearly visible on slit-lamp examination
(Fig. 4E-H).
In case 10, the epithelial cells abnormally invaded
the groove to the corneal surface and filled the gap
with ingrowth of the epithelial cells at 2 months after
ingrowth induced corneal deterioration, including
opacity, irregular astigmatism, and abnormal photophobia
symptoms (Fig. 4L). Therefore, the epithelial
ingrowth was removed, and the corneal gap was
sutured to prevent recurrence of epithelial ingrowth.
The cornea remained stable without recurrence, and
the photophobia disappeared (Fig. 4K).
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first descriptive
study with the largest sample size to report postoperative
complications and topography alterations in patients
with EKPL removal.
To transplant the lenticule, the prepared lenticule was
anchored to a groove made with a trephine. The lenticule
was sutured in place with superficial sutures that were
(Table 4). However, most studies presented that cornea
was not reversible with a removal of epikeratophakia
(Table 4). Bleckmann et al. reported that fixation of the
epikeratophakia lenticules led to a 2 to 3.5 D reduction
in the K value after the removal of the corneal transplants
in two cases (one high myopic eye after 13 years,
the other aphakia eye after 15 years), and Shin YJ et al.
also reported that EPK led to an increase in corneal
refractive power in three myopia cases (Table 4) [10,
16]. It indicates that changes of keratometric value may
affect the power calculation of IOL when the cataract
surgery is planned.
In this study, there was a difference of 5.1 D ± 4.0
(n = 8), when comparing the initial cornea and the
post-removal cornea in the same case. Although statistical
analysis could not be done due to the small number
of patients, 5.1 D was significant difference. Through this
study, we suggest that the cornea can lose its reversibility,
and both increase or decrease is possible after EKPL
removal. Seven of the eight cases showed an increase in
the K value, and only one case (No. 4, aphakia patient)
showed a reduction in the K value. The reason why the
cornea loses its reversibility and the K value change pattern
is unpredictable cannot be proved in this study.
However, it is speculated that this may be due to the
interaction of the original cornea with the lenticule,
decrease in recipient corneal tensile strength, and fibrosis
in the process of wound healing, causing the cornea to
be distorted [8, 10, 17]. In addition, there is a possibility
that corneal stromal necrosis was revealed partially in the
process of pressing the cornea with a lenticule for a long
period of time, resulting in a change.
Shin YJ et al. suggested that follow-up of more than
6 months is necessary until the cornea is stabilized when
considering lens extraction [16]. Given that the differences
in Km ranged from 0.5 D to 2.25 D (mean 1.06 ± 1.0
D) between 1 and 6 months after lenticule removal, IOL
power calculation should be considered at least 6 months
later to reduce miscalculation..
Through topographic analysis before and after removal,
we were able to identify changes that were not possible
in keratometry, such as axial map, irregular astigmatism,
and diagnosis keratoectasia in case 7 [18]. All irregular
astigmatism in the topography was outside the normal
range. This suggests that scarring of a recipient cornea
after epikeratophakia or persistent groove after removal
of the lenticule can cause deterioration of vision because
of an irregular corneal surface [17, 19].
Here, we report three complicated cases associated
with lenticular removal. In the previous studies, there
were no reports of complications that occurred after
removal; Greenbaum et al. reported three EKPLs removal
and Bleckmann et al. also reported two EKPLs removal;
however, both studies did not mention postoperative
complication [9, 10].
As shown in Fig. 3A-C, rapidly progressive keratoectasia
is observed in corneal topography. Whether this
patient had innate keratoconus or if ectatic changes were
complicated after lenticular removal could not be accurately
discriminated because there was no initial topography
of the cornea.
However, there is a possibility that corneal connective
tissue disorder had occurred by digging a groove around
the mid-peripheral cornea and spending a long time with
the lenticle fixed to the groove. When observing the rapid
progression as the lenticule was removed, it is possible
that the lenticule mechanically pressed the cornea like a
hard contact lens, and the progression was slowed during
that time.
The abnormal corneal flattening change in case 4 may
also have occurred due to an abnormality in connective
tissue, caused by one procedure performed during EKP.
The abnormal epithelial cell proliferation seen in case
10 suggests the possibility that the wound healing process
after EKP removal is different from that of the normal
cornea, which lets the stromal gap persistently open to
allow epithelial cell ingrowth.
To reduce the rate of corneal complications such as
keratectatic changes or epithelial ingrowth into the previous
pocket after lenticule removal, possible risk factors
of the host cornea or some of the surgical tips during
the removal should be noted. Given that the cornea is a
360-degree trephined to make the pocket for insertion
of the lenticule wing, the anterior stromal collagens may
no longer contribute to maintaining the tensile strength
of the cornea. The trephine thickness of EKP is usually
180 μm [6]. Considering that post-LASIK ectasia can
occur in percent tissue thickness alteration ≥40% or a
low residual stromal bed (≤ 300 μm), [20] thin cornea
(≤ 480 μm) or high myopia that may have a weak tensile
strength of the collagen fibrils would be risk factors for
post-ectatic changes. During removal of the lenticule,
the boundary of the lenticule can be identified by pressing
the cornea near the lenticule. Sinskey-hooking can
be used to dissect the junction between the lenticule and
the host cornea without further stromal damage near the
junction. Thereafter, the peripheral edge of the lenticule
can be easily lifted off with hard grasping of the lenticule
using tooth-forceps. If the groove of the previous pocket
is well aligned and closed, a therapeutic bandage contact
lens can be applied without further procedures. If the
groove is open and gapped, the groove should be closed
by suturing to prevent epithelial cells from invading the
groove.
Epithelial ingrowth can also occur after radial keratotomy
or LASIK. RK involves a vertical incision, whereas
both LASIK and EKP require a sloping incision. Corneal
epithelial ingrowth associated with RK is rarely reported
through perforation due to surgery or trauma. Therefore,
epithelial ingrowth is observed on the endothelial surface
in the perforation [21]. Post-LASIK epithelial ingrowth is
frequently reported at the interface between the flap and
stromal bed following LASIK, especially when the flap is
lifted for retreatment [22, 23]. Like LASIK, the epikeratophakic
procedure makes sloping pockets, and epithelial
cells can easily invade through the sloping stromal gap.
Therefore, it would be better to temporarily suture the
gap when the groove is open and exposed.
In EKP, epithelial cells could be proliferated in stromal
gap within groove. As for the removal method
mechanical debridement could be performed in the same
way as Post-Lasik epithelial ingrowth, and it would be
better to temporarily maintain an additional tightening
suture to prevent recurrence.
This study has several limitations. Due to the limitations
of the retrospective design of this study, it was difficult
to collect all data, especially in the 90s. In addition, it
failed to show statistical significance because the number
of patients was small, and the range of change was small.
Furthermore, histological analysis was not performed
on the removed lenticule. Therefore, further studies that
include histologic evaluation are necessary to reveal the
cause of the complication accurately.
Conclusions
In summary, if EKPL removal is needed for any reason,
the surgeon should expect that the corneal refractive
power may steepen or flatten in some cases with abnormal
astigmatism and irregularity. Epikeratophakic eyes
may exhibit serious ectatic changes and abnormal epithelial
cell ingrowth by 30% after removal of epikeratophakic
lenticules.