Background
Over the past decade, myopia has become a global public
health problem. The myopia boom is growing globally,
and 49.8% of the world population is predicted to
be myopic, and 9.8% of the world population is predicted
to be high myopic in 2050 [1]. The prevalence of
myopia for preschool children (younger than 7 years
old) has been reported to be greater than 5% [2, 3]. Children
with early onset of myopia are at particular risk of
complications associated with myopia. Myopia progression
over time could result in high myopia, which is related
to some irreversible blinding complications, such
as retinal detachment, myopic macular degeneration,
and glaucoma [4]. Also, younger children and children
with greater initial myopic refractive errors are at a
greater risk of myopia progression [5, 6]. Therefore, it is
essential to identify subjects that are at high risk of developing
myopia to facilitate myopia prevention in the
early stage, especially during the preschool period. As
such, International Myopia Institute (IMI) recently introduces
the concept of premyopia, which is defined as
SE between − 0.50 D and + 0.75 D, to guide research on
myopia prevention [7]. However, factors for predicting
premyopia or myopia onset have not been reported in
preschool children.
Several cohort studies have evaluated factors associated
with myopia incidence and progression rate among
children. Initial spherical equivalent (SE) is considered
to be the single best predictive factor for the school children
[8, 9]. However, the risk factors for the prediction
of myopia onset have not been reported in preschool
children. Previous studies showed that due to the influence
of accommodation, noncycloplegic assessment of
refractive errors in children overestimates myopia and
results in a high error rate for emmetropic and hyperopic
refractive errors [10, 11]. However, measuring SE
by cycloplegic refraction in preschool children is limited
by poor cooperation and long examination time. Thus,
alternative myopic indicators that are easily obtainable
can merit preventative interventions for myopia. The visual
system keeps the refractive state in the normal range
through balancing changes in the axial length (AL) and
the refractive components, including the cornea and the
lens. When the compensation mechanism of emmetropization
between refractive parameters is out of balance,
there is a tendency to myopia onset [12, 13]. According
to a cross-sectional study, long AL is a risk factor for
early-onset myopia in school children [14]. Also, some
studies on myopia onset have shown stronger correlations
between myopia and the ratio AL/corneal radius of
curvature (CR) than with AL or CR alone [15, 16]. AL is
usually measured using partial coherence interferometry
(PCI) and is testable in preschool children [17]. According
to cross-sectional studies, AL, AL/CR have been
found to highly correlate with noncycloplegic SE in preschool
children [16, 18].
We hypothesized that both premyopia and myopia in
preschool children could be predicted by ocular biometric
parameters, such as AL and AL/CR. In the present
study, we aimed to examine the associations between AL
and AL/CR at baseline and future SE in preschool children
and identify factors for predicting premyopia and
myopia.
Methods
Study population
The Nanjing Eye Study (NES) is a population-based cohort
study aiming to longitudinally observe the onset
and progression of childhood ocular diseases in eastern
China [19]. As described previously, in Yuhuatai District,
Nanjing, China, all children born between September
2011 and August 2012 and entering kindergarten in
Yuhuatai District were invited to participate in NES and
undergo comprehensive examinations. Baseline data was
obtained in 2015 when the children were between 36
and 48 months old, and, follow-up data was acquired in
2016 and 2017 with the mean interval between each year
of 12 ± 1 month.
The NES study was approved by the Ethics Committee
of the First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical
University and followed the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from
the parents or legal guardians of all participants. Verbal
consent was obtained from all children right before the
examination. The examinations were supervised by attendant
teachers or guardians.
Examinations and questionnaire
A comprehensive examination of all participants was
performed by a team composed of 4 junior ophthalmologists,
2 senior ophthalmologists, and 4 optometrists using
similar protocols as described elsewhere [20]. Seniors
reviewed examinations performed by juniors. Basic information,
including name, gender, and birth date, was obtained
from each kindergarten’s principal and was
checked during the examination. Basic examinations, including
anthropometric parameters, visual acuity, anterior
segment, and fundus examination, refraction without
cycloplegia, stereoacuity test, ocular alignment and motility,
and ocular biometric parameters, were performed in
the setting of each kindergarten. Children with suspected
or confirmed eye problems were referred to senior ophthalmologists
and underwent further examinations.
Ocular biometric parameters, including AL and CR,
were measured by IOL Master (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena,
Germany; V5.5.0.0062) before cycloplegia with standard
room lighting. The right eye was tested first. All ocular
biometric parameters, including AL, the greatest corneal
radius of curvature (CR1), and the lowest corneal radius
of curvature (CR2), were performed five times. The
mean values were used for analysis.
Cycloplegic refraction was performed after cycloplegia
using table-mounted autorefraction (Cannon R-F10,
Tokyo, Japan) and retinoscopy for children with suspected
or confirmed eye problems in baseline grade and
children whose guardians signed the informed consent
of cycloplegia in both middle and graduation grades.
Two drops of topical 1.0% cyclopentolate (Cyclogyl,
Alcon Pharmaceuticals) were administered to each eye
at a 5-min interval. After 15 min, a third drop of cyclopentolate
was applied if the pupil size was < 6mm or the
pupillary light reflex was still present.
Height in centimeters was measured without shoes.
Weight in kilograms was measured using a standard
weighing machine, which was calibrated before the
examination.
A comprehensive questionnaire was self-administered
by legal guardians at baseline, including parental myopia,
outdoor time and near activities time [21, 22].
Definitions
SE was calculated as spherical power plus half of the cylindrical
power. In accordance with the definition in IMI
[7], myopia was defined as SE ≤ − 0.50 D, and premyopia
was defined as − 0.50 D < SE ≤ + 0.75 D.
CR was calculated as the average of CR1 and CR2.
Corneal power (CP) in diopters was calculated using the
formula corneal power (D) = 0.3375*1000/CR (mm); the
AL-to-CR ratio (AL/CR) was calculated as AL in millimeters
divided by CR in millimeters.
Parental myopia represented the number of myopic
parents, including zero, one, and two myopic parents.
Statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed using the IBM Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences program V13.0 (SPSS,
Chicago, IL, USA) and R software (version 4.0.3, https://
www.r-project.org/). Descriptive statistics were presented
using mean ± standard deviation (SD) for continuous
variables and percentages for the categorical
variables. P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
All confidence intervals were 95%.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), independent-samples
t-test, and Pearson χ2 test were applied to compare differences
between groups. Univariate linear regression
analyses were performed to assess the association of
baseline factors, including age in month, gender, height,
weight, CP, AL, AL/CR, and parental myopia, with SE in
the graduation grade in the kindergarten. A multivariate
linear regression model was then fitted with age, gender,
height, weight, and other variables with p < 0.1 from
univariate analyses. To examine factors associated with
incident premyopia and myopia, Cox proportional hazard
regression analysis was conducted on participants
who were not in the stage of myopia or premyopia at
baseline. For comparing students by height, weight, CP,
AL, and AL/CR, a reference group was defined using
participants in the bottom quartile (< the 25th percentile)
of the entire cohort. ROC curve and Hosmer-
Lemeshow test were fitted to examine the discrimination
and calibration of the Cox model. The candidate predictors
with significant P values were then incorporated
into the nomogram. AL and CR between the right and
left were highly correlated (Pearson correlation coefficient
= 0.982, Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.971, respectively,
both p < 0.001). Therefore, the data from the
right eye were used for analysis.
Results
Among the total 1491 children who cooperated with the
IOL Master and had a complete data set at baseline, 90
(6.04%) children had strabismus, amblyopia, or glasses
for refractive error, thus leaving 1401 children.
In total, 830 children (433 boys and 397 girls), whose
guardians filled in the questionnaire and signed the informed
consent about taking cycloplegic examinations,
were included in the study for myopia prediction factors.
There was no statistically significant difference between
830 included children and 571 excluded children in gender
(p = 0.891), age (p = 0.446), height (p = 0.365), weight
(p = 0.566), CP (p = 0.803), AL (p = 0.240) and AL/CR
(p = 0.246) (Table 1). Among the 830 children, 79
(9.52%) and 109 (13.13%) children were lost during
follow-up in middle and graduation grades, respectively.
In addition, 130 (15.66%) and 95 (11.45%) children became
premyopic or myopic in middle and graduation
grades, respectively.
Table 2 showed characteristics of children in 2 years’
follow-up. The mean age was 40.83 ± 3.43 months at
baseline (2015) and 66.81 ± 3.33 months at graduation
(2017). Age-related increase was statistically significant
in AL and AL/CR (21.90 ± 0.65mm and 2.82 ± 0.06 at
baseline, compared to 22.48 ± 0.70mm and 2.87 ± 0.13 at
graduation; both p < 0.001), while CP decreased with
age (43.44 ± 1.42 D at baseline, compared to 43.15 ± 1.41
D at graduation, p < 0.001).
In the univariate models, of all studied variables, AL,
AL/CR (baseline grade) and two parental myopia were
consistently correlated to the future SE (graduation
grade) (coefficient = − 0.309; coefficient = − 6.341; coefficient
= − 0.505, respectively, both p < 0.001). In the
multivariate model, significant negative relationships
were observed between AL, AL/CR, and SE after adjusting
for age and gender. There were 0.30 D and 5.79 D
shifts towards myopia with every 1 unit increase in the
AL and AL/CR, respectively. Compared with one- and
no-myopic-parent, having two myopic parents was associated
with refraction (coefficient = − 0.273, p < 0.001).
However, height and weight were not correlated with refraction
(Table 3).
Cox proportional hazard regression analysis for predicting
myopia or premyopia in the cohort is shown in
Table 4, which excluded two children of myopia and 72
children of premyopia at baseline. After adjusting for
other covariates, higher baseline AL (hazard ratio (HR) =
2.875, for the middle quartile compared with the bottom
quartile; HR = 4.916, for the top quartile compared with
the bottom quartile; both p < 0.001), higher baseline
AL/CR (HR = 1.702, for the middle quartile compared
with the bottom quartile, p = 0.022; HR = 2.979, for the
top quartile compared with the bottom quartile,
p < 0.001) and two myopic parents (HR = 1.756, compared
with no myopic parents, p = 0.001) were statistically
significantly associated with incident myopia and
premyopia in future. However, baseline height (p =
0.093), weight (p = 0.652), CP (p = 0.259), and only one
myopic parent (p = 0.590) had no significance. A nomogram
incorporating the above three independent predictive
factors with significant P values was built (Fig. 1).
AL, AL/CR, and number of myopic parents each result
in points from 0 to 63 (AL), 0 to 100 (AL/CR), and 0 to
25 (number of myopic parents), and the total points
range from 0 to 160. Individual risk score is obtained by
summing each separate risk factor. By the sum of the
risk score, we might estimate the probability of 1-year
and 2-year survival, which was the probability of not developing
pre- or myopia. The higher the total score, the
lower the survival rate.
The survival curves for incident myopia and premyopia
in different AL and AL/CR groups are shown in
Fig. 2. Different baseline AL and AL/CR (both Log Rank
p < 0.001) values had different survival curves. The incidence
of myopia and premyopia were highest when
baseline AL > 22.33mm (75th percentile) and AL/CR >
2.85 (75th percentile) compared to the other two groups.
Discussion
In the present study, we use ocular biometric parameters
and physical parameters to predict premyopia and myopia
in a cohort of preschool children in eastern China.
Higher baseline AL and AL/CR are related to more myopic
SE 2 years later. AL and AL/CR are the high-risk
indicators of the incident premyopia and myopia among
preschool children. We conclude that AL and AL/CR
examinations might help identify children susceptible to
myopia prospectively. This is the first study on predicting
premyopia and myopia in preschool children to the
best of our knowledge.
The refractive development of human eyes is a dynamic
process that ocular biometric parameters change
from birth, and the refractive state changes accordingly
[12]. The visual system keeps the refractive state in normal
range by balancing changes in the AL and other refractive
components, including the cornea and the lens
[13, 23]. Previous studies on refractive development suggest
that over the first year or two after birth, AL elongation
is coordinated with corneal flattening, and, after
that, CR is relatively stable, but AL elongation exists for
a long time [13]. Our observation is consistent with this
pattern of refractive development. In our study, the agerelated
increase was statistically significant in both AL
and AL/CR, consistent with the Shenzhen crosssectional
study, which showed AL and AL/CR increased
from 3 to 6 years of age (AL from 22.19 ± 0.65mm to
22.63 ± 0.63 mm, AL/CR from 2.84 ± 0.06 to 2.91 ± 0.07)
[18]. Meanwhile, our study found a flattening in CR over
2 years, consistent with previous research on the refractive
development of 3- to 6-year-old children in Shanghai
[24]. Nonetheless, earlier studies for school-aged children
suggested CR varies little from ages 6 to 14 years
[25, 26]. The difference may be due to the study design
and age of the included subjects. We speculate that the
flattened cornea is to compensate for the elongation of
the axial length during the preschool period.
Over the past decade, myopia’s prevalence has increased
quickly, whereas the age of myopia onset has decreased.
A significant increase in myopia has been noted
in Hong Kong preschool and school children. The
prevalence of myopia was 6.3% in preschoolers. Meanwhile,
the prevalence of myopia reached 12.7% in
schoolchildren aged 6 years [27, 28]. The Singapore Cohort
of the Risk Factors for Myopia (SCORM) study
found that the onset age of myopia or myopia progression
duration were the strongest predictors of high myopia
in their later life [29]. Sara et al. [30] found that a
younger age of myopia onset was associated with more
rapid myopia progression. It has been reported that early
achievement of emmetropia is a risk factor for subsequent
progression to myopia [23]. Noteworthily, previous
longitudinal studies of refractive development in
school children found that most forms of myopia progression
have variable periods. Particularly, before the
onset of myopia, eyes showed an accelerated axial elongation
pattern and refractive error for several years. The
acceleration of axial elongation is faster than the one
that occurs after the onset of myopia [31, 32]. These results
indicated the importance of myopia prevention in
the stage just before the onset of myopia. IMI has made
it clear that premyopia is a refractive state of an eye of ≤
+ 0.75 D and > − 0.50 D in children, which could be considered
as a framework for research on myopia
prevention.
Previous studies on myopia prediction mainly focused
on school-age children. The National Eye Institutefunded
Collaborative Longitudinal Evaluation of Ethnicity
and Refractive Error (CLEERE) study assessed the
ability of 13 candidate risk factors to predict the onset of
myopia and found that SE was the single best predictive
factor [33]. Therefore, trials for myopia prevention
should target children with low hyperopia. Limited by
poor cooperation and low follow-up rate of young children,
few studies have assessed the probability of myopia
in preschool children through a longitudinal observation.
Moreover, it is more difficult to collect cycloplegic refraction
data than collect ocular biometric parameter
values in preschoolers, suggesting that ocular biometric
parameter values might be a more realistic alternative
data source for myopia prediction in preschoolers. AL,
AL/CR have been found to highly correlate with noncycloplegic
SE in preschool children, according to crosssectional
studies [16, 18]. Also, a 1.5-year follow-up
among school-age children in China indicated that although
there were confounding factors, the use of the
current AL/CR as a precursor indicator for myopia onset
is undeniable [34]. Therefore, we hypothesized that early
myopia and premyopia could be predicted by ocular
biometric parameters, such as AL and AL/CR, and other
risk factors.
In the present cohort, we found that among all studied
variables, AL and AL/CR (baseline grade) were consistently
associated with the future SE (graduation grade)
after adjusting for age and gender. Therefore, baseline
AL and AL/CR could be used to monitor refractive development
and the tendency to develop myopia. Given
the relatively low prevalence of myopia in preschoolers,
we selected those who were in the stages of premyopia
or myopia as a study population and took myopia and
premyopia as occurrence events in the prediction model.
We found that higher AL value (AL > 21.42 mm) and
higher AL/CR (AL/CR > 2.77) at baseline were the
independent factors most strongly associated with incident
myopia and premyopia. Using the nomogram as a
visual and graphical prediction tool, AL/CR was found
to have the most enormous effect on survival. Nonetheless,
a large external validation cohort is needed to validate
the nomogram. Thus, a systematic, prospective
evaluation of our model in a larger patient population is
warranted.
Consistent with other longitudinal studies, we also
found a higher risk of myopia in children with two myopic
parents compared with those in one- and no-myopicparent
families [35–37]. However, we did not find a statistically
significant difference between children having only
one myopic parent and children not having a myopic parent
in the risk of myopia onset. The nonsignificant difference
between children with or without a myopic parent
may be explained that refractive error development is affected
by both the environment and genetic factors. Due
to the lack of complete questionnaire data in baseline and
middle grades, we retrospectively checked the questionnaire
from graduation grades. We found that outdoor
time and near activities time were 2.25 h/day and 4.32 h/
day among children who were pre- or myopia, 2.30 h/day
and 4.21 h/day among children who were nonmyopic.
There were no statistically significant between difference
two groups of children (P = 0.586, P = 0.498). The possible
explanation could be questionnaires with poor response
rates and poor quality or the less educational time and
more similar life pattern during preschool. In the GUSTO
birth cohort study, genetic factors are suggested to have a
greater contribution to early development of refractive
error compared to environmental factors in preschool
children [14].
We found no correlation between baseline physical parameters
and future SE, which is consistent with the
Growing Up in Singapore Towards Healthy Outcomes
(GUSTO) birth cohort study in Singapore [14]. Conversely,
Ye S et al. found that personal anthropometry
values, such as height and weight, remained independently
related to refraction among schoolchildren aged 6–
15 years old in Tianjin, China [38]. We infer that the absence
of a relationship between anthropometric measures
and SE may be due to the difference in the study
population that varies in corneal and lens powers, which
compensate for AL growth, although the eye grows in
harmony with the body.
This study’s strengths include large-scale longitudinal
data from preschool children in a particular period of
eye development and the objective measure of refraction
with complete cycloplegia. While, there were also some
limitations. Firstly, we failed to get cycloplegic refraction
in all children at baseline, but we found no significant
differences in the baseline parameters between children
included and excluded. Secondly, we did not obtain the
data of lens power, as an IOL Master could not measure
lens power directly. While, some studies indicated that
lens power also played an essential role in refractive development
[32]. Thirdly, our follow-up time was a fixed
node, and we were unable to determine the exact time
of the onset of myopia or premyopia. Fourthly, we could
not evaluate environmental factors’ influence in the
present analysis due to lack of complete questionnaire
data in baseline and middle grades about environmental
factors, including near activities and outdoor times.
Nonetheless, our study determined easier predictive
factors of myopia than traditional cycloplegic refraction
in preschoolers despite limitations. Based on
these findings, monitoring the AL/CR changes should
be informative in identifying children at risk for myopia.
Children with higher risk should be provided
with preventive advice and monitored closely for the
onset of myopia so that anti-myopia therapies can be
applied in time [39, 40].
Conclusions
In conclusion, AL and AL/CR showed an age-related increase
from 3- to 6-year-old. Premyopia and myopia
could be predicted using baseline AL and AL/CR in
preschool children. Further prospective studies for
myopia prediction in preschool children with longer
follow up period and exploring the mechanisms
underlying the relationship between AL and AL/CR
and SE are needed.