Introduction
Tolosa-Hunt syndrome (THS) is an uncommon idiopathic
granulomatous inflammatory disease of the cavernous
sinus, superior orbital fissure, or orbit associated
with ocular pain and ophthalmoplegia [1, 2]. However,
the etiology of THS is still unknown. Thus, the diagnosis
of THS should exclude other causes of painful ophthalmoplegia
such as tumors, vasculitis, meningitis, sarcoidosis,
diabetic ophthalmoplegia, and pseudotumor [3, 4].
THS is described in the International Classification of
Headache Disorders (ICHD 3-beta) diagnostic criteria as
unilateral orbital pain associated with paresis of one or
more of the third, fourth, and/or sixth cranial nerves
caused by a granulomatous inflammation in the cavernous
sinus, superior orbital fissure or orbit (Table 1) [5].
In clinical practice, the disorder is diagnosed based on
the above diagnostic criteria and treatment with corticosteroids
is generally recommended. There are relatively
few reports on the clinical course of THS, so the objective
of this retrospective study was to investigate the clinical
outcomes of THS.
Methods
The Institutional Review Board for Human studies at
Samsung Changwon Hospital (Changwon, Republic of
Korea) reviewed and approved this study protocol (IRB
No. 2020-06-014). As this study was a retrospective
study, informed consent was obtained from all patients
before the imaging examination and all identifiable personal
information of patients would be anonymized. All
study conduct adhered to the tenets of the Declaration
of Helsinki for the use of human participants in biomedical
research. The medical records of patients diagnosed
with THS from March 2016 to January 2020 at Samsung
Changwon Hospital were retrospectively reviewed. The
diagnosis of THS was defined by (1) unilateral headache
or orbital pain; (2) headache preceded with paresis of
the third cranial nerve (CN), fourth CN, and/or sixth
CN for two weeks, or developed with it; and (3) headache
localized around the ipsilateral brow and eye based
on ICHD-3 beta criteria [5]. All patients underwent
brain or orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
enhancing lesions of the cavernous sinus, superior orbital
fissure, and/or orbital apex were identified. Furthermore,
other causes of painful ophthalmoplegia including
tumors, vasculitis, basal meningitis, sarcoidosis, migraine,
cranial herpes zoster, giant cell arteritis, myositis,
pseudotumor, and thyroid ophthalmopathy were excluded.
Patients who did not show confirmed recovery
within a follow-up duration of less than six months were
excluded. Case notes were reviewed to obtain data on
patient demographics (age, sex), previous medical history
(hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or cancer), symptoms
(recorded as orbital pain, diplopia, ptosis, visual loss, and
facial numbness), the involved cranial nerves, laboratory
results, neuroimaging, the symptom-resolution interval,
and treatment. All patients were given oral methylprednisolone
(MPD) at 50 mg/day or intravenous (IV) MPD
1 g/day initially and then switched to a gradually decreased
dose until the signs and symptoms resolved. The
patients with previously diagnosed paralytic or restrictive
strabismus, congenital strabismus, or with previous
extraocular muscle surgery were excluded. At the first
visit, the patients underwent ophthalmologic assessments
including slit-lamp examination, intraocular pressure
measurements, ocular motor limitation assessment,
and fundus photography. In addition, the patients were
examined the hematological tests and cerebrospinal
studies. At the final follow-up visit, THS recovery was
deemed complete or non-recovered based on ocular
motor limitation and visual acuity. Complete recovery
was defined as the absence of ocular motor limitation
and other CN abnormalities and non-recovery was defined
as sequelae of CN function.
Results
A total of eleven patients (night males and two females)
were included in this study and the mean follow-up time
was 201.27 ± 31.36 days after the initial visit. The average
age at THS onset was 57.18 ± 15.32 years (range, 35–78
years). All eleven patients had orbital or periorbital pain
as the first symptom followed by diplopia or ptosis. Diplopia
and ptosis were found in eleven patients (100 %)
and five patients (45.45 %), respectively. Sixth CN palsy
was most common (eight cases, 72.73 %), followed by
fourth and sixth CN palsy (five cases, 45.45 %, respectively),
optic nerve (ON) involvement (two cases,
18.18 %), and trigeminal nerve and facial nerve palsy
(one case, 9.09 %, respectively). At the initial examination,
four patients had one CN involved, three patients
had two CNs involved, and two patients had three CNs
involved. Complete recovery was seen in ten (90.91 %)
patients and in one patient, the ocular motor limitation
was completely recovered but visual acuity was not recovered.
The mean duration of recovery was 26.91 ±
24.35 days (range, 8–73 days) (Table 2). The clinical
summary and MRI findings of the patients are presented
in Table 3. All patients were initially treated with steroid.
Six patients received oral MPD at 50 mg/day and five
patients received IV MPD at 1 g/day. The laboratory test
results showed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) in three patients and no patients had elevated
C-reactive protein (CRP) values. Three patients with elevated
ESR had a paralysis of all third, fourth and sixth
CNs. In two patients with optic neuritis as ON involvement,
one had fourth CN palsy at the first visit with a
history of facial nerve palsy before four months. ON
swelling was observed three days later, and IV MPD at
1 g/day was administered. Another patient had third,
fourth, and sixth CN palsy at the first visit and oral
MPD at 50 mg/day was administered. After five weeks,
decreased visual acuity was observed and IV MPD at
1 g/day was injected. The first patient recovered completely
after treatment, but the second patient did not
recover from visual impairment. Of all the patients, two
patients relapsed, and one patient had recurrence of visual
impairment at 5 weeks interval. The other patient
had a history of treatment for THS five years prior according
to the medical record and was included as a relapsed
patient.
Discussion
This retrospective study of eleven cases of THS based
on ICHD-3 beta criteria showed that the clinical manifestations
were variable. The sixth CN (72.73 %) was
most commonly involved, followed by the third
(45.45 %), and fourth CN (45.45 %). Previous studies reported
a high rate of third CN (78–91 %) involvement
[6, 7], however, Curone et al. reported a low rate of third
CN (39 %) involvement [8]. As such, CN involvement
has been variably reported in each study. THS is usually
treated with steroid, but there are no rules regarding
drugs, formulations, routes of administration, or therapeutic
doses. Steroid treatment generally includes prednisone,
MPD, and dexamethasone given orally or by IV
injection. In this study, five patients were treated with IV
MPD at 1 g/day for three days, and six patients received
oral MPD at 50 mg/day for seven days, then the dosage
was tapered. The difference in treatment dose was determined
in consideration of the patient’s age, the severity
of their symptoms, and underlying diseases. After the
initiation of MPD treatment, pain resolved within two
days in all patients, and ocular motor limitation
gradually improved. Other studies reported that most
patients achieved pain relief within 72 hours and that
CN palsy resolved over two to eight weeks [6, 7]. In the
patients in this study, the recovery period varied from
one to eight weeks, similar to the previous report. Steroid
treatment relieves the pain quickly, but the signs do
not resolve immediately after treatment. As in this study
and previous studies, because steroid administration had
dramatic effects, when THS is diagnosed, it is important
to start steroid therapy immediately. An accurate diagnosis
is important for quick and appropriate treatment,
but many diseases must be considered in the differential
diagnosis of painful ophthalmoplegia. Tolosa-Hunt syndrome
is a diagnosis of exclusion requiring various
examination and careful evaluation to rule out tumors,
vascular causes, or other forms of inflammation in the
lesion of the cavernous sinus and superior orbital fissure
(Table 4). The role of MRI in the criteria has been included
as “granulomatous inflammation demonstrated
by MRI or biopsy” in the ICHD-3 beta criteria. In most
studies and our study, no patient had a biopsy or pathological
examination [3, 4, 6, 7]. Also, the location of lesion
is an important factor in the differential diagnosis,
especially an orbital pseudotumor with characteristics
and steroid response similar to THS [9]. Therefore, MRI
plays a key role in the diagnosis of THS. Since THS can
be diagnosed by anatomical location, MRI should be
performed if THS is suspected in a case of painful ophthalmoplegia.
The recurrence rate in our study (18.18 %)
was similar to that of Rui et al. (23 %) [6] and Colnaghi
et al. (21 %) [3] but was lower than that reported by
Zhang et al. (37 %) [7]. Two patients in this study experienced
recurrences, one recurred after five weeks and the
other had a history of THS diagnosis five years earlier.
THS patients have a good prognosis but recurrences
occur in about 21–50 % of the cases over an interval of
months to years [3, 7, 10]. Thus, it is important to consider
follow-up and the possibility of a recurrence after a
full recovery. In this study, the laboratory test results
showed elevated ESR values in three patients, which
were the patients with all third, fourth, and sixth CN involvement.
However, no patients with non-elevated ESR
had paralysis of all third, fourth, and sixth CNs. In patients
with elevated ESR, one patient did not recover
from visual impairment, and the other two showed
complete recovery, but the recovery period of the three
patients was about 2 months, which was longer than the
average recovery period of all patients. The longer recovery
period can be considered in association with the
clinical findings that there are many involved CN palsy,
and the ESR values could be considered as a factor predicting
the severity of the disease and the recovery
period. However, it is expected that further studies of
the blood test results in more patients will be needed in
the future. Meanwhile, ON dysfunction has been reported,
indicating that the pathological process may involve
the orbital apex [10]. Two patients in this study
had optic neuritis as ON involvement and enhanced
apex lesions were confirmed by orbit MRI. One patient
had fourth CN palsy and optic neuritis and recovered
completely after steroid treatment. In contrast, in other
patients with third, fourth, and sixth CN palsy, relapsed
five weeks later with retrobulbar optic neuritis and third,
fourth, and sixth CN palsy. After high-dose steroid treatment,
the ocular motor limitation was completely recovered,
but the vision loss (recognition of hand motion)
did not improve and a pale optic disc was observed at
follow-up. Kline and Hoyt [10] reported that the optic
disc may be normal, swollen, or pale in appearance, with
visual decline ranging from minimal to blindness, and
variable final visual acuity. In the two cases in this study,
the opposite results were found. In one case, the visual
acuity was completely recovered and in the other case, it
was not recovered despite the same treatment. In patients
whose vision did not recover, oral MPD at 50 mg/
day was prescribed at the initial examination because of
old age and uncontrolled diabetic history. At recurrence
of THS with optic neuritis, 1 g of MPD was administered,
but the loss of vision did not recover. It is thought
that the damaged ON axons could not be recovered due
to persistent granulomatous inflammation. We suggest
that initial IV MPD at 1 g/day might have a better prognosis
considering the elevated ESR and extended inflammation
of cavernous sinus and orbital apex. Although
optic neuritis as ON involvement is not common in
THS, the occurrence of ON dysfunction should be confirmed
through a visual acuity examination during the
follow-up period and immediate high dose steroid treatment
should be initiated. In addition, even if the ocular
motor limitation have improved, it is necessary to check
for recurrence or ON function through sufficient followup.
Our study had several limitations. First, it was a
retrospective, single-hospital-based study, suggesting
possible selection bias. Second, the sample size was small
due to the relatively uncommon occurrence of the disease.
Third, the follow-up intervals were not standardized
and were not long-term. Nevertheless, this study
showed the strength of analyzing eleven cases and
reporting various THS clinical symptoms. In conclusion,
considering that THS may cause optic neuritis as ON involvement,
immediate high dose steroid treatment
should be performed at the time of diagnosis. In
addition, since there is a possibility of recurrence, longterm
follow-up is necessary.