Background
Globally, it is estimated that over 1 billion people live
with some form of disability, accounting for approximately
15% of the world’s population. Among this,
93 million children and 720 million adults live with severe
disabilities [1]. In Ethiopia, the proportion of people with
disabilities is estimated to be around 17.6%, implying that
more than 14.4 million Ethiopians live with a disability,
including 2.5 million children [2].
Oral diseases disproportionally affect the poor and
socially disadvantaged members of society [3]. Disabled
individuals appear to have poorer oral health than their
non-disabled counterparts [4]. A systematic review on
the oral health status reported that children and adolescents
with intellectual disabilities have poorer oral health
(higher level of dental plaque, worse gingival status, and
fewer decayed and filled permanent teeth) compared to
their counterparts [5]. According to the Global Burden
of Disease, untreated dental caries in permanent teeth is
the most prevalent oral health problem [6], and with over
530 million children suffering from primary tooth caries
[3]. Children with disabilities and other special needs
have more oral health problems than the general population
due to impaired cognitive abilities, behavioral problems,
impaired mobility, and neuromuscular problems.
They require extra help and rely on others to achieve and
maintain good oral health [7].
Article 25 of the UN Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) reinforces the right
of persons with disabilities to attain the highest standard
of healthcare, without discrimination [8]. However,
the numbers of children with disabilities have steadily
increased with demographic trends; most health systems
cannot even address the current needs of children with
disabilities. The unmet needs of children with disabilities
have increased considerably, as health services have not
expanded to meet the growing need [9]. Most low- and
middle-income countries are unable to provide services
to prevent and treat oral health conditions [3].
Oral diseases pose a major health burden for many
countries and affect people throughout their lifetime,
causing pain, discomfort, disfigurement, and even death
[3]. People with a disability may have worse oral health
than those without disabilities; this might not only cause
physical problems, but it can also have a far-reaching
impact since poor oral health can hurt self-esteem, quality
of life, and general health [10]. Moreover, oral diseases
and conditions have serious health and economic burden,
particularly among school-age children and adolescents
[11].
Healthcare-seeking behavior is, any action taken by
individuals who believe that they have a health problem
or believe that they are ill [12]. It comprises activities carried
out to maintain good health, to prevent ill health, as
well as any departure from a good state of health [13].
Oral healthcare-seeking seems to be inextricably linked
to the demand for oral healthcare services[14]. Thus, the
demand for oral healthcare services is often associated
with an individual’s choice about which service to access
and when and where to access healthcare services [15].
Inadequate health-seeking behavior has been associated
with poorer oral health outcomes, higher mortality &
morbidity, and lower oral health statistics [16]. Knowing
the oral health problems and challenges of dental care
utilization among disabled individuals has the utmost
effect to design interventions. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no documented evidence of dental health
problems and treatment-seeking behavior among schoolchildren
in Ethiopia. Hence, the purpose of this study
was to assess the dental health problems and treatmentseeking
behavior of special needs school students in in
Amhara regional state, Ethiopia.
Methods
Study area and period
A cross-sectional study was conducted from November
2020 to April 2021 in eight special needs schools
in the Amhara Regional State, Ethiopia: Gondar, Dessie,
Debre Markos, and Bahir Dar. In the study area, 696
disabled students are attending special needs schools
(Gondar = 170, Dessie = 179, Bahir Dar = 237, and Debre
Markos = 110). The disability type distribution revealed
that 341 were hearing impaired, 129 were visually
impaired and 226 were mentally handicapped.
Population
The study participants were disabled students attending
special needs education special in Amhara Region,
Ethiopia. Students who were absent throughout the data
collection period, unable to provide complete data, and
severely ill were excluded from the study.
Sample size and sampling procedure
The sample size was calculated using a single population
proportion formula; considering 50% (since no previous
study found in Ethiopia) proportion of students
who have a dental health problem, d (the permissible
Margin of error 5%), Zα/2 (the value of the standard normal
curve score corresponding to the given confidence
interval = 1.96) corresponding to 95% confidence level,
and 15% non-response rate. The final sample size was
estimated to be 443 participants. The list of special need
students was obtained from each school class roaster. A
simple random sampling technique using a computer
random number generator was employed to recruit the
study participants.
Data collection procedure
Data were collected using a pretested structured interview-
administered questionnaire adapted from the
WHO oral health survey tool and other literature [10, 15,
17, 18]. In the very beginning, the tool was prepared in
English and then translated into the local Amharic language.
To check the consistency of the questionnaire, the
Amharic version was translated back to English. Pretest
was done on 5% of the total sample size and modifications
were made accordingly. The final instrument was
composed of socio-demographic characteristics, oral
health practice, medical condition, disability, oral habits,
and dental care-seeking behaviors.
The data collection and supervision were done by qualified
dental professionals and special needs experts. Data
collectors and supervisors received a five-day training on
the purpose of the study, data collection techniques, and
ethical considerations during data gathering. Daily, each
returned questionnaire was checked for completeness
and consistency.
Data processing and analysis
The data were entered into EpiData version 4.6 and
exported into STATA version 14 statistical software for
analysis. Descriptive analyses like medians, means, proportions,
standard deviations, and frequencies were computed.
A bivariable and multivariable logistic regression
model was fitted to identify the factors associated with
dental health problems and treatment-seeking behavior
among special needs school students in Amhara region.
Those variables with a p-value of less than 0.25 in the
bivariable model were fitted in the multivariable model.
Variables with a p-value less than 0.05 at a 95% confidence
interval were considered statistically significant.
Results
Socio‑demographic characteristics
A total of 443 special needs students participated in the
study with a response rate of 100%. The mean age of participants
was 15.84 (SD ± 0.18 years) with the age range
of 7 to 30 years. More than half of the participants were
males (53.5%) and attending primary education (53.3%).
The higher proportion of the participants (69.8%) were
affiliated with Orthodox religion. The monthly income of
the majority of the participants (70.5%) was below 1000
Ethiopian Birr (Table 1).
Oral hygiene practice
More than three-quarters (76.1%) of study participants
had a tooth brushing habit, and nearly half (53.1%) of
them used toothbrushes when brushing their teeth.
About 16.7% of the participants brushed their teeth twice
or more times a day. Furthermore, about 17.4% of the
participant received support from parents or legal guardians
while brushing their teeth.
Type of disabilities
One-third of the participants (33.6%) had hearing impairment,
and 29.4% had visual impairment. The median
(inter-quartile range) of years lived with a disability was
14 (12–16 years).
Self‑reported oral health problems and dental
care‑seeking behavior
Of the total study participant, 204 (46.1%, 95% CI: 41.4%,
50.7%) reported oral health problems. From these,
123 (60.3%, 95% CI: 53.4%, 66.8%) sought dental care
within the median time of 5 days, interquartile range of
(5–7days). The majority (65.0%) of the participant sought
dental care at the serious stage of the disease. More than
half (53.7%) of the participants followed the dental care
treatment courses until recovery. Fear (29.7%) and cost
of the treatments (29.7%) were the two main barriers
not to sought dental care. On the other hand, nearly half
(48.1%) of the participants did not know dental healthrelated
risky behavior (Table 2).
Perception towards dental care services
The study participants’ perception of dental care service
was evaluated using five items with a five-point Likert
scale. About 88% and 72% of the participants thought
dental care was important and the quality of the care
was good, respectively. Besides that, the cost of dental
care was too high for more than half of the participants
(56.9%). Majority (69.1%) of the participants were
pleased by the respect and behavior of dental professionals
(Fig. 1).
Treatment need
Concerning treatment needs, the majorities (71.8%) of
the participants require scaling and root planning and
more than one-third (37.8%) of them require Orthodontics
treatments (Fig. 2).
Factors associated with dental health problems
As presented in Table 3, place of residence, grade level,
maternal educational status, paternal educational status,
religion, carbohydrate intake, frequency of tooth
brushing, types of disability, years lived with disability,
knowledge on risk behaviors for oral health, and comorbidity
was variables with a p-value of less than 0.25 in a
bivariable logistic regression model. These variables were
entered into the final multivariable logistic regression
model. Of them, place of residence, grade level, religious
affiliation, years lived with disability, and knowledge of
dental health-related risk behaviors were statistically significant
factors associated with dental health problems.
Students who lived in Bahir Dar (AOR = 0.32, 95% CI:
(0.15, 0.70)) and Debre Markos (AOR = 0.45, 95% CI:
(0.22, 0.93)) cities were less likely to have dental health
problems as compared to those who lived in Gondar. Students
attending grades 5–8 (AOR = 2.04 95% CI: (1.14,
3.65)) and grades 9–12 (AOR = 4.25 95% CI: (1.91, 9.47))
were more likely had dental health problems than students
attending grade 1–4 did. Students affiliated with
the Islamic religion were 2.38 times more likely to report
dental health problems compared to those affiliated with
Orthodox Christians (AOR = 2.38, 95% CI: (1.07, 5.32)).
Students with mental impairment were 2.42 times more
likely to report dental health problems compared to
visually impaired students (AOR = 2.42, 95 %nCI: (1.14,
5.11)). Students who knew at least one dental healthrelated
risky behavior were 2.31 more likely to report
dental health problems compared to their counterparts
(AOR = 2.31, 95% CI: (1.40, 3.80)). The risks of having
oral health problems drop by 0.92 times for every year
spent living with a disability (AOR = 0.92, 95% CI: (0.87,
0.98) (Table 3).
Factors associated with dental treatment‑seeking behavior
The multivariable analysis showed that living in Dessie
town, being hearing impaired, and having prior information
about dental health problems were statistically significant
factors associated with dental treatment-seeking
behavior. Students who lived in Dessie town were 4.48
times more likely to seek dental treatments than students
who lived in Gondar city (AOR = 4.48, 95% CI:
(1.10, 18.25)). Hearing-impaired students were 3.70 times
more likely to seek dental treatments compared to visually
impaired students (AOR = 3.70, 95% CI: (1.46, 9.43)).
Moreover, students who did not have prior information
about dental health problems were 86% less likely to seek
dental treatments than their counterparts (AOR = 0.14,
95% CI: (0.04, 0.44)) (Table 4).
Discussion
This study was aimed to assess the dental health problems
and treatment-seeking behavior of special needs school
students in Amhara Regional State, Ethiopia. Individuals
with disabilities appear to have poorer oral health than
their non-disabled counterparts [4]. In support of this,
the present study revealed that 46.1% of special needs
students reported dental health problems. A similar finding
was reported in Canada among people experiencing
social and health inequalities where 46.3% of the participants
had poor oral health [19]. On the contrary, Choi
and Yang reported lower caries prevalence among children
with disabilities compared with those without disabilities
[20]. In general, increased urbanization and
changes in living conditions could be a contributing factor
for the high prevalence of oral health problems [3].
Moreover, children with special needs have more oral
health problems due to existing condition-related complications
that can be barriers to adequate oral hygiene
practice [7]. Physical limitations that make tooth brushing
difficult, reduced saliva flow, taking medications and
precarious diets are reported as factors that contribute
to poor oral health in people with disabilities [21]. Due
to this, students with disabilities depend on others to
achieve and maintain good oral health [21]. This reflects
that ongoing coaching and reinforcement from caregivers
is critical in improving special needs students’ oral
care practices and reducing the occurrence of oral health
problems [22]. However, the present study found that
about 82% of the participant did not get adequate support
from their family members to do so.
In this study living in Bahir Dar and Debre Markos cities,
and increased years lived with disability were associated
with lower dental health problems. On the other
hand, attending grades 5–8 and grades 9–12, and being
affiliated Islam religion was associated with increased
dental health problems. These findings may be attributed
to differences in geographic location, socio-economic,
and other confounding factors. A previous study reported
that children with hearing impairment had lower caries
experience than children with mental retardation and
visual impairment [4]. Besides in this study knowledge
of dental risky behaviors was negatively associated with
a dental health problem. In such cases, the knowledge
by itself may not enable us to predict the behaviors. This
means individuals who know dental health-related risky
behaviors may not adhere to them appropriately. This
may be due to knowledge is neither sufficient nor necessary
to trigger a behavioral change [23].
Meeting the oral health treatment requirements for
children with intellectual, emotional, or physical disabilities
can be a difficult task for their caregivers and
health professionals [24]. Children with special needs,
oral health needs are competing with already burdensome
chronic health conditions [25]. Oral health
treatment-seeking and decision about what type of
treatment to receive could be said to depend on the
recommendations of family and friends and the cost
of services [16]. In the present study, the prevalence of
dental treatment-seeking was 60.3%. Similarly, a study
on oral health care services utilization among children
in Lagos, Nigeria, found that children with disabilities
did not adequately use dental facilities [25]. Children’s
treatment-seeking behavior was attributed to family’s
low commitment to their dental care. A national survey
of children with special health care needs in the USA
from 2005 to 2011 found that children with special
health care needs are experiencing greater unmet dental
needs and are receiving less help coordinating care
services [26].
The analysis of factors associated with dental treatment-
seeking behavior revealed that children living in
Dessie town, hearing impaired, and who had prior information
about dental health problems had higher dental
treatment-seeking behavior. A cross-sectional study on
the oral health-seeking behavior of different population
groups in Nigeria found that geographic location and
socio-economic status group have a negative regression
coefficient to the demand for treatment in the dental clinics.
Any movement towards the urban area will increase
the demand for dental caries treatment in a dental facility
[16]. This is may be due to differences in access to dental
health services and information, and geographical location
of the participants and services. A systematic review
reported that people with disabilities encounter physical,
structural, geographical, professional, or behavioral barriers
that hinder access to dental services. Specifically,
the most frequently reported barriers to use dental care
among disabled peoples were the cost of treatment, lack
of preparation for dental care of the disabled persons, the
inadequacy of dental facilities for the disabled, and lack
of adaptation of the access routes to the health care facilities
and dental offices [27]. This indicates the need for
dental centers accessible to special needs individuals, and
trained dental professionals [28].
Despite some limitations, the present study tried to
assess an important public health issue in marginalized
populations and provide a way for successive researchers.
This is the first study on the dental problem and treatment-
seeking practice of special needs school students
in Ethiopia. The first limitation, the findings were based
on self-reported data and may be subject to social desirability
bias. Secondly, due to the impairment, some of the
study participants did not express their dental problems
confidentially. This means we have used language translators
for hearing-impaired participants. Finally, due to the
cross-sectional nature of the study, the causal relationship
between the dependent and independent variables
cannot be declared.
Conclusion
The present study found that a significant proportion
of special needs school students had oral health problems.
In addition, a significant number of them did
not seek dental treatments. Dental health problems
and dental treatment-seeking behavior of special need
school students were associated with a variety of child
and familial socio-demographic characteristics, types
of disabilities, years lived with disabilities, knowledge
of oral health-related risk behaviors, frequency of carbohydrate
intake, and information about dental health
problems. Therefore, schools and centers for special
needs students should develop and implement oral
hygiene programs focusing on screening, prevention,
and treatment of oral health problems to reduce the
impact of dental diseases. Policymakers, health professionals,
and other concerned bodies should emphasize
oral health care as a major component of the overall
wellbeing of children with special needs. On the other
hand, oral health promotion programs and tailored oral
health education programs focusing on oral hygienic
practices, risky behaviors, dental diseases preventive
strategies, and dental treatment-seeking behaviors are
recommended to achieve optimum oral health. Finally,
it is also strongly suggested to incorporate oral healthrelated
messages/information in health-related academic
lessons.