Background
Denture stomatitis is a common clinical condition occurring
in removable denture wearers. It is characterized
by inflammation, erythema and edema of denture bearing
mucosa which may accompanied by pain or burning
[1]. Several studies reported that more than two thirds
of denture wearers can develop denture stomatitis [2, 3].
The prevalence of this lesion in Iranian population was
estimated to be 28.9% [4]. Although, the main etiology of
denture stomatitis is not fully understood, some related
risk factors have been identified including Candida infection,
defects in the immune system, mucosal trauma,
poor denture hygiene, and denture wearing pattern [2, 5].
As some of the risk factors are interrelated, they should
be studied with multivariable analysis [5]. Although,
many studies have been published on prevalence and etiology
of denture stomatitis, the conclusion is still controversial
[2, 3, 5, 6].
It is believed that most cases of denture stomatitis
are associated with Candida growth [7] while literature
reveals that cigarette smoking, as one of the local factors,
either alone or with other factors can lead to candida
infection [8, 9]. Smoking tobacco in other forms, such
as hookah (also known as: water pipe, nargileh, shisha,
ghalyan) indicated to be associated with suppressing the
immune system cells, change the composition of the oral
microbiome and proliferate Candida species [10, 11]. To
date, different hypotheses have been reported regarding
the pathogenesis of tobacco-related diseases, but none
of them conclusive. [8]..Hookah smoking is culturally
popular among Asian people, however its usage becomes
increasingly prevalent among other societies too [12].
Various studies reported that the rate of regular or occasional
use among adults in Iran is 16.3% [13].
Consumption of opium or its derivatives as a psychoactive
drug in Middle East, especially Afghanistan, Pakistan,
and in our country Iran is exceptionally common
[14]. A general population-based survey performed in
Kerman province, Iran, indicated that the prevalence of
opium abuse was 17.1% and addiction rate was 5.3% [15].
Some studies investigated the correlation between opium
addiction, as a suppressive factor of immune system, and
candida infection which showed a higher risk of fungal
infection in addicts [16, 17].
Moreover, risk indicators such as cigarette, hookah
and opium consumption and denture hygiene have less
investigated in the previous studies. Therefor the aim of
this study was to investigate the association of denture
stomatitis prevalence with cigarette, hookah and opium
consumption also dose–response relationship between
the cigarette smoking duration and odds of denture stomatitis
in population of Rafsanjan cohort center.
Methods
Study design and patient selection
This cross-sectional study based on data of Rafsanjan
Cohort Study (RCS) which is a part of the prospective
epidemiological research studies in Iran (PERSIAN) [18].
RCS conducted in Rafsanjan as one of the cities located
southeast of Iran with 10,000 participants of both gender
aged 35–70 years old [19]. The only inclusion criterion for
the present study was wearing at least one complete denture
and the exclusion criteria were as follows; immunocompromised
individuals, history of drug ingestion in the
past 30 days including; wide spectrum antibiotic, antimycotic,
or corticosteroids and history of organ transplantation
as they should receive lifelong immunosuppressive
therapy. After applying the exclusion criteria, 1619 cases
were included in the analysis. Study was designed based
on the PERSIAN protocol and was approved by the Ethics
Committee of Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences
(IR.RUMS.REC.1398.058).
Data collection
Data were collected by completion of interviewerbased
questionnaires and intra-oral examination.
Intra-oral examination performed by examiners who
were trained and calibrated in workshops hold by an
oral medicine specialist to diagnose denture stomatitis.
The oral medicine specialist was consulted in case
of uncertainty. A clinical diagnosis of denture stomatitis
was made when inflammatory alterations were
found under a removable denture according to newton’s
criteria [20]. For a lesion to be classified as denture
stomatitis, there must be visible inflammatory
changes under the denture [21] and Patient-reported
discomfort in the absence of inflammation was not
recorded as denture stomatitis.
Questionnaires included questions on demography,
cigarette and hookah smoking, opium consumption,
alcohol consumption, medical history (diabetes and
hypertension), body mass index (BMI), Wealth score
index (WSI), nutritional habit and oral health questions
such as denture hygiene habits. In terms of income, WSI
was categorized into two groups: lower and higher than
median.
To determine cigarette, hookah and opium consumption,
a structured questionnaire about frequency of use
and years of smoking was used. We classified cigarette
smoking as current and former smoking; participants
who had smoked more than 100 cigarettes in lifetime
and are still smoking considered as current smoker and
who quit smoking prior to admission considered as
former smoker. Duration of cigarette smoking in current
smokers divided into four quartiles: ≤ 11 year,
12–24 year, 25–34 year and ≥ 35 year. Opium consumption
was defined as self-report of opium use at least once
per week for 6 months prior to admission, and hookah
smoker was defined as active smoking of tobacco using a
hookah over the past 30 days [19]. Alcohol consumption
was defined as drinking approximately 350 mL of beer or
150 mL of wine or 45 mL of liquor, once per week for at
least 6 months[19]. Qualitative and quantitative aspects
of food intake were evaluated by use of food frequency
questionnaire; Vitamins A (Micrograms per day), B12
(Milligrams per day), a- and b-carotene (Micrograms per
day) and calcium and magnesium (Milligrams per day)
were computed by nutritional records. Questionnaires
were verified in the PERSIAN [18].
Statistical analyses
Data of the present study were analyzed by STATA 14.0
(STATA Corp, College Station, TX) software. Categorical
variables across denture stomatitis were analyzed
using chi-square test. T-test was used to compare the
continuous variables between denture stomatitis groups.
For investigating the association between cigarette,
hookah and opium consumption and denture stomatitis
prevalence, logistic regression models were used. Confounders
were identified using relevant epidemiological
literature. Thereafter, they were sequentially entered
into models according to their hypothesized strengths of
association with denture stomatitis. To achieve this goal,
separate models at bivariate level were run to acquire
variables associated with denture stomatitis. Afterwards,
variables with a p-value < 0.25 were considered for multivariate
analysis. Adjusted model 1 included sociodemographic
characteristics (age, gender, education years
and WSI) considered to be related to cigarette, hookah
and opium consumption and denture stomatitis. Model
2 contained additional adjustments for oral health factor
(The frequency of brushing per day), history of hypertension,
alcohol use that were additionally considered
to confound cigarette, hookah and opium consumptiondenture
stomatitis associations. Model 3 included all
variables in adjusted model 2 and additionally included
vitamins A, B12 and a- and b-carotene, calcium and magnesium
intake per day. In all models related to cigarette
smoking and denture-associated stomatitis the effect
of hookah and opium use was controlled and in models
related to opium consumption the unwanted effects
of cigarette and hookah smoking was also controlled.
Since opium consumption is known as stigmatized
and marginalized attitude, in the present study some
degree of nondifferential misclassification is likely as a
consequence of misreporting and recall bias. Therefore,
to evaluate the direction and extent of the misreporting
bias, we conducted a simple bias analysis, and compared
the results with those of the conventional result [22]. The
results of an internal validation analysis can be used to
define the bias parameters (sensitivity and specificity
of self-reported opium consumption). When resources
are not available for performing an internal validation
analysis, previously conducted validation studies which
are applicable to the acquired data can be used. Finally,
in the absence of relevant studies, the researchers must
use their experience to classify parameters. Also, due
to lack of any internal validation study for evaluation of
the self-reporting of opium consumption, utilizing of the
results of an external validation study [23] and estimation
based on the current condition [19] to determine the bias
parameters and applying of simple bias analysis to correct
the exposure measurement error were inevitable [22].
Results
In the present study, 1619 participants in the baseline
data collection phase of the Rafsanjan cohort study,
763(47.1%) women and 856 (52.9%) men, with the
mean ± SD age of 58.07 ± 7.36, who had maxillary or
mandibular dentures, were included. Prevalence of denture
stomatitis in all removable complete denture wearers
was 21.6% (Table 1).
Characteristics of participants from the aspects of sociodemographic,
cigarette and hookah smoking, opium
consumption, alcohol use, BMI, nutrient intake and oral
health based on stomatitis denture status are shown in
Table 1. There are significant differences regarding gender,
cigarette smoking, opium consumption and history
of hypertension among denture stomatitis and non-denture
stomatitis participants. As expected, cigarette smoking
and its duration had significant effects on prevalence
of denture stomatitis.
Table 2 shows the association of denture stomatitis
diseases with cigarette, hookah and opium consumption
using the crude and three adjusted models.
In the crude regression model, the odds of denture stomatitis
among current cigarette smokers and opium users
were about 2.12 and 1.33 times greater than those of noncigarette
smokers and non-opium users respectively (OR;
2.12, 95% CI 1.63–2.76 and OR; 1.33, 95% CI 1.05–1.69
respectively). This association has been persisted after
adjustment for confounders among current cigarette
smokers (adjusted OR; 2.27, 95% CI 1.52–3.38), but not
in opium users and former cigarette smokers (adjusted
model 2). Adjusted model 3 includes all variables considered
in adjusted model 2, additionally included vitamins
A, B12 and a- and b-carotene and calcium and magnesium
intake. Although, the result showed no marked
changes after adjusting for the variables among current
cigarette smokers (adjusted OR; 2.29, 95% CI 1.53 to
3.41) (adjusted model 3). As the results classified by quartile
of cigarette smoking duration, dose–response rises
were shown, with the highest odds ratios for denture
stomatitis in the 4th quartile (adjusted OR; 2.09, 95% CI
1.29–3.37). Also, we investigated the interaction between
opium consumption and cigarette smoking and denture
stomatitis and the results showed that participants who
were opium consumer and cigarette smoker at the same
time had no higher odds of denture stomatitis (adjusted
OR: 1.65, 95% CI 0.85–3.22). Also, we failed to find any
association between hookah use and denture stomatitis
in any of the models.
As previously mentioned, since opium consumption
is known as stigmatized attitude in the studies, we conducted
a simple bias analysis and compared the results
of the analysis with conventional results, assuming that
the specificity and sensitivity of the self-reported opium
consumption in both denture stomatitis and non-denture
stomatitis groups are 90%. The adjusted odds ratios for
this bias about denture stomatitis are 1.44. These Odds
ratios were reported in the crude logistics model before
adjusting for this bias as 1.33. According to this analysis,
percent biases, were − 7% for association between denture
stomatitis and opium consumption, demonstrating
that the odds ratio increased or, in other words, there was
7% error towards null prior to controlling for this bias.
Discussion
The aim of the present cross-sectional study was to investigate
the association of denture stomatitis prevalence
with cigarette, hookah and opium consumption in participants
of Rafsanjan cohort study, a district in southeastern
Iran with a high rate of opium consumption. The
present study would provide basic data for better understanding
of distribution and association of denture stomatitis
and cigarette, hookah and opium consumption
as essential information for prevention, early diagnosis,
treatment and also for better dental health services.
According to our findings, the prevalence of denture stomatitis
in all removable complete denture wearers was
21.6% which was in accordance with similar previous
studies [4, 24]. Also In agreement with some other studies
[6, 25], male participants showed a higher prevalence
of denture stomatitis (62.75%). However, there are studies
indicating that denture stomatitis is more frequent
among female gender [24, 26].
We found that denture stomatitis were almost two
times more prevalent in current cigarette smokers compared
with non-cigarette smokers (also when adjusted
for several potentially confounding variables). This findings
were similar to those reported by several studies [5,
8, 9]. Shulman et al. found that cigarette smokers had
increased OR of denture stomatitis [5]. This association
could be in relation with increasing candida carriage, as
cigarette increases epithelial thickness and changes functional
activity of the keratinocytes which leads to candida
colonization [27]. Hypothetically, cigarette smokers had
a reduced salivary flow rate and, as a result, decreased
saliva pH may result in an acidic environment that is also
likely to increase Candida colonization. Furthermore,
it has been proposed that smoking causes a decrease in
salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA) and reduction in neutrophil
function, both of which promotes oral Candida
colonization [28]. In addition, our findings on dose–
response relationships between the cigarette smoking
and odds of denture stomatitis strengthened the conclusion
that cigarette smoking were directly associated with
an increased odds of denture stomatitis.
However, it should be noted that, the cross-sectional
studies does not allow us to determine the directionality
of observed associations, and further prospective studies
are warranted to reconsider these associations.
Also, It has been reported that 23.81% of the Rafsanjan
adults (46.19% of men and 4.27% of women) use opium
[19]. Our finding indicated that the prevalence of denture
stomatitis was 0.81 times lower in opium users compared
to non-opium users (not statistically significant). Therefore,
this result suggests that opium consumption has no
effect on denture stomatitis. Interestingly, our additional
analysis indicated that the interaction between opium
consumption and cigarette smoking was also not associated
with higher odds of denture stomatitis. Kathwate
et al. observed antifungal effect of tramadol, an opioid
agonist, at certain concentration [29] and in contrast
to this study, Hadzic et al. [30] reported higher candida
growth in opium users. There is a study suggesting that
impairing immune system cells by opium can provide a
candida infection condition and consequently increase
the possibility of denture stomatitis incidence [31]. Due
to these conflicting evidence, it is suggested that in the
follow-up phase of the study, this association is further
investigated.
According to the findings of the present work, contrary
to opium users, denture stomatitis were more prevalent
in hookah smokers versus non-hookah smokers which
are consistent with those of the previous studies [10, 11]
although they were not statistically significant.
This study had strengths and limitations. Populationbased
nature of the study with a large size of the sample,
the high population coverage and extensive data collection
for the exposure of interest (cigarette, hookah and
opium consumption) and potential confounders (e.g. age,
gender, education, oral heath factor, medical history and
nutrient intake) were strongly enhancing the external
validity of this study. The study design had a number of
limitations too.
The major limitation of the study was the design where
both outcome and predictor variables were assessed
simultaneously. The cross-sectional design of the present
study does not allow us to determine the directionality
of observed associations. For example we are not
able to determine if participants started smoking before
or after the onset of denture stomatitis, accordingly, it is
suggested that this relationship be reconsidered in the
follow-up phase of this prospective study.
Also, it is likely that a number of individuals have not
fully disclosed their opium consumption status. However,
there might be a degree of misclassification because of
self-reporting and recall biases. As a result, measurement
errors may occur in this form of study, leading to incidence
bias [32–34]. However, self-reporting bias whole effect varies
according to sex, age, geographical location, and study
population [35, 36]. Interestingly, since opium consumption
in this population was related to a lower social stigma, we
believe that the validity of the data on opium consumption
in study population is almost high. Abnet et al. in agreement
with this study showed a high rate of sensitivity of opium
consumption among residents of northern cities of Iran [23].
It has been reported that this population, use opium as a traditional
medicine with low social stigma. However, in the
present study, findings from simple bias analysis indicated
that the direction and value of this bias may be towards null
and the adjusted OR for this bias about denture stomatitis is
stronger than that of the conventional result and the validity
of the results of this model is influenced by the accuracy
of bias parameters [22]. Hence, it is suggested to perform an
internal validation research on our population to examine
the magnitude and direction of this bias more accurately.
These findings may shed a more light in the field of causative
association of denture stomatitis prevalence with opium
consumption or tobacco smoking as determining factors for
updating dental health services and education.
Conclusion
According to the findings of this study while cigarette
smoking has a dose–response relationship with increased
odds of denture stomatitis; this association was not found
with opium consumption. Also, we failed to find any
association between hookah smoking and denture stomatitis.
Accordingly, denture wearers should be more
aware of adverse effects of cigarette smoking.