Background
The instrumentation aims to shape the canals to facilitate
cleaning and obturation, preventing disease progression
and promoting healing. Rotary NiTi (nickel-titanium)
instruments are designed to shape the canals. Their performance
and safety have always been a subject of interest
among practitioners in the presence of anatomical
challenges. Canal curvature is a parameter that can
challenge the performance of a file; hence respecting
the anatomy of a canal in the presence of curvature is a
desired characteristic of any rotary instrument considering
the root canal morphology [1, 2].
The OneShape (OS; Micro Méga, Besançon, France) is
a single-file canal preparation system made of conventional
NiTi alloy that works on full clock rotation. This
system was introduced to the market after two reciprocating
single-file systems named WaveOne (Dentsply
Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and Reciproc (VDW
Munich, Germany) promising results. The OS file has a
tip size of 25 and a constant taper of 0.06 with different
cross-sections along its length, changing from S-shaped
to concave triangular shape near the tip. This system
requires only one file working in a clockwise rotation to
prepare the canals up to the apical size of 25. These features
have decreased the preparation time by OS compared
to other single and full sequence file systems [3,
4]. Bürklein et al. found that OS required less time in
comparison with another single file and a full sequence
system to prepare canals in extracted teeth although
the clinical significance this difference is questionable
[3]. The file has features such as Anti Breakage Control
(ABC) and asymmetric file design, which is claimed by
the manufacture to increase the safety of the system [5].
Hero Shaper (HS; Micro Méga, Besançon, France) is
a full-sequence system introduced as a modification of
Hero 642 in terms of helix pitch and helix angle with a
shortened handle. HS files have a positive rake angle,
large inner core, and ABC, incorporated into the design
to increase the files’ efficacy and safety. The system consists
of six files with tip sizes of 20, 25, and 30 and is
grouped in tapers of 0.4 and 0.6. The manufacturer suggests
three protocols, namely yellow, red, and blue, based
on the canal’s anatomy to be instrumented. A sufficient
amount of studies are available on this system to make it
a proper baseline for the evaluation of rotary instruments
[6–8].
Revo-S (RS; Micro-Mega SA, Besançon, France) is
another full-sequence system introduced after HS by the
same company, which consists of three files with a constant
apical size of 25. The main feature of this system
is the asymmetry in the cross-section or offset mass of
rotation [9]. This feature is claimed to enhance the negotiation
of curved canals due to the files’ increased flexibility
[10]. The manufacturer also claims that the file’s
helical design facilitates debris movement away from the
apex because of the increased available volume of space
between the file and the canal’s surface. This asymmetric
design was not incorporated in Revo-SC2. Claimed by
the manufacture, this file’s asymmetry balances the forces
and ensures the instrument’s guidance up to the apical
region. Like HS, this system also benefits from variable
pitch angle.
Although HS and RS might be considered traditional
systems compared to the latest rotary instruments, especially
the new wave of single-file systems. These are the
products of constant changes and improvements in NiTi
instruments’ designs over a short period by the same
manufacturer. Evaluation of these systems’ behaviour
may give us some insights into the effect of changes on
our understanding of different designs and sequences of
rotary files on their shaping ability. Therefore, this study
aimed to evaluate three NiTi files’ shaping ability regarding
their centricity in simulated L-shaped canals.
Methods
Sample size
Sample size was calculated with assumption of
alpha = 0.05, power = 80% maximum difference of means
(d) = 0.05 and pooled standard deviation (s) = 0.04 (4)
and 3 levels(k = 3) by this formula
n =
2s2(z
1−
/2+z1− )2
(d)2 , n =
k − 1 . So the sample size in
each group approximately was 16.
Simulated canals
Forty-eight simulated L-shaped canals were used in this
study (Endo Training Block-S; Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues,
Switzerland, with 0.02 taper, 0.15 mm apical
diameter, 17 mm length, and 40 curvature). The patency
of the canals was confirmed by passing a size 10 K-file
(Micro Méga, Besançon, France) just beyond the apex,
and the unity in the angles and length of the curvatures
were confirmed before distribution of the blocks by taking
pictures of the samples on a photography stand. After
assuring that the samples are standard, they were randomly
divided into three groups (n = 16 canals/group)
and were numbered.
All canals were injected with black ink (Parker Quink,
Parker, France) to obtain a clear pre-instrumentation
image (Fig. 1). The canals were photographed using a digital
camera (Sony Alpha DSLR-A100 camera with DSLRA100
macro lens, Sony, Japan) on a fixed stand with
constant settings. All the canals were rinsed with saline
before and after instrumentation prior to ink injection.
Instrumentation of L‑shaped canals
A new instrument was used for each canal in all groups.
Glyde-Prep (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland)
was used as a lubricant before using each instrument,
and saline was used for irrigation during preparation. The
canals were instrumented using the protocols suggested
by the manufacturer described in the following sections
without glide path preparation or additional use of hand
files except for recapitulation with a size 10 K-file.
Group A
The OS file (tip size, 25; apical taper, 0.06) was used in
a full clockwise rotation generated by an X-Smart motor
(Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland), and the
speed and torque were adjusted to 400 rpm and 4 Ncm.
The files were used in a slight pecking motion according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. The flutes of the
instrument were cleaned after each retrieval of the file
from the simulated canal.
Group B
The HS files were used following the yellow sequence
with file size 25 taper 0.6 used as a modification to the
protocol to achieve the same apical size and taper of prepared
canals as that of other groups. According to the
manufacturer’s torque guide, the motor was set at the
speed of 400rmp with the torque of 1 to 2 set for each
instrument. The instrument sequence was as follows:
1. A 0.06 taper size 20 instrument for 2/3 of the WL.
2. A 0.04 taper size 20 instrument for the full WL.
3 A 0.04 taper size 25 instrument for the full WL.
4 A 0.06 taper size 25 instrument for the full WL.
Group C
The RS files were used up to the size 25 and taper of
0.06 in a full clockwise rotation with a rotational speed
of 400 rpm generated by the X-Smart motor (Dentsply
Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland), and the torque was
adjusted to 2 Ncm. The files were used in a slight pecking
motion according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
instrument sequence was as follows:
1. A 0.06 taper size 25 instrument (SC1) 2/3 of the WL.
2. A 0.04 taper size 25 instrument (SC2) for the full
WL.
3. A 0.06 taper size 25 instrument (SU) for the full WL.
An endodontist with more than 20 years of experience
and the history of conducting studies on resin blocks prepared
all canals, and a total of 48 L-shaped canals were
prepared [4, 11]. Canals were irrigated during preparation
by using saline. A new instrument was used to prepare
four canals only, and the flutes of all instruments
were cleaned after retrieval of the instruments from the
canals during instrumentation or after three pecks.
Image analysis and assessment of canal preparation
The post-instrumented canals were subsequently filled
with red ink (Parker Quink, Parker, France) and were
photographed again under identical conditions to the
pre-instrumentation images. The pre-and post-instrumentation
images were superimposed into a composite
image using a computer software program (Adobe
Photoshop Elements 7.0, Adobe Systems Incorporated,
San Jose, CA, USA). The post-instrumentation image
was faded, inverted (converted to a negative photo), and
superimposed in Photoshop for composite image production.
A measuring template was also superimposed
on the composite images (Fig. 1). The amount of resin
removal due to instrumentation was measured using
ImageJ 1.46r software (Wayne Rasband, National Institutes
of Health, USA) perpendicularly to the surface of
the canal at 22 measuring points (11 on each side of the
canal). The measurement points (MP) were arranged in
1-mm steps: points 0 corresponded to the canal’s endpoint,
7 to the beginning of the curve, and points 7 to 10
belonged to the straight portion of the canal. A second
examiner who was blinded to all experimental groups
carried out the canal shapes’ assessments before and after
instrumentation.
Centring ability was assessed for each measuring point
by analyzing the amount of resin removed at the inner
side versus the outer side using paired t test (p < 0.05).
Canal preparation with no significant differences
between the amounts of resin removed from the inner
and outer side of a canal was considered as good centring
ability.
The canal preparation time, which included total active
instrumentation, cleaning of the instruments’ flutes,
and irrigation, was recorded. The amount of time spent
to change the files or adjust stoppers was excluded to
facilitate the files’ efficacy. Canal aberrations were determined
by two clinicians blinded to the canal preparation
instruments by using composite images. Assessments
were performed based on an apical zip, narrowing, ledge,
and the danger zone. The canal aberrations were defined
according to Ersev et al.[7]
Statistical analysis
Statistical evaluations were performed with SPSS software
(IBM SPSS Statistics 21, SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA).
The normality of the data was verified for each set of
measurements by using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test.
The results were statistically.
analysed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
and the post hoc Tukey test. ANOVA and the post hoc
Tukey were also used to analyse the preparation times,
and the Chi-square test was used to analyse the incidence
of canal aberrations. The significance level was set at
P < 0.05.
Results
Only one SC2 file in the RS group fractured during
instrumentation. Consequently, the sample was substituted
with a new one, and another set of instruments
were used. No sign of deformation was noticed visually
on RS and HS files, but all the OS files showed deformity
signs.
A significant difference was found at the apical end of
the prepared simulated canal (MP 0) between the groups,
with RS showing the least amount of resin removal from
the inner side of the canals and HS showing the highest
amount of resin removal from the outer side (P < 0.05;
Table 1). RS removed the highest amount of resin from
the inner side of the canals at the endpoint of curvature,
however not significantly different from the other groups.
HS showed the least amount of resin removal from the
canals’ outer surface at the curvature’s apex but the highest
amount of resin removal from the outer side at the
beginning of the canals (P < 0.05, Table 1). RS removed
significantly less resin from the outer side at the canals’
straight portion (P < 0.05, Table 1). OS showed the highest
centricity at the terminal portion of the canals and the
curvature’s beginning, followed by RS. This pattern was
reversed at the other points of canals by RS, showing a
higher centricity than OS (Fig. 2).
Regarding the total width of the canals after preparation,
a significant difference was found between the
groups at the apical end and the straight portion of the
canals only, with RS removing the least amount of resin
at the straight portion of the canals (P < 0.05; Table 2).
Canal aberrations
The results of the canal aberrations are presented in
Table 3. No statistically significant differences were found
between the different instruments regarding canal aberrations’
incidence (Fig. 2, Chi-square test, P > 0.05).
Centring ability
OS showed the highest centricity along the simulated
canals, followed by RS (Fig. 1). HS tends to cause more
straightening by removing the higher amount of resin
from the outer than inner side of the canals at the apical
part. The least centricity was also noticed by the same
file at the beginning of the curvature (MP 5–6), shown in
Fig. 2.
Preparation time
Considering the preparation time, a significant difference
(P < 0.05) was found between OS (63.7 s) and HS only
(73.6 s); no significant difference was found between RS
(68.8 s) and the other two files (P < 0.05) (Fig. 3).
Discussion
This study aimed to compare OS single file system’s shaping
ability with RS and HS. RS and HS were used in this
study as they have some common features in design with
OS because all these three systems are products of the
same company. They also demonstrate a gradual change
from a full sequence system to a single file system which
is OS.
Various methods have been used to evaluate the shaping
ability of rotary or manual files [12–19]. Methods
vary based on the parameters being evaluated and the
devices used to measure changes. Studies can be performed
either on natural teeth or simulated canals. Studies
on natural teeth can be conducted by using images of
sectioned teeth, dental x-rays, cone beam radiography
and micro-computed tomographic imaging [12–15].
Simulated canals are being used as an alternative to natural
teeth when comparing the shaping ability of different
files because of their advantages [4, 16–19]. Simulated
canals are standard in canal curvature, length, diameter,
and hardness. Also, it is easy to measure changes
on them after instrumentation [20, 21]. Therefore, simulated
L-shaped canals were used in this study due to
the importance of standardization of experimental setting,
minimizing the possible variables and ease of reliably
obtaining pre and post-instrumentation images in
accordance with previous studies [4, 11].
The simulated L-shaped canals in this study were
prepared up to the size of 25 to make the comparison
between the files easier because OS when used as a single
file, prepares canals to the minimum size of 25. The
HS system’s yellow sequence was modified using the file
25 taper 0.06 instead of the file 30 taper 0.04 to reach a
closer prepared canal shape compared to the other two
systems.
Amount of resin removed
More centricity with OS at the apex may be due to the
fact that only one file was passed to the canal’s apex.
However, in the other two systems, the apex was instrumented
twice with files of the same size but different
tapers to achieve the final shape. This could attribute to
the more amount of resin removal from the outer side
of the canals at the terminal point of the canals. Consequently,
the increased number of passes and preparation
time in RS and HS full sequence systems can cause
eccentricity at the apical point [22]. Furthermore, OS
has a variable cross-section with a small inner core in
its middle portion and an S-shaped cross-section in its
coronal portion. These features may contribute to higher
flexibility and more centricity [23, 24]. The offset mass of
rotation causing swaggering motion in RS could be the
reason for higher maintenance of canal curvature and
less mount of resin removal from the outer canal wall in
comparison with HS group [18].
File separation and canal aberrations
Only one SC2 rotary file fractured. All of the instruments
prepared the simulated canals to the full length. Each rotary
file sequence is used to prepare only one canal. HS created
two ledges, three zip and elbows, and a narrowing effect.
However, the higher number of aberrations in the HS
group was not statistically significant compared to other
groups. A similar result regarding zip formation using HS
was reported by Perez et al. but two other studies reported
fewer canal aberrations [6, 8, 25]. Because all three systems
have non-cutting tips and are made of conventional
NiTi alloy, higher canal aberrations may be explained due
to the differences in design, flexibility, and the number of
instruments used among the three systems [22, 24]. HS has
a larger core, hence less flexibility in comparison to OS and
RS [23]. Unlike HS, RS has an offset mass of rotation and
OS has a variable cross-section that increases its flexibility.
Offset mass of rotation which is present in RS has been
associated with the maintenance of canal curvature [18].
Another possible reason for the observation of higher canal
aberration in the HS group can be due to the modification
in sequence of the HS system in this study.
Care must be exercised while extrapolating the results
of the studies conducted on resin blocks. Resin blocks are
softer than natural teeth, and the debris formed during
instrumentation is not that of a natural tooth. Therefore,
the files might not be as safe and efficient during natural
tooth preparation [20]. It is also important to remember
that the root canals in natural teeth are not merely a
single canal as presented in simulated resin blocks. A root
canal system is more complicated [26]. In addition, the
modification on sequencing HS files and its potential effect
on the outcome of this study needs to be considered and
emphasized. The use of ratios instead of actual measurements
while evaluating centricity may eliminate the need
for modifications. More studies are required to evaluate
and assess the effect of the number of instruments used
during instrumentation on maintaining the geometry of
the canals, especially in the apical portion. The effect of
the operator’s experience and the performance of singlefile
systems in comparison with full sequence systems also
requires to be examined.
Conclusions
Within this study’s parameters, all of the files showed a
tendency to straighten the canals, whereas OS files maintained
the original canal curvatures well. Single files
that are less tapered should be preferred when preparing
severely curved canals to maintain the original canal
curvatures.