Background
In orthodontic treatment with premolar extraction, sliding
and closing loops are two major techniques to close
the space. Although sliding mechanics is widely used in
the clinic with the advantages of simplified mechanics,
increased patient comfort and reduced chair time [1, 2],
loop mechanics is still thought to be more efficient in
controlling tooth movement patterns [3]. Orthodontic
loops are frictionless, and all the generated force will be
fully expressed against the brackets and finally to teeth
after deactivation [4]. Some clinicians still prefer loop
mechanics to sliding mechanics [5, 6].
Closing loops with different configurations such as
T loops, teardrop loops, L loops, and mushroom loops
are used in the clinic, and they need individual adjustments
according to the clinical experience of orthodontists
[4, 7]. The load deflection ratio (L/D), vertical force
and moment-to-force ratio (M/F) are three important
indexes for the evaluation of different loops, and the
M/F ratio is the most critical index in loop mechanics.
Generally, a force system with an M/F ratio of 7 mm
induced controlled tipping, and an M/F ratio above 10
was required for translation of teeth [8, 9]. As reported
in previous experimental and analytical studies, the
M/F ratio varied with the wire material, cross section,
height, width and configuration of loops [10–14]. Preactivation
methods such as gable bends and vertical
steps diversified the M/F ratio [15–18]. The M/F ratio
was also reported to change with the distance of activation
[19, 20].
Double key loop (DKL) is a special method advocated
by John Parker to close space with straight wire appliance
[21]. Normally, DKL is composed of two key holes, vertical
loops at the mesial and distal interproximal positions
of canines. Loading at the distal end, distal key and additional
ligation between keys are the three major loading
types of DKL, which provide advantages of flexible force
system and effective control of anterior torque [22]. Retrospective
clinical studies by Dr. Kim and Chen reported
the high efficiency of DKL in the vertical and torque control
of upper anterior teeth [23, 24]. Clinicians are interested
in the mechanical properties of DKL, and several
relevant studies have tried to explore precise control
methods for DKL. Dobranszki used photoelastic models
to compare the force response of teeth subjected to DKL
and confirmed that vertical force on anterior teeth varied
with the loading types [25]. Tábitha used finite element
method to investigate the force and deformation of DKL,
but no detailed M/F ratio results were provided [26].
To provide a preliminary guide for the application of
DKL, finite element method was used in this study to
explore the effect of wire material, loading types and preactivation
angle on the mechanical force system of DKL.
Methods
Archwire between the upper lateral incisor and second
premolar with a single key loop and a double key loop
was established in finite element analysis software Ansys
Workbench 17.0 (ANSYS, USA). The cross-section of the
archwire was 0.019 × 0.025 inch rectangular, and the configuration
of the key loop is shown in Fig. 1. The height
and width of the key loop were 6 mm and 4 mm, respectively.
Key loops were at the mesial and distal interproximal
positions of the canine. The archwire was divided
into several parts, and bonded contacts were added
between the parts to calculate the force and moments
at specific positions. Automatic meshing was finished
in Workbench, and 174,830 nodes and 108,039 elements
were attained (Fig. 2a). Wire material was defined
as stainless steel (SS) with an elastic property of Yang’s
modulus 168 GPa, Poisson’s ratio 0.3, and titaniummolybdenum
alloy (TMA) with Yang’s modulus 66 GPa,
Poisson’s ratio 0.3[5, 27].
To simulate the activation of key loops, the mesial end
was fixed in six degrees of freedom (three displacements
along and three rotations around the three orthogonal
axes). The vertical (Z axis) displacement of the distal end
was set as 0 mm to simulate the sliding of the archwire
through the bracket slot of the second premolar. Force
was applied at different positions to simulate three types
of loading (Fig. 3). For Type-1 loading, horizontal force
was applied to the distal end. For Type-2 loading, force
was applied between the distal key and the tube of the
second molar. For Type-3 loading, a spring was added
between mesial and distal loops to simulate preactivation,
and then retraction force was applied as in Type 2.
Stiffness of the spring was set as 15 N/mm. Preliminary
experiments verified that preloading of 7.1 N, 14.2 N and
21.3 N in spring generated upward bending of the distal
wire in SS DKL to preactivation angles (θ) of 5°, 10°
and 15° (Fig. 2b). When the distal end was constrained
in the vertical component, simulating the engagement of
preactivated DKL in premolar brackets, the residual tension
in the spring was 1.86 N, 3.71 N and 5.57 N, respectively.
For TMA wire, preloading of 6 N, 12.4 N, 18.9 N
and 25.3 N was applied accordingly to generate preactivation
angles of DKL of 5°, 10°, 15° and 20°, and the residual
tension after engagement was 0.97 N, 2.07 N, 3.18 N
and 4.28 N, respectively. The mesial displacement of the
distal end for each preactivation angle was calculated and
set as the neutral position.
A retraction force from 1 to 8 N was applied in each
loading condition at intervals of 1 N, and all the reaction
force and resultant displacement data were collected.
Force and moment reactions on the mesial end were
recorded. Horizontal displacement of the distal end was
recorded as extension of the archwire. The load deflection
ratio (L/D) and moment/force ratio (M/F) were calculated
accordingly.
Results
The deformation of SS key loops after loading of 5 N is
shown in Fig. 4 and shows different patterns. The horizontal
part of a single loop showed the least distal extension.
In DKL, both mesial and distal loops were activated.
In Type-1 loading, the distal loop opened more than the
mesial loop did, and the distal loop moved occlusally. In
Type-2 loading, the mesial loop opened more than the
distal loop did, and the horizontal archwire was almost
at the original level. Type-3 loading activated the mesial
and distal loops to almost the same distance, and the distal
loop occlusally shifted slightly.
The displacement of the distal end under retraction
force on SS loops is listed in Table 1 and Fig. 5a. For the
single key loop in Type-1 loading, the L/D ratio in the
horizontal direction was approximately 10.2 N/mm. For
the DKL in Type-1 loading, the horizontal L/D ratio was
4.37 N/mm, approximately 43% of the single key loop.
For DKL in Type-2 loading, its horizontal L/D ratio of
6.05 N/mm was higher than the horizontal L/D ratio in
Type-1 loading but lower than the horizontal L/D ratio
in Type-3 loading. The distal extension of DKL with
preactivation angles of 5°, 10° and 15° in Type-3 loading
started at retraction forces of approximately 1 N, 2 N and
4 N, respectively. The L/D ratio of DKL at a preactivation
angle of 5° was 9.37 N/mm, and the ratio increased to
10.8 N/mm when the preactivation angle was up to 15°.
The L/D ratio of DKL in Type-3 loading was close to the
L/D ratio of a single key loop in Type-1 loading.
For TMA loops in Type-1 loading, the L/D ratio of a
single key loop was 4.00 N/mm, and the L/D ratio of DKL
was 1.72 N/mm. The L/D ratio of DKL in Type-2 loading
was 2.37 N/mm. The distal extension of TMA DKL
with preactivation angles of 5°, 10° and 15° in Type-3
loading started at a retraction force of approximately
0.5 N, 1 N and 2 N, respectively. The L/D ratio of TMA
DKL under Type-3 loading was close to the L/D ratio of a
single TMA key loop under Type-1 loading, remaining at
approximately 4 N/mm. The results were approximately
40% of the corresponding value of SS key loops (Table 2,
Fig. 5b).
The vertical fore at the mesial end of the SS single and
double key loops was negative in Type-1 loading regardless
of the force level, indicating that an extrusive force
acted on the anterior teeth. In contrast, vertical force at
the mesial end was positive for DKL in Type-2 loading,
meaning an intrusive force on anterior teeth. The vertical
force of DKL at the mesial end in Type-3 loading after
engagement (retraction force = 0) was extrusive, and the
magnitude increased with the preactivation angle. At a
preactivation angle of 5°, the extrusive force decreased
with increasing retraction force, and the vertical force
became intrusive when the retraction force was above
6 N. However, the vertical force remained extrusive in
Type-3 loading at preactivation angles of 10° and 15°
(Table 3). For TMA loops, vertical forces at the mesial
end were similar in direction to the vertical forces at the
mesial end of SS loops, but the magnitudes were less
when subjected to the same retraction force. In Type-3
loading of TMA DKL with a preactivation angle of 5°, the
vertical force became intrusive when the retraction force
was up to 4 N (Table 4).
Moment on the mesial end in all loading types
increased with the increased distal traction force
(Table 3). For SS loops in Type-1 loading, the moment
increased proportionally, and the M/F ratio remained
at 3.53 mm. Adding a parallel key loop in DKL induced
no change in the M/F ratio. The moment in Type-2 loading
of DKL also increased proportionally with the distal
force, and the M/F ratio increased to 3.27 mm, which was
close to the M/F ratio in Type-1 loading.
The moment in Type-3 loading of DKL increased with
the preactivation angle and retraction force. After simulative
engagement of SS DKL in brackets without retraction,
the moments on the mesial end were 8.79, 18.78 and
28.73 N·mm at preactivation angles of 5°, 10° and 15°. All
M/F ratios under Type-3 loading of DKL were higher
than the M/F ratios under Type-1 and Type-2 loading. As
the retraction force increased, the moment at the mesial
end increased, but the M/F ratio decreased inversely. The
highest M/F ratios at preactivation angles of 5°, 10° and
15° were 9.62, 19.69 and 29.73 mm, respectively, under
a 1 N retraction force. The corresponding M/F ratios of
DKL with preactivation angles of 5°, 10° and 15° under
6 N retraction force were 4.26, 4.92 and 6.03 mm, respectively
(Table 3).
For TMA loops (Table 4), the moments at mesial end
in Type-1 and Type-2 loadings under equal retraction
forces were almost the same, and the corresponding M/F
ratios were the same as the M/F ratios of the SS loops.
In Type-3 loading of DKL, the moment at the mesial end
after simulative engagement was 3.68, 8.15 and 12.67 N.
mm at preactivation angles of 5°, 10° and 15°. The M/F
ratio of TMA DKL under the same retraction force was
lower than the M/F ratio of SS DKL with an equal preactivation
angle. The highest M/F ratios at preactivation
angles of 5°, 10° and 15° were 5.44, 9.32 and 13.88 mm,
under a 6 N retraction force varied between 4.10 and
4.65 mm.
The change in the M/F ratio against the distal retraction
force is shown in Fig. 6. At the same level of retraction
force, the M/F ratio increased with the preactivation
angle. The M/F ratio of SS DKL was higher than the M/F
ratio of TMA DKL under the same level of retraction
force. Almost overlapping in the fitting curve of SS + 5
and TMA + 10 and overlapping of SS + 10 and TMA + 20
suggested their equal M/F ratio under the same retraction
force.
As shown in Fig. 7, the M/F ratio decreased with the
extension of the distal end. The M/F ratios under all conditions
were all above 4.03 mm. The M/F of DKL with
a higher preactivation angle was above the M/F of DKL
with lower angles. At an equal amount of distal extension,
the M/F ratio of DKL increased with the preactivation
angle. The fitting curves of SS and TMA DKL with equal
preactivation angles were close to each other, indicating
similar M/F ratios at the same distance of activation.
Discussion·
DKL was advocated for extraction space closure, but its
mechanical properties were not well defined in previous
literature. In the commercial DKL products, the most
ordered size of SS loops was 0.019 × 0.025 inches. Finite
element analysis has been widely used in studies of orthodontic
biomechanics, including appliances, wire materials,
loops and force direction control [11, 12, 16, 17, 28].
For orthodontic loops, the analytical results of finite element
models were consistent with experimental data in
previous research [20, 29], which supported the credibility
of finite element analysis in similar studies. The actual
force exerted on teeth is very complicated and influenced
by many factors such as the elastic property of periodontic
tissue, root length, height of alveolar bone, and clearance
between the archwire and bracket slot. In this study,
the finite element model was simplified to be flat without
teeth and curvature for comparison of different loading
conditions and force levels. Stiffness of spring in Type 3
activation was critical for optimal simulation. Calculating
results using different data (5, 10, 15, 30 N/mm) showed
that there was few changes when the spring stiffness was
over 15 N/mm. The data with spring of 15 N/mm was
chosen for publication.
Single key versus double key loop
Obviously, the double key loop had a lower L/D ratio
than the single key loop. For a single key loop, a force
over 10 N was needed to activate the single key loop for
1 mm in Type-1 loading. This value is quite high, and it
was seldom used in clinic. SS DKL got activation of 1 mm
under 4.37 N force in Type-1 loading, which was acceptable
in loop mechanics for clinicians. Previous studies
proved that cross-section, height of loop and wire material
were three major factors affecting the L/D ratio of
closing loops [11, 13]. When switched to TMA, the force
required for 1 mm activation dropped by approximately
60% for single and double key loops. DKL and TMA
were superior to a single key loop and SS in terms of wire
rigidity.
L/D ratio of DKL
The L/D ratio of DKL was also affected by the loading
type. In Type-2 loading, the L/D ratio of SS and TMA
loops was approximately 1.35 times higher than the L/D
ratio of SS and TMA loops in Type-1 loading, possibly
because of the change in location of the force application.
When loaded at the distal key, the deformation of
the mesial key was almost the same, but the distal loop
showed distal tipping instead of loop opening (Fig. 4).
When loaded in Type-3, the L/D ratio increased dramatically
to approximately 10 and 4 N/mm for SS and TMA
DKLs, respectively, which were close to the L/D ratios of
single key loops. Ligation between double keys was performed
with 0.0025-inch SS wire in the clinic, which kept
the keys together. An elastic spring with high stiffness
up to 15 N/mm was used to simulate the ligation in the
model. The retraction force on the distal key was transmitted
through the spring to the mesial key and finally to
the mesial end. Hence, DKL behaved similarly to a single
key loop in the L/D ratio.
For DKL with preactivation in Type-3 loading, distal
extension was restricted when the retraction force
was too low, and the retraction force induced distal tipping
and occlusal movement of the distal key loop. The
initial force level to start distal extension varied with the
wire material and preactivation angle. The initial activating
force increased with the preactivation angle, and SS
DKL needed a higher force to start activation than TMA
DKL. After initial activation, the DKL with preactivation
showed linear extension as in other loading conditions
with similar L/D ratios of a single key loop.
Vertical force
Vertical force is important for appraising loops. Key loops
in Type-1 loading exerted extrusive force at the mesial
end, as reported in former research on T loops [11, 16].
In Type-2 loading of DKL, retraction force induced distal
tipping of the distal loop and brought the mesial
archwire and key loop above the original level, inducing
intrusive force on the mesial end. These results were
consistent with the photoelastic results of Dobranszki
[25]. For Type-3 loading of DKL, a condition normally
used for correction of deep bites in the clinic, there was
extrusive force at the mesial end. The main reason was
the exclusion of canines in the model. As demonstrated
in Fig. 4d, ligation between key loops brought them
together, inducing upward movement of mesial and distal
archwire, and downward movement of the horizontal
wire between loops. After engagement in the clinic, the
canines would be extruded while mesial and distal teeth
would be intruded due to the elasticity of the periodontic
tissue. Establishment of an integrated model with bone,
periodontal tissue, teeth and orthodontic appliances was
necessary to fully interpret the vertical reaction of teeth
to DKL.
M/F of key loops
The M/F ratio is the key factor controlling the moving
pattern of the tooth [8]. The M/F ratio is determined
by the cross-section, height, loop design and
preactivation [11–13]. In this study, the M/F of key
loops in Type-1 loading and Type-2 loading was constant
in the process of activation and did not change
with the wire material. Single and double key loops
showed similar M/F ratios in Type-1 loading. In
Type-2 loading, the M/F ratio of DKL was close to the
M/F ratio in Type-1 loading. However, the M/F ratio
should be above 7 mm to attain controlled tipping of
teeth and higher than 10 mm to achieve bodily movement
[8]. Therefore, single and double key loops in the
plain wire were not enough to achieve good control of
space closure.
Methods to increase the M/F ratio of closing loops
include reverse curve of Spee, V bend and gable bend
[15, 17, 19]. The special preactivation method for DKL
was ligation between the mesial and distal key loops,
which generated upward bending of the mesial and distal
archwires. Although the horizontal archwire beyond
the key loops was still flat, there was a curvature in the
whole archwire, which was similar to the reverse curve
of Spee and the gable bend. Engagement of preactivated
DKL into bracket slots induced a positive initial
moment on anterior teeth. As shown in Tables 3 and
4, this initial moment increased with the preactivation
angle and rigidity of the wire material. The retraction
force at the distal key pulled the distal key loop backwards
and induced an additional positive moment on
the mesial end. However, the M/F ratio decreased with
increasing retraction force. Taking SS DKL with a preactivation
angle of 10° as an example, the M/F ratio
was 19.69 mm when the retraction force was 1 N, but
it dropped to 4.92 mm when the retraction force was
6 N. In another point of view, the M/F ratio increased
with the deactivation of DKL from 6 to 1 N in Type-3
loading. The resultant movement of anterior teeth will
start from control tipping and then turn into translation
and root torque. When the retraction force reaches
null, there will be only a positive moment at the mesial
end, indicating further anterior root torque movement.
For traditional closing loops, preactivation status,
including the depth of the reverse curve and angle of
gable bends, tends to be weakened after several weeks
in the mouth. Preactivation through ligation in DKL
shows minor change because additional force is stored
in the deformation of the vertical legs, and they are free
from masticatory force. It is very important for clinicians
to prolong the appointment intervals up to six
weeks and give enough time for the expression of positive
torque on anterior teeth [22]. As assumed by Dr.
Kumar, the key indication for further activation was
whether the angle of the canine had become normal
and the arch had been levelled or not [21].
Optimal loading condition
The force system of DKL is quite complicated, and it is
not easy for clinicians to decide a suitable loading condition.
As shown in Fig. 6, the M/F ratio of DKL in Type-3
loading under the same level of retraction force increased
with the preactivation angle. To attain a similar M/F
ratio, TMA DKL required twice the preactivation angle
of SS DKL.
In orthodontic clinics, it is more convenient to observe
the distal extension of the archwire than to measure the
force on the ligature wire between the distal key loop and
the molar tube. Normally, orthodontists activate closing
loops up to 1 mm in each visit and wait enough time for
the next activation. Figure 7 shows that the M/F ratio of
DKL at a certain distance of activation in Type-3 loading
depended mainly on the preactivation angle, while the
wire material had no obvious impact. It is reasonable to
select the preactivation angle according to the desired
change in anterior torque based on the original status. To
achieve similar torque control on anterior teeth with the
same preactivation angle, TMA DKL could provide 2.5
times the longer distance of activation at equal retraction
force or provide approximately 60% lower magnitude
of force and moment at the same distance of activation
compared with SS DKL. There could be several combinations
of loop materials, preactivation angles and activation
distances. These data were instructive for clinicians
to make a good decision.
Traditionally, the optimal force was 3.1 N for upper
anterior teeth and 2.6 N for lower anterior teeth [30,
31]. However, the latest research suggests that force with
lower magnitude could be optimal for bodily orthodontic
movement [32]. Activation of 0.019 × 0.025 inch SS DKL
up to 1 mm in Type-3 required force that was quite heavy.
Unsurprisingly, this heavy force was not realized by clinicians
and called for evidence from experimental studies.
If tested in actual measurements, the use of SS DKL for
space closure should be reconsidered. TMA DKL of the
same size required approximately 40% of the force of SS
DKL for the same loading condition. Changing the DKL
material into TMA is a good choice, or the cross-section
and configuration should be optimized for SS DKL.
Conclusions
The force system of DKL changed with loading type,
preactivation angle and wire material. Type-2 loading
of DKL showed a higher L/D ratio than Type-1 loading.
Type-3 loading showed the highest M/F ratio with a
similar L/D ratio of a single key loop. The M/F ratio of
DKL on anterior teeth in Type-3 loading increases with
the preactivation angle. The M/F ratio of DKL in Type-3
loading increased in the process of deactivation, and the
M/F ratio at a certain distance of activation depended
mainly on the preactivation angle instead of the wire
material. DKL of TMA was recommended as a substitute
for SS for a lower magnitude of force.