Background
Bladder cancer is the tenth most common cancer worldwide,
accounting for 3% of all cancers. Approximately
75% of the newly diagnosed bladder cancers are nonmuscle
invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC; stage Ta, carcinoma
in situ (CIS), and T1). The recurrence rates of
NMIBC are 61.1% in 2 years, 69.5% in 5 years, and 74.3%
in 10 years, and the progression rates are 5–40% for Ta
diseases and up to 30–50% for T1 diseases [1, 2].
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is another noteworthy health
problem worldwide, with a global prevalence of 8.8% in
2017 [3]. Complications of DM, such as cardiovascular
disease, nephropathy, and neuropathy, have been widely
discussed. Moreover, cancer is another associating factor
for morbidity and mortality. Evidence has shown that
DM may be associated with higher incidence and poor
prognosis of bladder cancer [4–9]. Furthermore, poor
glycemic control results in increase of oxidative stress,
upregulation of series of cell molecules, and inflammation
process, which are thought to have negative effect
on cancer prognosis. However, evidence on the effect of
glycemic control on the outcomes of bladder cancer is
limited. Besides, most studies use single HbA1C data for
evaluation, which may not be representative of longterm
glycemic control during the follow-up period.
Therefore, in the current study, we aimed to investigate
the effect of DM and glycemic control on the outcomes
of NMIBC by using mean HbA1C data.
Methods
Ethic approval
The present study followed all standards for ethics with
regard to experimentation and research. The institutional
review board of National Taiwan University Hospital approved
our study (approval number: 201901119RINA)
and waived the informed consent requirement due to the
retrospective design of the study.
Definition
Patients who had DM or who were diagnosed with DM
during the follow-up period were classified into the DM
group, and those who had no evidence of DM were classified
into the non-DM group. We obtained HbA1C data
from patients who received treatments of DM in our
hospital and calculated mean HbA1C levels by averaging
the sum of HbA1C data from the time of diagnosis of
bladder cancer to the time of the first recurrence. We
defined patients who had mean HbA1C ≤ 7 as proper
glycemic control and those who had mean HbA1C ≥7 as
poor glycemic control. Diagnosis of bladder urothelial
carcinoma was based on pathologic evidence. Cancer
staging was based on the 7th edition of the American
Joint Committee on Cancer. We determined T stage according
to pathologic reports of surgical specimens.
Lymph node and distant metastasis were detected using
computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging.
Recurrence was defined based on pathologic evidence of
surgical specimens that were obtained during follow-up
cystoscopy and subsequently confirmed as urothelial carcinoma
by pathologists. Progression was defined according
to the International Bladder Cancer Group definition
as [1] increase in T stage from CIS or Ta to T1 (lamina
propria invasion), [2] development of T2 or greater or
lymph node (N+) disease or distant metastasis (M1), or
[3] an increase in grade from low to high. Recurrencefree
survival (RFS) was defined as the period from the
date of the initial transurethral resection of bladder
tumor (TURBT) to the date of the operation in which
the first cancer recurrence was found. Progression-free
survival (PFS) was defined as the period from the date of
the initial TURBT to the date of the operation or image
study in which the first cancer progression was found.
Patient selection
We enrolled patients who received TURBT. The patients
were subsequently diagnosed with NMIBC in our hospital
from January 2012 to December 2017. Patients who
had newly diagnosed NMIBC with a follow-up period of
more than 2 years were included. Patients who had following
condition were excluded: [1] lack of the first operative
or pathologic report, [2] upper tract urothelial
carcinoma (UTUC), which was diagnosed before, concurrently,
or after the initial diagnosis of the bladder
cancer, [3] muscle invasive bladder cancer, [4] advanced
operation for the bladder cancer, e.g., cystectomy, [5]
any metastatic cancer, or [6] bladder cancer other than
urothelial carcinoma.
Treatment and follow-up protocols
In our center, resident doctors must receive a 5-year
training program for urological specialist. In the first
and the second years, junior resident doctors should be
trained as assistants and taught by seniors. They should
learn the procedure skills by watching and simulation.
Well-trained senior resident doctors could conduct
TURBT; either senior or junior resident doctors could
perform cystoscopy. For pursuing quality and safety of
surgeries, all procedures must be supervised by attending
doctors in charge. Repeated TURBT was regularly conducted
for all patients within 3 months after the first
TURBT. For all patients diagnosed with CIS, we conducted
mapping biopsies during the follow-up period.
Intravesical therapy would be given if no contraindication
existed, and the first dose would be given within 24
h after the operation. The follow-up protocol in our center
strictly met the current Urological Association
(AUA) and European Association of Urology (EAU)
guidelines for bladder cancer.
Study design
We retrospectively analyzed data from a prospective
database. Patient profiles and disease characteristics, including
age at the time of diagnosis, sex, body mass
index (BMI), history of smoking, comorbidities, cancer
stage, histology grade of urothelial carcinoma, tumor
number, tumor size, intravesical therapy, date of diagnosis,
date of recurrence, and date of progression were collected.
We divided the patients into the non-DM and
DM groups. Subgroup analysis for the DM group, which
was further divided into the proper glycemic control and
poor glycemic control groups, was performed to investigate
prognostic factors in the DM group. Outcomes
were recurrence, progression, RFS, and PRS.
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS version 22 (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL, USA). Categorical variables were analyzed
using Chi-squared test; RFS and PFS were analyzed
using Kaplan-Meier analysis. Factors including age, sex,
history of smoking, BMI, hypertension, serum creatinine
level, DM, glycemic control, metformin use, thiazolidinedione
(TZD) use, clinical T1 stage, grade of urothelial
carcinoma, concurrent CIS, tumor number, tumor size,
and intravesical therapy were analyzed using univariate
Cox proportional hazards regression to determine risk
factors for recurrence and progression. DM and confounders
with P < 0.2 in the univariate Cox proportional
hazards regression were candidates for multivariate Cox
proportional hazards regression to determine independent
risk factors for recurrence. In all cases, two-tailed
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Patient selection and baseline characteristics
We screened 845 patients who had a diagnosis of bladder
cancer. As a result, 287 patients had NMIBC with a
follow-up period of more than 2 years. Of all these patients,
61 patients (21.3%) had DM, and 226 patients
(78.7%) did not have DM (Supplementary Fig. S1).
The median age at diagnosis of bladder cancer was 67
years. The median follow-up period was 45 months. Recurrence
and progression were observed after the initial
diagnosis in 109 patients (38.0%) and 18 patients (6.3%),
respectively. Characteristics were similar between the
DM and non-DM groups, except that the patients in the
DM group were older and had higher rates of obesity
(P < 0.01), hypertension (P < 0.01), and renal insufficiency
(P = 0.04) (Supplementary Table S1).
Prognosis analysis
DM was not significantly associated with higher rates of
recurrence (odds ratio (OR) = 1.52, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 0.86–2.69, P = 0.15) and progression (OR =
0.73, 95% CI 0.20–2.60, P = 0.62) (Supplementary Table
S1). Kaplan-Meier analysis of RFS and PFS revealed no
significant difference between the DM and non-DM
groups (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. S2a). Univariate
Cox proportional hazards regression showed that male
sex (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.94, 95% CI 1.14–3.30, P =
0.014), T1 stage (HR = 2.14, 95% CI 1.47–3.12, P <
0.001), CIS (HR = 1.58, 95% CI 1.03–2.41, P = 0.036),
high grade (HR = 1.72, 95% CI 1.14–2.58, P = 0.010),
tumor number ≥ 3 (HR = 2.49, 95% CI 1.58–3.94,
P < 0.001), and tumor size ≥3 (HR = 1.94, 95% CI 1.12–
3.36, P = 0.018) were associated with higher recurrence
(Table 1). Multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression
showed that T1 stage (HR = 2.05, 95% CI 1.06–3.97,
P = 0.034), tumor number ≥ 3 (HR = 3.46, 95% CI 1.90–
6.33, P < 0.001), and tumor size (HR = 1.90, 95% CI
1.05–3.42, P = 0.033) were independent risk factors for
recurrence (Table 1).
Subgroup analysis
Patients in the DM group were classified by HbA1C
level. Thirty-three patients had medical treatments for
DM in our cohort. Among these patients, 16 had proper
glycemic control (HbA1C ≤ 7) and 17 had poor glycemic
control (HbA1C ≥ 7). The characteristics between two
groups were similar, except that renal insufficiency rate
was higher in the poor glycemic control group (Supplementary
Table S2). The recurrence rate was higher in
the poor glycemic control group (OR = 5.50, 95% CI
1.22–24.81, P = 0.037) compared with that in the proper
glycemic control group. Kaplan-Meier analysis showed
that poor glycemic control was also associated with
worse RFS (Fig. 1b, log-rank P = 0.019); progression rates
and PFS were similar between the two groups (Supplementary
Fig. S2b). Univariate Cox regression for RFS revealed
that only HbA1C ≥ 7 was associated with worse
RFS (HR = 3.64, 95% CI 1.14–11.65, P = 0.029). Urine
glycemic level, metformin use, and TZD use were not
associated with RFS (Table 1). We also compared the
RFS between the non-DM group, the proper glycemic
control group, and the poor glycemic control group by
using Kaplan-Meier analysis (Fig. 1b). The RFS was
worse in the poor glycemic control group compared
with the other two groups. RFS was not significantly different
between the non-DM and proper glycemic control
groups.
Discussion
In our study, recurrence and progression rates were not
significantly different between the DM and non-DM
groups. Metformin and TZD use had no effect on recurrence
rate. Nevertheless, in the subgroup analysis, patients
who had HbA1C ≥ 7 had significantly higher risks
of recurrence and worse RFS. Patients with DM who
had proper glycemic control had similar RFS compared
with patients without DM.
DM is associated with increasing incidence and poor
prognosis of several cancers, including colorectal, breast,
endometrial, liver, pancreatic, and bladder cancers [4, 5,
10–13]. Several studies have discussed the effect of DM
on bladder cancer. Xu et al. conducted a meta-analysis
including 21 cohort studies, which involved 13 million
participants, and reported that DM is associated with a
higher risk of bladder cancer or cancer mortality (relative
risk: 1.23; 95% CI = 1.12–1.35) [14]. Other studies
also reported higher recurrence of NMIBC in patients
with DM, with rates of 45–60% in patients with DM versus
30–40% in patients without DM [6–8].
Another interesting issue is whether glycemic control
is associated with prognosis of bladder cancer. Hwang
et al. found that patients who had serum HbA1C ≥ 7
have higher rates of tumor multiplicity and tumor grade,
but the recurrence and progression rates are not significantly
higher [7]. Ahn et al. reported that poor glycemic
control is associated with a higher progression rate and
worse PFS [8]. Tai et al. also reported that poor glycemic
control is associated with a higher risk of bladder recurrence
in patients with UTUC [15]. However, the HbA1C
levels for analyses in those studies were single data obtained
during the study period rather than averages of
all data in the study period.
Metformin has been discovered to suppress tumor by
activating AMP-activated protein kinase and liver kinase
B1 and downregulating mammalian target of rapamycin
and insulin-like growth factor-1 [16]. Tseng reported
that cumulative dose and duration of metformin use are
associated with decreased incidence of bladder cancer
[17]. Studies also found that metformin use appears to
be associated with better RFS or cancer-specific survival
in patients with bladder cancer [6, 18, 19]. However, the
effect of metformin on reducing the incidence and recurrence
of bladder cancer were challenged by other
studies [8, 20, 21]. On the other hand, pioglitazone is associated
with increased risk of bladder cancer [22, 23].
The mechanism of association between bladder cancer
and DM remains unclear. Chronic inflammation and
hyperinsulinemia induced by hyperglycemia may be the
two major factors. Poor glycemic control results in direct
cell damage by fluctuating serum glucose level and accumulation
of advanced glycation end products (AGEs).
The interaction between AGEs and their receptors leads
to increased oxidative stress that results in DNA damage,
upregulation of series of cell molecules, and inflammation
process. Cell molecules including transcription
factors (e.g., NF-κB, STAT3, HIF1α) and cytokines (e.g.,
IL-6, Cox-2, and TNF-α) coordinate together and lead to
the amplification of inflammation and creation of a suitable
environment for cancer growth [24–26]. Hyperinsulinemia
in type 2 DM upregulates insulin-like growth
factors (IGF) that act as stimulators of mitogenesis and
cellular transformation. On the other hand, insulin-like
growth factor-binding proteins (IGFBPs) serve as moderators
of IGFs and regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis
[27]. Zhao et al. reported that patients with bladder
cancer have higher plasma levels of IGF-1 and lower
levels of IGFBP-3 than patients without bladder cancer
[28]. Studies have also reported that overexpression of
IGFs and their binding proteins is associated with poor
prognosis in bladder cancer [29, 30].
This study has several limitations. First, the DM group
had fewer patients, and only 33 patients had HbA1C
data. Due to a small sample size, there is a lack of multivariate
analysis bias in the subgroup analysis. Second,
demographic distributions in the DM and non-DM
groups were not similar in terms of age, obesity, hypertension,
and serum creatinine level, which may lead to
potential biases.
On the other hand, several strengths of our study are
noteworthy. First, for patients who had HbA1C data, we
calculated the mean HbA1C levels from the time of
diagnosis to the time of end points. To our knowledge,
this study is the first to use mean HbA1C levels for
evaluation, which is more representative because the
follow-up period of cancer may be much longer than the
half-life of HbA1C. Second, we included patients with a
follow-up period of more than 2 years, in which more
than 80% of recurrence occurred. Third, we performed
Kaplan-Meier analysis for patients without DM, patients
with DM and proper glycemic control, and patients with
DM and poor glycemic control. The result shown in Fig.
1b illustrates the relationship between glycemic control
and RFS. Finally, in our center, treatment and follow-up
protocol for bladder cancer were strictly according to
the current AUA or EAU guidelines. For patients with
CIS, mapping biopsies were regularly performed. We believe
that the detection of recurrence or progression can
be early as possible.
Conclusions
The results of our study suggest that DM is not a risk
factor for recurrence and progression in patients with
NMIBC. However, poor glycemic control is associated
with a higher rate of recurrence and worse RFS in patients
with DM. Therefore, proper glycemic control
should be one of treatment goals in patients with DM
and NMIBC. In addition, due to small sample size and
retrospective design, further prospective studies are
needed to confirm current results.