Background
Spirituality is viewed as an essence, a driving force, and a
self-supporting resource [1]. Spiritual care is the recognition
and response to human spiritual needs. Spiritual care
meets the needs of life meaning, self-worth, expressing
oneself, and faith support [2]. Spiritual care is a required
element of holistic health care. A recent concept analysis
of spiritual care suggested that spiritual care includes
healing presence, therapeutic use of self, intuitive sense,
exploration of the spiritual perspective, patient-centeredness,
meaning-centered therapeutic intervention,
and creation of a spiritually nurturing environment [3].
Spiritual care competence (SCC) refers to an ability to
assess and identify patient spiritual needs and implement
appropriate interventions to promote patient spiritual
health. SCC requires knowledge, attitudes, and skills of
spiritual care [4].
Cancer patients generally have a high level of spiritual
need [5–7]. Höcker et al. found that most cancer patients
indicated at least one spiritual need [5]. Spiritual needs
increase drastically after a diagnosis of cancer [6, 7]
because people usually associate cancer with death, and
they are vulnerable to depression and anxiety. In addition,
the spiritual issue also affects a patient’s cooperation
with treatment and rehabilitation. Therefore cancer
patients’ spiritual issues should receive more attention.
Spiritual care for cancer patients can improve negative
mental states such as anxiety and depression and
relieve fatigue and pain. In addition, spiritual care can
help patients contemplate the meaning of life and gain
peace of mind, so that they can face disease and death
[8–10]. Nurses, the most accessible healthcare providers
for patients, have responsibilities in spiritual support.
Somayeh et al. and Nkomo found that clinical nurses
could not adequately assess or identify patient spiritual
needs, and nurses lacked sufficient awareness of patient
spiritual problems [11, 12]. Thus, it is essential to improve
the SCC of oncology nurses.
There are some studies on spiritual care competence of
nurses, but little is known about the spiritual care competence
of nurses in non-religious contexts. Investigators
have assessed the relationship between spiritual care
competence and nurse personal characteristics; findings
from these studies could help to understand how to effectively
improve spiritual care competence. Studies have
shown that nurse spiritual care competence is related to
the perception of spirituality/spiritual care [13] and to
personality characteristics [14, 15] such as spiritual wellbeing
[16] and self-efficacy [17]. But little is known about
the relationship of nurse attitude towards death and spiritual
care competence.
Attitude about death is a stable and evaluative psychological
tendency when individuals face death environment.
Attitude towards death encompasses fear of death,
death avoidance, natural acceptance, approach acceptance,
and escape acceptance [18]. Ay and Öz [19] showed
that oncology nurses often have negative feelings about
death, such as fear and anxiety. These feelings could
directly affect the mental health of nurses themselves and
the quality of nursing care. Schroeder et al. reported that
nurses with positive attitudes towards death had a positive
influence on the care of their patients [20]. Akdeniz
found that nurse attitude towards death could affect their
spirituality and spiritual perception, which was an important
factor that affected their SCC [21]. A high degree
of nurse negative attitudes towards death impaired their
level of perceiving spirituality and spiritual care. And
nurses with negative attitudes towards death had difficulty
providing spiritual care [22, 23]. However, the
relationship between attitude towards death and nurse
SCC has not been reported for the Chinese cultural
background. Thus, it is essential to assess the effects of
attitude towards death on nurse spiritual care competence
to provide a means to improve nurse spiritual care
competence.
Methods
Aim
The aim of this study was to establish oncology nurse
spiritual care competence and its relationship with the
attitude toward death and personal characteristics. The
specific purposes were the following:
1. To measure the spiritual care competence of Chinese
oncology nurses.
2. To document Chinese oncology nurse attitudes
towards death.
3. To identify factors that affect nurse spiritual care
competence.
4. To assess the relationship between nurse spiritual
care competence and attitude towards death.
Study design
A descriptive cross-sectional study using a field questionnaire
and online survey methods was conducted in
Guangzhou, Guangdong province, China. The research
conformed to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational
Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) Statement:
Guidelines for Reporting Observational Studies. All
methods were conducted in accordance with relevant
guidelines and regulations. The theory of this study is
based on Bandura’s social cognitive theory.
Participants
The principle of multifactor analysis requires a sample
size 5-10 times the number of variables. The number
of variables in this study was 21; thus, the sample size
was about 21*(5-10) = 105-210. The sample size was
increased by 20%, to 126-252, to protect against possible
data loss or invalid data. Convenience sampling was used
to select nurses from a cancer hospital and four Fristclass
Hospital at Grade 3 in Guangdong Province, China,
from December 2019 to March 2020. To be eligible, clinical
nurses had to have been engaged in clinical tumorrelated
nursing work for more than one year; nursing
students, nurse interns, and nursing managers were
excluded. Three hundred twenty-six oncology nurses volunteered
to participate in the research.
Demographics and professional experiences
We collected participant demographics including sex,
age, marital status, religious belief, the highest degree of
nursing education, professional experience such as title,
years of nursing experience, working unit, experience
of caring for terminally ill patients, experience caring
for a terminally ill family member, whether training was
received for perceptions of competence in delivering, and
whether a family member or friend was a cancer patient.
Spiritual care competence scale
Van Leeuwen et al. [24] developed the Spiritual Care
Competence Scale (SCCS), a self-reporting scale to
measure nurse spiritual care competence. The questionnaire
contains 27 items, consisting of six core domains of
spiritual care-related nursing competencies (assessment
and implementation of spiritual care, professionalization
and improving quality of spiritual care, personal support
and patient counseling, referral to professionals, attitude
towards patient’s spirituality and communication). All
items are scored on a 5-point scale from completely disagree
to fully agree, scoring from 1 to 5. The original scale
was validated with nursing students and showed sound
reliability and validity [24]. Di et al. [25] revised the
Chinese version of the SCCS (SCCS-C); they translated
and back-translated the scale using Brisling’s translation
model after approval from the original author. The final
SCCS-C is composed of 22 items and the 6 dimensions of
the original scale. For a better understanding of the Chinese
population, the revised scale specifies “never, seldom,
sometimes, often, and always” as possible answers,
with scoring from 1 to 5. The range of score is 22–110. A
high total score indicates a participant’s high level of spiritual
care competence. The psychological metrics were
validated with 528 nurses in mainland China. The content
validity index of the SCCS-C was 0.98. The construct
validity was tested by confirmatory factor analysis. The
six-factor structure fit the data well, which accounted
for 77.43% of the total variance. The Cronbach’s α for the
SCCS-C was 0.974 and 0.902 ~ 0.956 for different dimensions,
which indicated satisfactory reliability [25]. In this
study, reliability was examined by analysis of Cronbach’s
a (=0.952), an estimate of internal consistency. Sampling
adequacy was confirmed by Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure
(=0.954, p < .001).
Death attitude profile‑revised
The Death Attitude Profile-Revised (DAP-R) was developed
by Wong et al. (1994) [26] to evaluate attitudes
towards death, and the validity and reliability of the Chinese
version was assessed by Tang Lu et al. [18]. The scale
is multidimensional with 32 items and 5 subgroups: fear
of death, death avoidance, neutral acceptance, approach
acceptance and escape acceptance, and which dimension
has the highest score indicates that the participants
tend towards the attitude of death represented by that
dimension. The scale is of the Likert-5 type and rated as
1-strongly disagree to 5-strongly agree. A total score is
32 ~ 160. The Cronbach’s α for DAP-R was 0.80 [18]. In
this study, the Kaiser- Meyer- Olkin for DAP-R was 0.954
(p < .001), the Cronbach’s α was 0.898 and 0.671 ~ 0.882
for different dimensions, which indicated satisfactory
reliability.
Procedure
From December 2019 to January 2020, data were collected
by field questionnaire and online survey from
nurses at one tumor specialist hospital in Guangzhou.
Completing the survey was voluntary. About 10-15 min
were required to complete the questionnaire. One
hundred questionnaires were distributed, and 87 valid
questionnaires were returned.
Because of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, we stopped
taking questionnaires at hospitals and continued to collect
data online. The online survey was constructed with
Wen Juan Xing (www. wjx. cn), an electronic data collection
tool. The link to the questionnaire was posted on the
Internet and sent to one tumor specialist hospital and
three general hospitals in Guangzhou. These hospitals
were invited to share the survey link with their oncology
nurses. Completing the survey was voluntary. The
survey link was available from February 2020 to March
2020. Data collection lasted 10–15 min. Each IP address
and account could answer the survey only once to avoid
duplication. To ensure the quality of the data, we eliminated
questionnaires that were completed in a short time
(< 3 min) or a long period (> 30 min). Finally, 326 valid
questionnaires were collected.
Statistical analysis
The data collected online were transferred to statistical
software SPSS 23.0 for analysis. Categorical variable
data (participant demographics and professional
experiences) were presented as numbers and percent,
whereas continuous variables (SCC, attitude towards
death) were expressed as means and standard deviation
(SD). Spearman correlation analysis was conducted to
detect a relationship between SCC and attitude towards
death. Multiple linear regression analysis was performed
to determine the factors associated with SCC. The total
SCC score was set as the dependent variable, whereas
demographics, professional experience, and dimensions
of DAP-R were independent variables. A p value of < 0.05
was considered statistically significant.
Ethical considerations
The Ethics Committee of Guangzhou Medical University
approved this study. Participants provided informed consent
prior to participation.
Results
Demographics and professional experience
Of 326 participants, 95.4% (n = 311) were women. Most
were less than 35 years old. Ninety-five percent (n = 308)
were non-religious, and 39% (n = 127) were unmarried.
Sixteen percent of the participants (n = 52) received
their highest degree of nursing education below bachelor,
and 80.44% (n = 262) achieved a bachelor’s degree.
Most nurses were of middle title. Thirty-eight percent
(n = 124) were working in oncology internal medicine, and
30.7% (n = 100) were working in surgical oncology. A little
more than half of the nurses had more than six years
of working experience (63.8%) and had experience in
caring for terminally ill patients (77.0%). Forty-three percent
(n = 139) had never participated in the care of a family
member or friend. Fifty-seven percent (n = 187) stated that
they did not receive any training related to spiritual care.
Table 1 presents additional demographic information.
SCC
As presented in Table 2, the scores for the total scale
and subscales of SCCS-C described nurse spiritual
care competence. The total score of SCCS-C was
61.12 ± 16.10, ranging from 22 to 110. The highest score
on competence was for communication, 3.64 ± 1.00,
and the participants had the lowest score for competence
on referral to professionals, 2.27 ± 0.93.
Attitude towards death
Table 2 lists the scores for the subscales of DAP-R that
described participant attitudes towards death. The
highest score on DAP-R was for neutral acceptance,
3.83 ± 0.62, and the lowest score was escape acceptance,
2.64 ± 0.82. The participants had scores of 2.87 ± 0.70
on fear of death, 2.77 ± 0.67 on death avoidance, and
2.77 ± 0.67 on approach acceptance.
Relationship between SCC and attitude towards death
The Spearman correlation (Table 3) showed that SCCS
was related with Fear of death, Death avoidance, Neutral
acceptance, and Approach acceptance, with the correlation
coefficients ranging from 0.109 to 0.198. This result
indicates that the SCC is weakly and positively correlated
to the attitude towards death.
Factors associated with SCC
Table 4 shows the results of regression analysis. The
linear regression equations fit the data well (F = 4.985,
p < .001), which explained 18.1% of the variance. The
absolute value of the standardized regression coefficient
showed a significant association with the dependent
variable. The associations between the SCC and
demographics, professional experience, and dimensions
of attitude towards death were as follows: work department,
whether trained on spiritual care, approaching
acceptance, and escaping acceptance.
Discussion
The situation of oncology nurse SCC
The total score of SCCS-C of oncology nurses in
Guangzhou was 61.12 ± 16.10, which was at a medium
level and slightly lower than the score reported by Yang
et al. [15]. The difference in scores may be related to
differences in the nurse populations. Moreover, the
SCC scores in our study were significantly lower than
those reported by Petersen et al. [27], who investigated
112 pediatric oncology nurses (98.30 ± 14.05) scores
on SCCS [27], and Attard et al. [28] who investigated
nurses (105.73 ± 14.053) and midwives (104.37 ± 8.999).
The reason for this difference may be due to differences
in religious, cultural, educational, and spiritual aspects.
Spiritual care is highly valued abroad, and theoretical
training and clinical practice in spiritual caring for terminally
ill patients are more mature external to China.
The American Clinical Oncology Association [29] palliative
treatment guidelines include spiritual care in the
basic content of cancer patient care. Spiritual nursing
in China began relatively late. At present, there is a
lack of a unified spiritual concept, systematic intervention,
and an independent care model [4, 30, 31]. Chinese
clinical nurses have a different understanding of
spirituality. Some even consider spirituality a matter of
personal privacy or they equate it with religion [32, 33].
Therefore, it is necessary to define the connotation of
spirituality and spiritual care, to increase nurse recognition
of spirituality, to raise their recognition of spiritual
distress, and to promote the implementation of
spiritual care.
Communication and attitude towards patient spirituality
of SCC had the highest scores in this study; the
scores were similar to other studies [13–15, 34, 35]. The
results showed that nurses were confident about their
communication with patients on spiritual issues, and
nurses respected patient spirituality. We found that
nurses received the lowest score on referral to professional,
which was different from the results of Azarsa
et al. [36]. Referral to professional refers to transferring
or recommending relevant spiritual care professionals
or institutions to patients who have severe spiritual
distress, so that patients can get timely and effective
intervention. There are many spiritual nursing professional
care teams outside of China, and healthcare providers
have abundant resources to refer patients [27,
37]. Because of cultural differences between China and
the West, and a lack of Chinese standard procedures of
spiritual care, healthcare providers are not clear about
their roles in spiritual support and the means of referral.
These factors hinder nurses from referring patients
to other professionals or organizations for more effective
help. Thus, additional research is needed to
assess the appropriate spiritual care mode for Chinese
patients, determine the roles of healthcare providers
in delivering spiritual care, and develop a professional
spiritual support system. In addition, government
should provide appropriate support.
The influencing factors of oncology nurse SCC
We found that, compared with oncology internal medicine
and other departments, the SCC of oncology surgical
nurses was relatively high. The high SCC may be
related to the short hospitalization period of tumor
surgery patients and their more limited spiritual needs
[38, 39].
We also found that nurses who been trained in spiritual
care showed higher degrees of SCC, which was similar
to findings by Yang et al. [15] and Hsieh et al. [13].
This result indicated that spiritual care training could
enhance SCC. However, only 17.5% participants in our
study received spiritual care training, lower than the
19.2% and 57.9% reported by Chen et al. [34] and Yang
et al. [15], respectively. Thus, the curriculum and learning
requirements are lacking in China. At present, Chinese
medical colleges and universities have not unified
spiritual care education content, and they lack appropriate
spiritual education resources. This situation means
that it is necessary to combine humanistic care to conduct
spiritual education and improve the training system
of spiritual care [40–42]. Nursing administrators also
need to improve oncology nurse cognition and attention
to spiritual care, provide more training and education
opportunities, and improve nurse SCC by expert
theoretical teaching, spiritual care case discussion, and
sharing of successful care experiences from departments
with high SCC.
In our study, the natural acceptance had the highest
score, which was similar to other reports [43, 44]. In
addition, we found that attitude towards death was positively
associated with nurse SCC. Oncology nurses held
an objective and positive acceptance of death, which
was akin to results reported by Du et al. and Han et al.
[43, 45]. The high scores for death escape and death
fear indicated that some nurses had a negative feeling
about death, which may have been related to the high
frequency of death care and impairment of nurse mental
health. Nursing educators should attach importance
to death education, improve the death education system,
increase death education in continuing education,
enhance nurse positive view of death, and improve nursing
quality.
Effects of death attitude of oncology nurses on their SCC
A strong negative attitude towards death led to low
levels of perceiving spirituality and spiritual care [21].
Investigators have pointed out that a negative view of
death affects nurse cognition of spiritual and spiritual
care, and spiritual care cognition is an important factor
that affects nurse SCC [13, 46–48]. However, there
are no reports of whether different death attitudes are
related to spiritual care. We found a positive correlation
between the death approach acceptance and nurse SCC
(P < 0.001). Nurses who had approach acceptance (an
attitude that accepts death optimistically and regards
death as part of life or as a way to a happy next life) had
higher spiritual care competence. The reason for this
relationship may be that nurses with a heart-felt positive
acceptance of death can better detect the spiritual
distress of cancer patients and provide spiritual care.
Conversely, after looking at death positively, nurses will
improve their spiritual care in the process of nursing.
They will provide spiritual care by listening to companionship
and soothing resonance to convey a positive
view of life and death in the process of caring for cancer
patients, to help cancer patients treat and face death
correctly and find inner peace and comfort to maintain
their spiritual health.
Furthermore, we found that the escape acceptance
was negatively correlated with nurse SCC (P < 0.05).
This negative correlation was possible because nurses
with negative evasive attitudes to death were unable
to detect the spiritual distress of cancer patients,
their understanding of spirituality was not deep, and
they were unable to perform spiritual care and relieve
patient spiritual distress. Hsieh et al. [13] and Shi
et al. [47] pointed out that nurse cognition and spiritual
perception can affect the quality of spiritual care.
Death attitude may have affected nurse SCC by the
intermediary of spiritual cognition and perception, but
the specific mechanism needs further study.
We found that the death attitude of oncology nurses
was not optimistic. Although most participants had natural
acceptance, there were still some negative factors such
as death fear and escape. Nursing administrators should
recognize the death attitude of oncology nurses, promote
oncology nurses to approach death by improving
their self-acceptance level, and construct effective death
and spiritual education models. Managers should craft
strategies to enhance positive death attitude of oncology
nurses, improve their SCC, improve the quality of spiritual
care, and better maintain the spiritual health of cancer
patients.
Strengths and limitations
The strengths of our study are the following factors.
First, we measured the relationship between spiritual
care competence and attitude towards death, which
is scarcely reported. Second, to our best knowledge,
there are few reports on spiritual care competence in
mainland Chinese. Our study will contribute to understanding
of spiritual care competence among Chinese
oncology nurses. Third, a study of a Chinese population
was needed because of important differences in culture
and health care systems between mainland China and
elsewhere and because of the ever-increasing importance
of spiritual care.
Some limitations of our study need to be acknowledged.
Although the sample size was sufficient, the participants
were oncology nurses from a single province.
Further studies are needed to assess the status in other
provinces and enroll more participants. We used a crosssectional
survey that could not report changes in nurse
spiritual care with time. In addition, SCCS is a self-report
instrument that may have response bias because participants
tend to give acceptable answers that differ from
their actual level of competence.
Conclusion
Oncology nurses showed different levels of competence
in various dimensions of spiritual care. At present, the
incidence of cancer is high, and most cancer patients
have spiritual issues. Spiritual care is becoming increasingly
important in oncology nursing. It is imperative to
enhance oncology nurse competence to address the spiritual
needs of patients and improve patients quality of
life. Nurses also need to perfect their spiritual care competence
by different ways; establishing a positive attitude
towards death could be an option.
Implication for practice
Because of inadequate spiritual care competence in
China, patient spiritual issues may be ignored or underrecognized,
especially for cancer patients who have
more spiritual issues that other patients. Nurse managers
need to enhance oncology nurse competence
to address the spiritual needs of patients. Our study
revealed deficiencies in oncology nurse spiritual care
competence. Therefore, nurse managers know which
areas of the nurse spiritual care competence need
strengthening. There is a need for appropriate strategies
that emphasize the importance of spiritual care by
nurses and enhance nurse spiritual care competence,
such as training and clinical practice on spiritual care.
In addition, enhancing one positive attitude towards
death, such as approach acceptance, is likely to improve
spiritual care competence.