Background
Advance care planning is a process that involves people,
their loved ones and health professionals to discuss about
their values and consider the types of health care they
would want to receive or decline if they become unable
to make decisions for and by themselves [1] . Despite
numerous attempts to promote ACP worldwide over the
last two decades, the uptake of ACP remains low [2–4].
Consequently, increasing the uptake of ACP has been
a focus of policy makers, health care professionals, and
researchers [5–10]. In particular, whilst there has been
consensus that nurses have crucial roles to play in ACP,
there have been consistent reports that nurses perceived
barriers despite their positive attitudes towards ACP
[11–13]. This is of concern as it may imply a lack of commitment
and action by nursing profession.
ACP is well known to be beneficial to individuals, their
families, and health care professionals [11, 14–16]. However,
while patients themselves can initiate ACP, there are
many reasons why uptake is low [17]. Extensive literature
has already identified that the reasons for the low uptake
of ACP from patients’ and families’ perspective include
inadequate awareness of ACP, societal reluctance to discuss
end-of-life issues, time consuming, and complexity
of form [17, 18]). The studies focused on the facilitators
and barriers to ACP from health care professionals’ perspective
report the lack of health professionals’ confidence
and commitment [11, 19]. Despite the various
challenges, one consensus is that health professionals are
the ones to initiate ACP to assist patients [20]. Among
health professionals, social workers have demonstrated a
leadership in encouraging and facilitating ACP in Canada
[21], and the United States of America (USA) [22]. General
Practitioners in Australia also have positioned themselves
to initiate and promote ACP through ongoing and
trusted relationships with their patients [23].
Recently, a nurse-led ACP has emerged and demonstrated
improvement in the quality of patient-physician
end-of-life care communication in patients with COPD
in the Netherlands [5], and produced higher plan completion
rates in Australia [3]. An American study of a
nurse-led patient-centered ACP in primary care has also
demonstrated a promising pilot result with 95% (n = 38)
of participating patients completing ACP documentation
[24]. An Australian study of the experiences of 13 patients
who participated in the nurse-led ACP program in a
general practice found that discussions about working
through ideas around end-of-life care with nurses were
helpful, with participants perceiving the nurses as being
knowledgeable and providing objective professional
advice [4]. A nurse-led and facilitated ACP intervention
also demonstrated a higher ACP uptake by patients with
respiratory malignancy, COPD or interstitial lung disease
in a metropolitan hospital in Australia [7].
Previous studies have provided promising results and
insights about evolving roles for nurses in ACP amongst
other health care professionals. However, it must be
noted that the population is narrowly targeted to patients
with malignancy, COPD or interstitial lung disease [3,
7] in urban/metropolitan hospitals [5, 7, 21], in either
General Practice [3, 4], primary care [24], or residential
aged care [22]. The sample sizes of those nurse-led and/
or facilitated intervention programs vary from 13 [4], 38
[24], 54 [7] to 3017 [3]. The findings from theses studies
indicate that nurses’ roles and responsiblities in implemenation
of ACP intervention are still in their infancy
and warrant further studies.
Methods
We conducted a multi-site quasi-experimental study
involving 16 sites (8 intervention and 8 control) in two
local health districts (LHDs) to investigate the effects of
a nurse-led normalised ACP (NACP) service as a routine
practice in acute and community settings with the use of
specially trained Registered Nurses (RNs). The study protocol
for this quasi-experimental trial is published elsewhere
[25]. The aim of the qualitative arm of the study
was to investigate the experiences of nurses with the
implementation of the nurse-led NACP service.
Theoretical framework
The Normalisation Process Theory (NPT) was used as a
theoretical framework in the implementation of a nurseled
NACP service. NPT focuses on the social organisation
of work (implementation); making practices routine
elements of everyday life (embedding) and sustaining
embedded practices in their social context (integration).
NPT focuses on what people do in the process of
implementation. Four core constructs of NPT are often
discussed for actors (personnel) who work around the
practices, which include; coherence, cognitive participation,
collective action and reflexive monitoring [26–29].
The details of how NPT was applied is published elsewhere
[25].
Design: a qualitative descriptive approach using
a semi-structured interview and weekly debriefing
meeting.
Settings: The nurse-led NACP was implemented at
two hospital settings and two community health care
settings in New South Wales (NSW), Australia for a
6 months duration.
Participant selection
Four purposefully recruited and trained RNs who did not
have any relationship with the research team previously
undertook the role of ACP RNs described in Table 1.
NACP service process is presented in Fig. 1.
The four ACP RNs completed a five-day training program
online and face-to-face. The Template for Intervention
Description and Replication (TIDieR) checklist [30]
is used, although it is not an intervention but a training
program, to improve the completeness of reporting
and the replicability of training program (See Table 2. A
summary of a 5-day training program). All four ACP RNs
were invited to participate in a semi-structured interview
and weekly debriefing meetings.
Data collection and analysis
Face-To-Face semi-structured interviews with four RNs
were conducted by SJ at the conclusion of the intervention.
The minutes of weekly debriefing meetings with
the research team (SJ, SO) were also used. Interviews
took about 30–60 min. The interview guide is presented
in Additional file 2. The interviews were audio-recorded
and transcribed verbatim by an independent transcribing
service and entered into a qualitative data analysis
software. Codes and categories were developed by listening
to interviews and reading transcripts by two of the
researchers (SO, PC). Any disagreements were solved
by discussion with another researcher (SJ). The data collected
through interviews and debriefing meetings provided
sufficient data to achieve saturation and enabled a
full description of the experiences of ACP RNs. All collected
data were analysed using thematic content analysis
because the data obtained from the transcripts are narratives,
stories and experiences of nurses [31]. This method
involved reading, browsing, reflection, coding, validation
of codes and searching for emerging patterns in the data.
This process also involved making comparisons and asking
questions in relation to research questions. All participants
reviewed their transcripts and none made any
edits. Disagreements in these processes were resolved by
consensus. Quotes from participants were used to illustrate
the themes and to keep the interpretation closely
linked to the original data. The Consolidated Criteria for
Reporting Qualitative Studies (COREQ [32]; has been
used in reporting this study (Additional file 3. COREQ
checklist).
Ethics statement
The study was approved by the Hunter New England
Human Research Ethics Committee (Approval no.
17/12/13/4.16). Informed written consent was sought
and obtained for uptake of NACP service, and voluntary
participation was ensured. The study was conducted
in accordance with the National Health and
Medical Research Council’s National Statement on
Ethical Conduct in Human Research (2007), and under
the governance of the Human Research Ethics Committee
(HREC) at the University of Newcastle and the two
Local Health Districts.
Findings
All four ACP RNs were females with a mean age of
43 years old. Their nursing experience ranged 2 to
25 years but they had minimal experiences with ACP
and had not attended any education about ACP previously.
The experiences of ACP RNs with the implementation
of NACP service as a routine service was
described in four inter-related themes; 1) Embracing
NACP service; 2) Enablers and barriers related to
patients and health professionals; 3) Enablers and barriers
related to ACP RNs; and 4) What it means to be
an ACP RN.
Embracing NACP service
The ACP RNs themselves had limited awareness and
little experience in ACP before role commencement.
"I really didn’t know a great deal about it (ACP)
and yeah because of that I wouldn’t talk about it
too much (to patients before). If there were times
where a patient clearly needed to have something
put in place, you’d sort of sitting there and stew
and sort of think well how do I approach this subject
with the patient, how do I talk to the family
about it." ACP RN A
Despite lack of knowledge, ACP RNs recognised
ACP as being part of person-centred care that respects
patient autonomy.
"ACP is a necessary and very important aspect
of patient care and ensures we are caring for our
patients holistically. There is a lot of stigma attached
to Advanced Care Planning for patients, families
and professionals. When Advanced Care Planning is
done and in my experience, it makes the death of a
person as good a death as possible for all involved. I
am very excited to be a part of this project as I hope
Advanced Care Planning will become a normal part
of health care." ACP RN A
"I feel strongly about people having the right information
and control over their care when they are
unable to speak for themselves”. ACP RN D
The ACP RNs also reported that ACP was not a routine
practice in the study setting. It was necessary for them to
introduce the ACP service to the existing health professionals
and patients in the care settings. They identified
that the normalisation of the ACP service required their
effort to integrate the ACP as a standard care provision.
"I see the need to have Advance Care Planning in
place. I saw cases where there was nothing…. Social
workers, just from what I observed with the notes,
they’ll give out information about Enduring Guardian,
but it doesn’t go any further. And then the doctors
only talk about the end of life stuff when it is at
the end of life and what do you want. And so I do
definitely see there being a role there..." ACP RN D
Over the intervention period, the ACP RNs have fully
embraced and committed to NACP service because of
their better understanding of the process of ACP.
"It (ACP) needs to be done but just having that confidence
and having the knowledge to say I know what
I’m talking about.… Now after the project, I don’t
have a problem talking to people about it (be)cause
again you have that knowledge, you know what
you’re talking about. It’s just a matter of sussing out
the patient and how to deliver that information gels
with them." ACP RN A
Enablers and barriers to NACP service related to patients
and health professionals
During the intervention the ACP RNs encountered enablers
and barriers related to patients and health professionals.
The level of acceptance of ACP and willingness to
complete ACD were impacted by patient’s understanding
of their illness, past death and dying related experiences
and other nurses’ personal values or beliefs towards ACP.
Some patients were not interested in, or capable of,
participating in the NACP Service process.
"(Some patients were) not interested. Sort of like an
ostrich, bury your head in the sand and not face
those issues (be)cause it’s too hard, that sort of mentality.
Some people just found it absolutely too confronting
and they just don’t want to talk about that
sort of thing at all." ACP RN A
On the other hand, others welcomed and were enthusiastic
about the ACP. For example, one couple even took
the idea of ACP to their friends in a BBQ, this led to all of
their friends wanting to take up ACP as well. ACP RN B
reported that
"There are people out there screaming at me, "Come
and speak at my …Club". Even yesterday, (a patient)
and his wife is saying, "All their partners are doing
this too", as you know, they’re doing a (Advance
Care) directive." ACP RN B
Past death and dying experiences of a member of the
family, or near dying experiences among the patients,
could facilitate or prevent participation in ACP
conversations.
"Like, one of women, she’d had some near-death,
close death experiences with it (asthma) and she was
keen to have something in place." ACP RN D
"She’s gone through terrible troubles with her mum,
had massive family arguments and she said it was a
horrible time for everyone so that was the main reason
why she wanted to do one." ACP RN A
So a lot of people from, elderly people from M Community
Care Services feel that way. They just can’t
cope with another thing. Other ones will be, a lot of
the others … they’ll seem like yeah it’s a good idea
but then they, it’s not as important as everything
else that they’ve got going on. So they’re the kind of
people that it’s not as important. I have had visits
with people who have had the opposite. So one lady
who her mother was told at the age of 70 well that’s
the end for her, well she had some sort of treatment I
can’t recall what it was but something, she lived for
another 20 years. So that woman who was in her 90 s
refuses advanced care directives because she believes
that she would be signing her own death warrant.
That happens a fair bit. ACP RN B
Concern about the impact of major illness on family
members was associated with willingness to uptake of
ACP. All ACP RNs reported similarly that
"They were prepared to take that step and make it
easier for other family members …they saw this is a
good idea and they would do it…." ACP RN D
For the nurses that ACP RNs worked with, their beliefs,
knowledge, behaviour and attitudes about ACP impacted
the implementation of ACP in routine practice. Some
were more aware of and accepting of ACP.
"There was a little bit of resistance. One (commu
nity) RN stated her views on it and felt that ACDs
were so final. She did indicate that she doesn’t really
agree with them (ACD and ACP) and she doesn’t
hand them (the ACP flyer) out to everyone and get
them to do it." ACP RN C
While all ACP RNs described some degree of resistance
in the implementation of the ACP service among
the existing staff, others were committed to implementation
of the ACP service as a routine practice. ACP RN B
further appreciated a community nurse’s commitment to
ACP.
"I had one male nurse in particular who is absolutely
brilliant and he gets the prize for the most
referrals given to me at the end. Most nurses don’t
think about it. You constantly have to ask next time
you see Mrs such and such can you please ask (if
they want the ACP Nurse to visit)." ACP RN B
Enablers and barriers related to ACP RNs
The ACP RNs shared what worked well and what challenged
them in delivering NACP service, and these
included; 1) the training program, and weekly debriefing
and troubleshooting meetings, 2) the referral process for
the NACP service in community settings, 3) everyone
loved the Conversation Card, 4) let it take its course in a
series of conversations during the ACP process, and 5) is
hospital right place to do ACP?
Firstly, all ACP RNs stated that the training program
enabled them to gain the knowledge and skills to
deliver the NACP service. The ACP RNs also mentioned
gaining their confidence as they implemented the ACP
service.
"I have not discussed ACP/ACD in depth due to lack
of knowledge and time constraints before. I have
now completed 3 days of ACP/ACD training and
am starting to feel more confident as my knowledge
increases. "ACP RN B
"After completing the ACP training and getting to
talk to some patients about it, I have become more
confident in discussing this topic with patients and
their families." ACP RN A
Central to supporting the ACP RNs in sustaining the
ACP practice was a weekly debriefing and troubleshooting
meeting with the ACP experts (SJ, SO) in the
research team. This enabled the exploration of issues
around service delivery as they arose and consistency of
advice about challenging cases.
“The weekly meetings were fantastic that was absolutely
necessary. …Absolutely. (We) are doing the same
job but it’s chalk and cheese as well so it was really good
to hear how she was going… particularly because as I
say it’s not been done before so we were really feeling our
way to make it work, ... it was good to be able to touch
base once a week to say this is where I’m at challenging
cases, absolutely.” ACP RN B.
Secondly, the ACP RNs mentioned that the referral
process to the ACP service in community setting was
a challenge as it was dependant on the existing staff’s
belief and attitudes about ACP.
"The first nurse was one of the ones who would not
refer and when the second nurse happened to mention
to me ’oh this gentleman has said that he’d be
really good and he’s said yes’, she (the first nurse)
actually turned around and said ’you can’t harass
that man, he’s got enough going on, he’s got cancer…."
ACP RN B
Thirdly, the ACP RNs commented how useful the
ACP Conversation Card was to initiate the conversations
and to capture iterative patient conversations.
"The patients have absolutely loved it (Conversation
Card). As soon as it’s all complete and everything,
they fold it up and straight in their purse it
goes." ACP RN A
ACP RN A further explained that other health professionals
such as social workers accepted the ACP conversation
Card well, saying “They love it, absolutely love
it. All think it’s awesome and I’m surprised we haven’t
got something like sooner, so thumbs up for that one,
everybody absolutely loves it.”
The number and duration of conversations needed
for the ACP process surprised the ACP RNs. The ACP
RNs realised it was important to let it take its course
and to let them (patients) reflect their life and transcend.
The sequence or topic of conversations with the
clients/patients for ACP were similar among all ACP
RNs. In general, the first conversation was to build
rapport with the patients and introduce ACP to the
patients with explanation about the elements of ACP
such as ACD, substitute decision-makers, Enduring
Guardians, Power of Attorney, and will. In the second
conversation, they explored values and their preference
of care using the Conversation Card. Although
there were some patients who required more than three
conversations, it was usually at the third conversation
where they would finalise the ACD with all the signatures
which would make the ACD legally binding. The
conversations were spaced around 1 to 2 weeks apart to
allow them to talk with family members, reflect on their
situations, and experience gerotranscendence during a
series of conversations.
this study were not a senior or specialised personnel (e.g.
Clinical Nurse Consultant (CNC), Clinical Nurse Specialist),
but were general RNs who should be available at
various settings. This study adds new evidence that ACP
facilitators do not have to be a clinical specialist. However,
the ACP facilitators in previous studies all received
additional training which varied from a 2-day training
[5] to a full-day workshop [7]. It is not specified what
trainings were provided in other studies [3, 4]. Although
Miller et al. [4] provided some insight about the training
workshop, there is no detailed report on what the training
entailed. This study provided the detailed a 5-day
training program in Table 2. This study demonstrated
that purposely designed face-to-face small group training,
supported by on-line resources, was sufficient to
equip RNs to deliver an ACP service. Use of validated
resources, such as the NSW Health ACP Flyer and Workbook
or standard recording formats, such as the Conversation
Card, facilitated consistent delivery of ACP. It
is also important to note that ACP facilitators were also
supported regularly and as necessary by a CNC [4] and
ACP experts in this study to improve their competency
and confidence [9]. The findings from previous studies
and this study indicate that a nurse-led ACP service has
been emerging and has contributed to increased uptake
of ACP. Although it is not explicitly reported, an additional
training and ongoing support for general RNs are
necessary. The content, duration and mode of delivery
of training program for ACP RNs warrant further implementation
studies in various contexts.
The normalisation of ACP is definately a challenge for some
ACP is a relatively new concept in the experiences of the
ACP RNs. It is often a challenge for patients and community
members, indeed all health professionals, including
the ACP RNs themselves. There is a gap between a
policy perspective of the value of and need for ACP, and
the contextual reality of health care settings. Yet ACP
is promoted, even enforced by health care policies and
health organisations [8, 19]. While a systematic review
covering 1660 original articles highlights that legislation
and institutional policies influence ACP development [9],
the ACP practiced is ad hoc, fragmented and inconsistent.
This reivew provides evidence that current practice
does not place a high value on ACP activity except where
it is in response to a critical incident or serious clinical
event. A degree of cognitive dissonance can explain
a clincian’s perception and behavour. While many staff,
when asked, expressed support for more ACP, many of
them were unable or unwilling to change behaviour to
incorporate the provision of ACP information as a routine
activity into their role. As effective ACP requires a
time investment through conversations that may need to
be iterative, the expectation that hospital clinicians who
see themselves as very busy and under stress will be able
to step into more ACP related tasks is unlikely to be realised
broadly. While merit can be seen in arguments for
both an “everybody’s business” and a “specialised few”
approach to ACP service provision the “right” normal
may justifiably be different in different care settings. Further,
not all consumers (patients) chose to participate in
the ACP service, but those who did participate reported
value in the ACP process.
The importance of setting to deliver the ACP service is
discussed widely in the literature such as outpatient setting
[33], nursing homes [22, 34], and inpatient hospital
settings [35]. Similar to the findings of Batchelor et al.
[20], the ACP RNs of this study echo the ACP service at
the community setting is more effective than in the inpatient
hospital setting. However, the complexity of ACP
processes, and in particular the variations in attitudes of
both health professionals and patients towards these processes,
indicate the need for ACP Services that are robust
and adaptive.
Limitations
The interviews of ACP RNS were conducted by one (SJ)
of the ACP experts, and the weekly debriefing meetings
were conducted two (SJ & SO) of the ACP experts who
provided a large part of the training. Given that the interviewers
were the people who developed and delivered
the training and oversaw the implementation there were
concerns that the ACP RNs might not feel comfortable
sharing their experiences. To ensure open and honest
feedback from the ACP RNs, during the debriefing meetings,
the ACP RNs were encouraged to share their experiences
to resolve any challenges that they encountered
collaboratively as part of trouble-shooting exercise. The
interviews were conducted 1 to 2 weeks after the completion
of the intervention to ensure there was no influence,
coercion and pressure during intervention period.
The four ACP RNs shared their experiences as a reflection
activity during interviews. In fact, the ACP RNs did
provide critical or negative opinions, particularly about
the training (e.g. discomfort with role play). The questions
asked (Additional file 2) were open and inviting.
The direct quotes about enablers and barriers illustrated
in the findings represent the open and honest views of
the ACP RNs and demonstrate that the basis of the findings
is drawn from the voices of the ACP RNs. We neither
have objective evaluations of the RNs’ performance/
skills/competencies nor have information about the usual
staff. However, the patients’ opinion about the ACP RNs
as leaders of ACP is collected and will be published elsewhere.
Another limitation is that the study did not focus
on long term impacts on professional practice nor did it
consider the way ACP impacted upon future care outcomes
for users of the service as the study focussed on
RN experience in the establishment of an RN led ACP
service.
Conclusion
Believing in and commitment to the ACP service by
all actors (the ACP RNs, patients and their families,
the existing health care professionals) are essential for
the implementation of the ACP service. The successful
implementation of the ACP service can be determined by
the challenges and enablers such as contexts, the process
and tools that are used to implement the ACP service.
The ACP RNs highlight the need to address those challenges
and enablers to succeed in the implementation of
a nurse-led ACP service.