Background
Globally, people are living longer, and many are living
with complex, chronic conditions (World Health Organisation
[1, 2]. It is estimated that by 2060 there will be
an 87% increase in the number of people dying with serious
health-related suffering, and immediate global action
is required to integrate palliative care into health
systems [3]. Over the last two decades, the WHO
advocated that palliative care should be considered as a
public health issue, with calls for earlier integration of
palliative care within the wider healthcare system to improve
access and availability [1, 4, 5]. Integration of palliative
care into other parts of the health system, and
more broadly into society itself, is supported by a recent
article in the Lancet [6]. This earlier or ‘integrated’
model of palliative care enables palliative care professionals
to build relationships and become increasingly
responsive to the need of patients and their families [7].
Despite this recommendation, evidence repeatedly
demonstrates that palliative care is accessed late in the
illness course [8]. What the public know and understand
about palliative care may impact on future access to
quality care in the event of a serious illness [9]. However,
international research suggests that palliative care is
poorly understood among the general public with varying
levels of awareness and understanding of palliative
care globally (Table 1), for example, there are misconceptions
that palliative care is provided at the very end
of life [11, 15, 26], and variable knowledge of palliative
care by the public reported in America [20, 21]; Saudi
Arabia [24]; Nigeria [27]; Italy [12]; Sweden [22]; and
the UK [10, 15, 16, 28]. This literature confirms inconsistencies
internationally, despite global efforts to
increase awareness. A recent scoping review of the
literature noted that thirteen international studies
had been undertaken between 2003 and 2019 and
concluded that the public had poor knowledge and
misconceptions about palliative care [29]. Thus,
there is a growing need to raise awareness and understanding
of palliative care as a key public health
priority [6, 30].
A range of terms have been used to describe a public
health approach to palliative care, including compassionate
cities, compassionate communities, health promoting
palliative care, and community development, engagement
or participation [31]. Furthermore, there remains
debate within the academic literature around various
‘models’ and conceptual underpinnings for this approach
[30]. Three overlapping approaches to public health and
palliative care have been noted in the literature: WHO
approach (practice driven); Health promotion approach
(community assets) and Population based approach (epidemiology)
[32]. Further investigation of the public’s
views of palliative care is vital to help inform and target
a future public education programme that provide key
messages within a public health approach, which may
change attitudes to palliative care thus ultimately improving
access and end of life outcomes.
Aim
To examine public awareness, knowledge, and perceptions
of palliative care and identify strategies to raise
awareness within a public health framework.
Methods
Design
A two phase, explanatory, sequential mixed methods design
based on the taxonomy of Creswell and Plano Clark
[33] was utilised, including a cross-sectional survey and
qualitative interviews/focus groups with members of the
public (Fig. 1). The first phase assessed the knowledge,
attitudes and behaviours of the public in Northern
Ireland regarding palliative care, and the second phase
explored these concepts in depth to give meaning to the
numerical data and identify future strategies for public
promotion of palliative care.
Participants
Participants for the survey included a random representative
sample of adults from the Northern Ireland population
aged 18 years and over; selected from a database
of addresses, where interviewers selected one adult at
random for face to face completion of the survey at each
address using the ‘next birthday’ method. This is an efficient
method for selecting representative respondents
within a household unit [34]. Participation was
voluntary.
Following completion of the survey, participants were
asked if they would like to participate in the second,
qualitative phase. Those who agreed to contribute had
their contact information collated (separately to the survey
responses). Willing participants were contacted via
telephone. Inclusion criteria included participant aged
18–80 years; able to speak and read English; had previously
completed the survey and were willing to participate,
able to provide informed consent; and not have
suffered bereavement within the last 6 months. Participants
who met the eligibility criteria were sent study
information and upon receipt of the consent form, were
invited to take part in a one-off focus group or telephone/
face to face interview.
Data collection
Phase one quantitative data was collected in 2018, as
part of the cross-sectional attitudinal survey undertaken
annually in Northern Ireland, known as the Northern
Ireland Life and Times survey [35] (https://www.ark.ac.
uk/nilt/). The NILT uses a random sample with 1200
adults completing the questionnaire each year, ensuring
the socio-economic and demographic characteristics of
the sample are representative of the total population
[36]. This survey is run on a modular format and four
modules are included each year. One module assessed
the knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour of the Northern
Ireland public’s towards palliative care. This is the first
time palliative care has been included in this survey
since the NILT began in 1998. Questions investigating
palliative care were based on Palliative Care Knowledge
Scale (PaCKS) [37, 38], a 13-item instrument, and true/
false format that assesses goals, timing and what constitutes
the Palliative care team and systems related issues
[37, 38]. Seven yes/no items on participants’ prior
knowledge of palliative care were also included within
the NILT survey. Participant’s sociodemographic characteristics
such as age, gender, religion, education level,
marital status and income etc. are collected as part of
the NILT annual survey (see Supplementary file 1).
Face-to-face questionnaires were carried out using computer
assisted personal interviewing, and there was a further
self-completion questionnaire which respondents
are asked to fill in on a tablet, or on paper.
In phase two, data was collected from October 2018 to
July 2019 by DM, KC, EB and SMcC (postdoctoral researchers
and/or specialist practitioners). The researcher
was not known to participants prior to the data collection.
The qualitative interview schedule comprised of
five broad topic areas, which included questions on the
participant’s knowledge of palliative care; whether they
would seek knowledge and information on palliative
care; their perceived accessibility of palliative care services
and finally, future strategies including supporting
and inhibiting factors for promoting public awareness of
palliative care. The interview schedule was informed by
the literature and quantitative phase of the study (see
Supplementary file 2). While focus groups were offered,
the majority of participants wanted to undertake
interviews. Data were collected in a neutral public place,
the participant’s home or via telephone, and were audio
recorded and field notes taken. The data collection tools
were piloted with academics and NILT data collectors
prior to implementation.
Data analysis
In phase one, the number of correct responses were tallied,
and scores ranged from 0 (lowest knowledge) to 13
(highest knowledge). “I don’t know”/ “Not sure” responses
were coded as incorrect when calculating total
PaCKS scores. All survey data were analysed in SPSS v
25.0. Descriptive statistics were used to summarise the
participants’ demographic factors and other variables, including
participants’ prior knowledge of palliative care.
A factor analysis was undertaken on PaCKS and the factor
structure was found to be acceptable. Linear regression
was used to identify demographic variables that
impacted on the PaCKS score and explored further using
inferential statistics. Further analyses were undertaken
on appropriate variables; t Tests were conducted to
compare PaCKS scores across gender. An analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was conducted to analyse how age,
country of birth, marital status, household income, and
qualifications performed on the PaCKS.
Phase two data were stored and managed through
NVivo Software (V13). Qualitative data were transcribed,
and any identifying information was removed. Transcripts
were analysed using thematic analysis [39] which
involved a six-step process: familiarisation, generating
codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes, defining
and naming themes, and producing a report. Themes
were derived by exploring patterns, similarities and differences
within and across the data in relation to participant’s
awareness, knowledge, and perceptions of
palliative care. Data analysis was done by two authors
(OB and LH-T) and discussed with a third author (FH)
to enhance credibility and trustworthiness.
Integration
Integration was evident through data transformation between
phase one and two [40], and merging in the
results and discussion [33]. The data from phase one
informed the development of the interview schedule
utilised in phase two, and the results from both
phases were analysed in parallel, and integrated using
data matrix and weaving the thread techniques, and
presented thematically throughout the results and
discussion.
Results
Description of the sample
A total of 2161 people were contacted, 1201 of whom
completed the Northern Ireland Life and Times survey
(response rate 56%), representative of the demographic
profile in NI. The participants were aged between 18
and 95 years (mean: 61 yrs). The largest proportion of
the population, 17.7% (n = 210) were aged between 45
and 54 years. Over half were female (58.3% n = 700);
most were white (95.5% n = 1147) and born in Northern
Ireland (84.2% n = 1011). Over two fifths of those surveyed
were married (43.3% n = 514), described the area
where they lived as a ‘small city or town’ (41.5% n = 498)
and in terms of religion identified themselves as protestant
(43.9% n = 496). Regarding participant’s level of educational
attainment, over a quarter (25.3% n = 302)
indicated that they had a degree or higher qualification,
and just under a quarter (24.7% n = 295) reported no
formal qualifications. The demographic profile of the
survey respondents reflects that of the general population
of Northern Ireland [41].
Participants were asked if they had a physical or mental
health condition that had lasted or was expected to
last for 12 months or more; a quarter of participants
(25.6% n = 307) acknowledged that they had a physical
or mental condition or illness. Of those participants,
58% (n = 178) indicated that the condition/illness
reduced their ability to carry out day-to-day activities a
lot. Only 8.1% (n = 97) of participants indicated that they
had someone living with them, for whom they had a caring
responsibility. A further 9.6% (n = 115) of participants
had a caring responsibility for a sick, disabled or
elderly relative or friend not living with them.
Twenty-five participants took part in phase two. Almost
all participants (96%) were white; 60% were male
and nearly three quarters (72%) were married or cohabiting.
Less than a quarter (24%) of those who participated
were under 50 under 50 years old, with the largest
proportion of participants (36%) aged between 61 and
70 years. Almost half (48%) were retired, and all participants
were Christian.
Factor analysis of Palliative Care Knowledge Scale (PaCKS)
Thirteen items relating to knowledge of palliative care
were subject to factor analysis, extraction method: Maximum
Likelihood, with Varimax rotation. The analysis
yielded one factor explaining a total of 62.93% of the
variance for the entire set of variables. The communalities
of the variables included were good and each item
included in the one factor model was well-represented
with adequate factor loadings (.60–.87). A Chi-square
(goodness-of-fit) test was significant indicating that the
model results fit the data X2 (65, N = 1201) 931.18, p = <
0.05. The results confirm a single factor structure and
justification for the totalling of all 13 scores. Higher
scores indicate higher levels of knowledge. Factor loadings
and communalities are reported for each item (see
Supplementary File 3).
Demographic variations across palliative care knowledge
(PaCKS)
A linear model found significant impact of the following
variables on knowledge of palliative care scores; qualification
(predictor importance 0.45); description of area
lived (predictor importance 0.12); gender (predictor importance
0.09); marital status (predictor importance
0.09); age (predictor importance 0.08); country of birth
(predictor importance 0.04). (see Table 2 for mean
scores).
 Education had a significant impact on scoring across
the PaCK’s total score. Respondents with higher
levels of education had better knowledge of palliative
care. An ANOVA revealed a significant difference
depending on level of education [F (5,1187) = 24.474,
p = < 0.005); with post hoc tests revealing that those
with a degree level qualification or higher, scored
significantly higher than those with school
qualification (grades A-C) (p = < 0.005); and those
with school qualification (grades D-G) (p = < 0.005).
 An independent samples t-test was conducted to
compare PaCKS knowledge scores across gender.
There was a significant difference in PaCKS scores
between males, mean = 7.67, SD =5.06, and females,
mean = 8.77, SD =4.75, t (1199) = − 3.845, p < .001.
Our results indicated that females had significantly
higher palliative care knowledge scores than males.
Marital status also had a significant impact on
PaCKS scores.
 An ANOVA revealed a significant difference
across marital status [F (4,1183) = 15.3, p = <
0.005), with post hoc tests revealing that there
was a significant difference in knowledge scores
between those who were single and those who
were married and living with husband/wife
(p = < 0.001), with married people having a better
knowledge score than those who were single;
there was also a significant difference between
those who were married and living with husband/
wife, they scored higher, when compared to those
who were married and separated from husband/
wife (p = < 0.001) and those who were widowed
(p = < 0.001). Knowledge of palliative care also
increased with age.
 An ANOVA revealed a significant difference across
age [F (7,1180) = 9.193, p = < 0.005], with post hoc
tests revealing that there were significant differences
in knowledge scores between younger and older
populations; with older, for e.g. those aged 18-24 yrs.
scored significantly lower than those aged 45-54 yrs.
(p = < 0.005).
Findings from thematic synthesis
Five overarching themes were identified through the
merging and integration of qualitative and quantitative
data; three which examined public awareness, knowledge,
and perceptions of palliative care and two identified
strategies to raise awareness: “Prior knowledge of
palliative care”; “Variable understanding of palliative
care”; “Promoting public awareness of palliative care”;
“Shortcomings in current palliative care information and
provision”; and "Future strategies to improve understanding
of palliative care".
Prior knowledge of palliative care
Of those who completed the survey, almost half of participants
(44.6%) had some direct experience of palliative
care through a friend/relative. A small proportion of the
population sampled (11.2%) had a job that involved
working with people who received palliative care and
three participants (0.3%) were currently receiving palliative
care. A fifth of participants (20.1%) indicated that
they had previously heard about palliative care from either
TV, newspapers or social media, with a further 9%
acknowledging that they had heard the term from another
source including school/university, word of mouth,
a friend/relative, or a medical practitioner. For 13.8% of
participants, the term palliative care was familiar, but
they were either unsure or could not remember where
they had heard the term. Only 14.2% of participants indicated
that they had no prior knowledge of the term
palliative care.
Similar sources of information on palliative care were
reflected in the qualitative data. Participants discussed
the diverse sources from which they had gained an understanding
of palliative care, including online, media,
friends and family, GP and other healthcare professionals
and religious and social service providers. However,
it was clear from the qualitative findings that
respondents’ knowledge and understanding were largely
attributed to personal experience. Findings showed that
in some instances, these personal experiences led to a
negative view of palliative care as this was mostly associated
with the end of life care phase. Several respondents
focused on medication in the final stages of death and
resuscitation options, highlighting ‘a good death’ and
‘dying comfortably’ as the optimum goals.
Variable understanding of palliative care
The mean PaCKS score was 8.31 (standard deviation
[SD] = 4.91, range 0–13). Correct responses ranged from
44.6–72.4%. Overall, just over a fifth of participants
(22.6%) were completely accurate in their understanding
of palliative care, scoring a total of 13 out of 13 items
correctly. Similarly, just under a fifth (19.5%) answered
none of the items correctly. The median score for the
sample was 10; indicating that half the sample held at
least three misconceptions about palliative care. The
most commonly held misconceptions about palliative
care included: (PaCKS5) Palliative care is exclusively for
people who are in the last 6 months of life (55.4% answered
incorrectly); (PaCKS1) A goal of palliative care is
to address any psychological issues brought up by serious
illness (42.2% answered incorrectly); (PaCKS12) A
goal of palliative care is to improve a person’s ability to
participate in daily activities (39.6% answered incorrectly);
(PaCKS11) Palliative care encourages people to
stop treatments aimed at curing their illness (39.2% answered
incorrectly); (PaCKS4) When people receive palliative
care, they must give up their other doctors (36.8%
answered incorrectly); (PaCKS2) Stress from serious illness
can be addressed by palliative care (36.7% answered
incorrectly); and finally, (PaCKS6) Palliative care is specifically
for people with cancer (35.4% answered incorrectly)
(See Table 2).
Findings from the qualitative data showed that most of
the respondents had some prior knowledge of palliative
care while a few participants admitted that they had
never heard of the term. This re-enforced findings from
the quantitative data. Many of the respondents acknowledged
that palliative care was complex and specialised.
However, there were varying levels of understanding
among respondents when asked to clarify when exactly
palliative care took place and who was involved. A number
of respondents noted that palliative care happened
‘at the very end’ when there was ‘no hope’, or no other
‘treatments’ available. Most respondents agreed that palliative
care involved different healthcare professionals
(GP, hospital doctors and nurses, hospice nurses, social
workers etc) but most struggled with clarifying the various
individualised care packages and the range of support
available. This highlighted that although there was relatively
high awareness of the term palliative care, most
respondents had very limited understanding of the term.
Promoting public awareness of palliative care
In phase two, respondents were asked to give their views
of the barriers and facilitators to promoting public
awareness of palliative care. Many respondents acknowledged
the ‘taboo’ that still existed around public discussions
about death and dying, and that in some instances
it can be very difficult to broach the subject, even with
family and friends. Some respondents acknowledged that
relationships and dynamics can be complicated, and that
people do not want to cause ‘upset or distress’ by speaking
about ‘their own mortality’. One respondent stated;
‘It’s never really talked about to be quite honest …
like deaths and funerals – nobody really likes to envisage
the end … it’s inevitable at some stage, but it’s
sort of you don’t talk about it, it’s not going to happen,
so to speak’. (PCACPI003)
Participants advised that opening the conversation of
palliative care to a wider audience also means considering
the cultural differences that exist amongst the public
in terms of their views, understanding, and the role of
palliative care within end of life care. Many respondents
who were interviewed openly acknowledged that their
religious or cultural beliefs dictated the decisions they
make in terms of their care, both physical and spiritual.
A number of respondents discussed resuscitation, organ
donation, cremation etc. all through the lens of their
personal beliefs and were largely unconcerned with the
idea of doing something different/contrary to what they
were familiar with. A number of respondents also
highlighted the limitations of human knowledge and
technological advancement, and that our actual time of
death is beyond the scope of human prediction; ‘ … the
idea that there is no point almost in worrying about what
was going to happen. If it’s going to happen anyway … ’
(PCACPI002).
Shortcomings in current palliative care information and
provision
Many respondents who took part in phase two
highlighted that information being provided on palliative
care to the public had to overcome the challenging attitudes
that existed. Informing people about palliative care
involves facilitating individuals to realise and acknowledge
their own mortality as well as the importance of taking
responsibility for their own health and wellbeing, whilst
they still have the capacity to do so. One respondent noted
that palliative care could be included in something like life
insurance, that way, people availed of it (and learned about
the benefits) in the context of living and paying for their
mortgage but knowing that they’d be taken care of in the
future.
‘It’s bringing it into the discussion, it’s creating a solution.
How you do it? Like I say … a certain percentage
of people have life insurance. If you’ve got a
mortgage, you need life insurance … but palliative
care isn’t something that has been spoken about. If
I’m diagnosed with a terminal illness, the house is
paid off if I’m going to die. If you are not in a position
where you even think you’re going to avail of
palliative care at any stage in the near future, you’re
not going to think about it’. (PCACPFG002).
Future strategies to improve understanding of palliative
care
Respondents suggested various approaches for the dissemination
of information on palliative care via a variety
of platforms. More traditional methods discussed included
information in GP surgeries, libraries, posting
leaflets, traditional media platforms (e.g. T.V., radio,
newspapers and billboards) alongside the use of media
and television such as soap storylines. Respondents also
spoke about the internet and social media and their role
as a global information resource. Many agreed that such
online platforms were better able to reach younger generations,
but some cautioned being able to trust ‘everything
you see online’, indicating that some regulation
would be required to ensure that the information people
were searching for was accurate.
There was an overarching feeling that this information
and the need to educate people was ultimately about
‘supporting them’ to make informed choices and decisions
about their lives and their death, if that was their
wish. This was important to both move beyond awareness
and seek to enhance understanding.
Discussion
Whilst the findings indicate the public may claim to be
aware of the term palliative care, there is an inadequate
understanding of the concept, with only a fifth of the
sample obtaining full scores. The current study identified
14.2% of participants had no knowledge of palliative
care. This is consistent with previous international [12,
20–22, 24, 27], and national [10, 15, 16, 28] literature.
For example, a study undertaken in Northern Ireland
that reported 19% of the 600 members of the public who
completed a cross-sectional survey had no understanding
of palliative care and a further 56% had very low knowledge
[15]. This also correlates with an American study
which used the PaCKS tool and found limited understanding
or palliative care (mean score of 5.25), with a significant
proportion of the 301 participants responding “I
don’t know” for every item [20]. The timing of these studies
would also suggest that understanding is not improving,
despite policy initiatives, media and wider public
engagement strategies.
Personal experience shaped many participants’ views
on palliative care and potentially their misconceptions,
which is also a common thread in the literature [11, 15,
27]. For example, over half of the participants in Shalev
et al’s [21] study held a misperception about palliative
care and were not aware of the major components. The
most common misconception about palliative care in
this study was that it is exclusively for people in the last
6 months of life. This is supported by previous literature
internationally, which repeatedly reports a public perception
of palliative care provided at the very end of life
[11, 15, 26]. Internationally, it is also reflected in health
systems insurance policy, were palliative care is provided
6 months prior [42] Other common misconceptions included
a tendency to associate palliative care for those
diagnosed with cancer, a focus on pain relief whilst other
aspects such as spiritual care were not mentioned.
In this study, being female, higher educated, married,
and older, were significant factors that influenced level
of awareness and the number of correct responses. Similar
findings have been noted internationally, including
from research in America [21]; Saudi Arabia [24];
Nigeria [27]; Italy [12]; Sweden [22]; and the UK [10, 15,
16, 28]. These studies have consistently demonstrated
that palliative care awareness among the general public
is variable and that demographic factors have a significant
impact. Whilst this may provide a focus for future
initiatives to be based upon, it is however unclear why
such disparities exist and the impact of these on palliative
care receptivity.
Recent models of palliative care advocate earlier integration
of palliative care in public health yet evidence
would indicate that this is not happening in practice [6].
According to Collins [9] one of the potential contributing
factors to this is the general public’s attitude and
level of knowledge about palliative care. Despite respondents
in the current study advocating the need to hold
open conversations about palliative care in society, they
had concerns about the social taboo of talking about
death and fear of causing upset. Qualitative comments
highlighted that the public’s exposure to palliative care
was centred around the end of life period with the introduction
of specialist health care professionals and services.
Without open conversations and readily available
information, such experiences provided a framework
upon which to articulate and base their understandings
of what constitutes palliative care. This highlights issues
that Collins et al. [9] consider as an ‘image/language
problem’ for palliative care. Such misconceptions should
not be dismissed as they may deter people from accessing
services in the future. For example, if the public
view palliative care as predominately for people diagnosed
with non-curative cancer this may lead to a false
impression that this service is not appropriate for themselves
or their loved ones. The need therefore for public
health campaigns to recognise this disparity in what palliative
care is seen to offer, from the public’s perspective,
needs to be recognised and responded to. This would be
in line with the EIU Quality of Death Index’s [43] that
recommends that perceptions of death and cultural taboos
are confronted to improve end of life outcomes.
To move forward from these findings and raise
awareness, remove misconceptions, and increase openness
to holistic palliative care, a generic recommendation
from previous studies and reaffirmed in this study is the
need for a public education programme. There are two
key strands required within this public education
programme; the normalisation of palliative care and addressing
misperceptions and knowledge gaps. Normalisation
requires a structured and systemic introduction of
palliative care into the context of everyday life, such as
through life insurance and mortgage applications. It was
not seen as the sole remit of healthcare professionals; instead
education, media, and individuals all were seen to
hold personal responsibility to contribute to an open dialogue.
To address misperceptions and knowledge gaps, a
consistent message from a trustworthy source, inclusive
of the voice of the patient, carer, and healthcare professional,
and offering both general and tailored information
to the needs of specific groups (gender, age, rural/urban
communities) is advocated. It is also vital to consider
some essential messages of the educational intervention.
Building on the work of Collins [9], an increasing
evidence base, and drawing from aspects of the PaCKS
tool some of the following essential components of
educational message are proposed (see Table 3). Yet to
achieve this there is a need for service capacity to also be
reviewed to enable palliative care to be integrated earlier.
Study limitations
Whilst this study adopted a mixed methods approach
with phase one based on a random sample representative
of the total Northern Ireland population [36], the
structured framework of the NILT survey did not allow
to fully explore why people think the way they do and
only provides a snap shot of attitudes for that period in
time. Using a qualitative approach helped to contribute
to a broader understanding of the public’s views, however,
48% of the sample were retired, and everyone
identified as white and Christian, hence bias may be introduced.
A number of researchers from different background
and specialties were involved in data collection
which may introduce a source of researcher bias. To
manage this bias, data analysis was completed by multiple
researchers and reviewed by a team member separate
from the data collection process.
Conclusions
In conclusion, this population based mixed methods
study builds upon previous research in this area, indicating
widespread misunderstandings of the concept palliative
care. Variances in understanding were associated
with several demographic characteristics however reasons
why these are influencers are unknown. Whilst the
public report a willingness to engage in such conversations,
societal restrictions impinge on this occurring.
Understanding is derived from limited ad hoc personal
experiences focusing on the end of life and not the holistic
palliative care journey. The findings provide an empirical
basis from which to understand how the public view
palliative care, to inform and stimulate focused debate on
how to increase awareness and dispel misunderstandings.
Education is key to advancing public understanding of
palliative care. By shifting the view of palliative care to
earlier integration across disease types and care settings,
essential conversations can start earlier and ensure palliative
care reaches everyone who would benefit.