Background
Endometrial cancer (EC) represents the most common
gynaecologic malignant disease in Western Countries.
Over 50,000 women each year were affected by EC in
the United States, with a mortality rate of approximately
8,500 patients/year [1]. It seems to be more prevalent in
developed countries and especially in geriatric women;
in fact, the mean age at diagnosis is estimated to be
around 68 years [2, 3]. Type 1 EC represents the most
widespread type (80–90 % of all endometrial malignancy)
and it is estrogen-dependent. Endometrioid adenocarcinoma,
another name for type 1 EC, generally manifests as
low grade with a very favorable prognosis (5-years survival
rate, in fact, is considered to be approximately
83 %) [4]. The persistent estrogenic stimulation of endometrial
tissue, due to endogenous and exogenous origin,
represents the principal pathogenic mechanism for the
development of this malignancy [5–9]. The most important
risk factors include ovarian polycytosis, estrogenic hormonal
therapy, early menarche, late menopause, tamoxifen
therapy for breast cancer treatment, anovulatory cycles and
obesity. In addition familial history of EC, Lynch's syndrome,
hypertension, mellitus diabetes, and thyroid diseases
are additional risk factors for the onset of EC [5–9]. In
post-menopausal women, the main source of estrogen is
derived from the peripheral aromatization of steroids by
the aromatase enzyme. This enzyme is present in many
human tissues such as the placenta, adipose tissue, skin,
granulosa ovarian cells, skin fibroblasts, muscle, bone and
brain. Furthermore, the activation and the transcription of
this enzyme seems to be direct correlated to patient's age
and body mass index and this phenomenon well explained
the rationale of the increased risk of developing EC in obese
and elderly women after menopause. Genic expression of
aromatase enzyme is significantly increased in the endometrial
cancer tissue and it represents an index of tumour
cell proliferation and growth [10–14]. To our knowledge,
based on current literature, there are no studies which
focus on the use of aromatase inhibitors in the treatment of
EC in elderly patients. As it is shown in our previous review
of the literature, aromatase inhibitors may possibly be beneficial
in the treatment of advanced/recurrent type EC1.
The primary purpose of this study is to analyze the
possible role of anastrozole, in elderly patients with EC
who are ineligible for surgical treatment, in terms of
safety, efficacy, and clinical benefit. Secondarily, this
study evaluates quality of life modifications, toxicity
and tolerability of the drug in this high risk group of
patients.
Methods
Inclusion criteria were in women with primary EC Type 1,
International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) Stage IA-IB, age older than 75 years, not candidate
for surgical treatment due to advanced age, general status
or comorbidities. The exclusion criteria were: radiological
suspicion of distant metastasis according to Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) v1.1, Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance
status > 3, any recent or concomitant neoplastic diseases
in the previous 5 years, and no previous endocrine therapy
for cancer. The present trial was approved by the Ethical
Committee of IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation,
Pavia.
From 2015 all consecutive patients age older of 75
with diagnosis of type I EC referred to our hospital
underwent full clinical examination and trans-vaginal
ultrasound. At histological examination of endometrial
biopsy performed during hysteroscopy status of estrogen
receptor and/or progesterone receptor was systematically
performed by immunohistochemistry. A full clinical
history, blood count, coagulative study and serum biochemistry
were performed in order to analyze hepatic
and renal function. All of our patients underwent
abdominal and chest computed tomography (CT) in
order to exclude distant metastasis or local tumor invasion,
and pelvic magnetic resonance (MR) in order to investigate
the depth of myometrial invasion. All patients
underwent anesthesiological evaluation in order to assess
perioperative risk according to American Society of
Anesthesiologists score classification. Patients selected to
use anastrozole as palliative therapy instead of receiving
laparosocopic/laparotomic hysterectomy and bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy were poor surgical candidate
due to their health general status. Informed consent was
obtained in order to protect the patients regarding the
use of off-label therapy. The anastrozole schedule was
1 mg/daily orally in order to minimize the adverse effect
of progestagens, such as deep-vein thrombosis. In accordance
with the National Health Service Cancer Plan,
the therapy was started within one month of EC diagnosis
[14]. Patients were treated until disease progression,
intolerable toxicity or death. Four months after starting
the therapy, all patients underwent ultrasound examination
and abdominal CT in order to evaluate the response
to the therapy, than every 6 months. Tumor
response was investigated by using RECIST criteria.
Complete blood count, renal and liver functions were
tested starting one month after initiation of therapy and
every four months. In order to evaluate the quality of life
in each of the patients who followed the anastrozole
treatment, the authors administered the European
Organization for Research and Treatment (EORTC)-
Core Quality of Life Questionnaire(QLQC)30 questionnaire
at different times: before starting the treatment,
and every six months until discontinuation. The QLQC30
is based on five multi-item scales (physical, role,
social, emotional and cognitive functioning) and nine
single-items (pain, fatigue, financial status, appetite loss,
nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation, sleep wellness
and quality of life) [15]. The toxicity profile was established
according to National Cancer Institute Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v 4.0. During
follow-up evaluations, the clinical response to the therapy
was determined with the Word Health Organisation
Handbook for Reporting Results of Cancer Treatment [16].
According to RECIST 1.1, physical examination, and
ultrasound evaluation: complete response (CR) occurs
when all pathologic lesions disappeared. Partial response
(PR) when the total cancer lesion size showed a decrease
in size by 50 % or more; progressive disease (PD) when
the lesion increased by 25 % or more in total measured
size; Not changed (NC) when it was not possible to establish
the reduction of tumour size by 50 % or more. The
present trial adheres to CONsolidated Standards of
Reporting Trials guidelines. The compliance to the therapy
is based on patient self-reported outcomes.
Statistical analysis
Sample size consideration: 8 subjects represent a small
sample size, but a repeated measures design with one
group of 8 subjects measured 3 times achieves more
than 80 % power if effect size is about 1.5.
Categorical variables were described as count data and
percentage. Quantitative variables were described as mean
and standard deviation if normally distributed (Shapiro-
Wilks test); as median and interquartile range otherwise.
Response to the therapy was described in terms of reduction
of endometrial thickness, vaginal bleeding. For
clinical variables only descriptive statistics are shown.
Subscales of the EORTC-QLQ30 questionnaire have
been calculated following the manual instructions and is
accordingly linearly transformed to obtain a 0-100 score.
Change of subscale scores at 6 and 12 months with
respect to baseline were evaluated by fitting populationaveraged
generalized equation models following the
approach described in Liang and Zeger (1986) [17]. Each
normally distributed subscale is assessed in a separate
model with time as independent variable. The small
sample size does not consent multivariable analysis.
All statistical tests were two-sided and a p-value < 0.05
was considered significant. Analysis were performed
with the STATA v16 (StataCorp USA).
Results
Eight patients, according to inclusion criteria, were enrolled
in the present study between 2015 and 2018, while
ten women were excluded, as shown in the flow chart
(Fig. 1). At the time of enrolment, the mean patient age
was 85 ± 2.61 years (range 80–88 years). All patients had
a diagnosis of endometrial cancer stage IA/IB, according
to the FIGO system 2009. The histological and immunochemistry
analyses demonstrated endometrial cancer
type 1 in all patients (Table 1). Before starting the treatment,
pelvic ultrasound, CT scan and Pelvic RM evaluated
the lesion mapping: in all patients the tumour
appeared confined to the uterus. The response to the
therapy, counted such as any reduction in endometrial
thickness, after twelve months was reported. The endometrial
thickness had a mean of 10.74 ± 4.68 mm, with a
reduction of 9.25 ± 4.77 mm (relative reduction rate of
44 %). The maximal endometrial thickness was 18 mm
and the minimum was 5 mm (Table 2). Partial response
was observed in seven patients (87.5 %, 7/8), with a reduction
in self reported symptoms such as pain, vaginal
bleeding, and vaginal discomfort for all patients. In one
patient no endometrial thickness reduction was achieved
during the follow up (12.5 %), and vaginal bleeding, pain
and vaginal discomfort persisted, without any disease
progression. The average follow-up evaluation was
18.5 ± 5.2 months for all patients. Four women died of
reasons other than cancer during the study period: two
patients died of heart failure following previous history
of myocardial ischemia, one woman died after complicated
femur fracture, another died after an accidental fall
caused by pneumonia. No deaths related to endometrial
cancer, disease progression/relapse or side effects from
therapy were reported. Toxicity data were available for
all patients included in the present trial. None of the
patients reported any common side effects from the
medication during the study period, such as vomiting,
diarrhoea, alopecia, skin rashes and fever. Occasional
nausea (4/8 patients), muscle/joint aches and bone pain
(5/8 patients), and fatigue (5/8 patients) during the first
month of the treatment were the only side effects
reported. No grade 3–4 toxicity was highlighted. The
therapeutic compliance was optimal thank to decrease in
vaginal bleeding, subjective well-being and ease of oral
administration and no patients stopped the anastrozole
therapy due to adverse drug reactions. All eight patients
filled out the EORCT-QLQ 30 questionnaire before, and
at 6 and 12 months after starting therapy and results were
summarized in Table 3. The global health status increased
significantly 12 months after drug prescription (p = 0.002)
(Fig. 2a). However, fatigue increased significantly at six
months (p = 0.011) (Fig. 2b). We also reported a significant
decrease in pain (p = 0.038) at 12 months compared
to the baseline (Fig. 2c). Insomnia decreased significantly
6 and 12 months after the administration of anastrazole
(p = 0.008 and p = 0.001, respectively) (Fig. 2d). No statistically
significant changes from the baseline and follow-up
evaluations were reported for other items of QLQ-C30.
Discussion
Our preliminary trial shows that anastrozole can be a valid
palliative therapy in the treatment of EC in elderly women,
which not only improves the quality of life, but also helps
them to relieve the disease-related symptoms. Therefore
the oral administration of anastrozole and low side effects
improved compliance to the therapy in all of our patients.
In fact, this treatment demonstrated a positive clinical response
in 87.5 % of patients with an endometrial thickness
reduction. The clinical response to the therapy was associated
with global improvement and symptoms amelioration
(especially vaginal bleeding and pain), also in cases of
stable disease. In addition, Anastrozole therapy might
prevent the onset of further recurrences and reduce the
risk of endometrial hyperplasia.
Anastrozole is a third-generation non-steroidal aromatase
inhibitor, which is able to bind to the heme group of
cytocrome p-450 enzyme, so that the 99 % of the enzyme
activity appears to be blocked [18, 19]. Previous study has
shown that the use of aromatase inhibitors had a moderate
clinical benefit in case of recurrent/advanced EC [19]. The
review of Gao et al., suggested that the use of aromatase
inhibitors appears to be a potential active therapy in endometrial
cancer also in early stages [20]. Moreover Thangavelu
et al. demonstrated that the markers of proliferation
(KI-67 protein) and apoptosis (bcl2 protein) decrease in
those patients with EC treated with anastrozole in neaodiuvant
setting [21]. According to these biological and biochemical
mechanisms, the administration of anastrozole for
patients ineligible for surgery due to advanced age and/or
comorbidities provides to be beneficial as a palliative treatment.
Valenzano Menada et al. [22], demonstrated that
endometrial thickness during anastrozole therapy decreased
significantly also in breast cancer patients. The mean reduction
reported by the authors was 4.5 mm in those patients
with previous breast cancer treated with anastrozole
and tamoxifen, while in our patients the reduction of
endometrial thickness was 9.25 mm only with anastrozole.
These difference can be related to a proliferative
action of tamoxifen on endometrial tissue.
As the QLQ-C30 questionnaire reported, the global
health increased significantly twelve months after beginning
the therapy. The improvement of the quality of sleep
at six and twelve months was reported by most of patients
with psychological and physical benefits. Surprisingly we
reported a significant increase of fatigue declared; we
explained this result as related not to the side effects of
anastrozole, but, more likely, to the advancing age of
patients. Literature data were not concord about the
significance of fatigue in elderly patients. Weims et al.,
reported that fatigue increased in patients underwent to
palliative treatment comparing to adjuvant therapy, while
Jing et al., showed that fatigue was common in elderly not
cancer patients because of menopause and non oncologic
gynecological diseases [23, 24]. Unchanged values reported
in the other items of questionnaire are probably
related to the early stage of the disease.
Currently, some other therapies are available for palliative
treatment of EC, such as the use of progestagens,
known since the 1950s, because they seem to have antioestrogenic
activity by decreasing ER, by increasing
oestrogen dehydrogenase enzyme, and by blocking the
production of new receptors in endometrial tissue [25].
The use of aromatase inhibitors may be preferable thanks
to better safety profile in pluripathological advanced aged
patients. In fact, several sides effects have been reported by
the use of progestagens, such as weight gain, hypertension,
oedema, increases of blood sugar levels, sleep disturbance,
tremor, bowel disturbance, and other more dangerous
adverse effects such as thrombosis and pulmonary emboli
[26, 27]. Nowadays progestin therapy by IUS system
(Mirena) seems to be effective in the treatment of EC and
in the decrease of malignant progression [28]. On the other
side, oral therapy could avoid the discomfort caused by the
IUS introduction in elderly women. Head-to-head studies
in this setting are still lacking.
Even if our study enrolled a small sample of women,
the prolonged follow-up and the quality of life data improve
the significance of our results. Furthermore, larger
and multicentric studies are necessary to confirm our
data. In conclusion, minimally invasive surgery appears
to be the best option in elderly women for the treatment
of EC. Nevertheless, in those patients with reduced life
expectancy, the primary goal of palliative therapy of EC
is to reach an acceptable control of cancer symptoms,
good tolerance of the therapy and an adequate quality of
life: anastrozole could have all these characteristics.