Background
Spiritual care remains an integral component of Taiwanese
hospice care, with indigenous spiritual care taking root in
the first tertiary inpatient palliative care unit in Taiwan by
employing Buddhist chaplains to care for the patient in
death preparation [1]. Currently it is unclear how Western
definitions of spiritual care practices, such as aiming to improve
patient quality of life and coping with symptoms,
may hold in the context of Taiwanese hospice care [2, 3].
The objective of our study was to synthesize participant
perspectives through semi-structured interviews to ascertain
what it means to be a provider of spiritual care in a
Taiwanese urban hospice setting. We sought to gauge physicians
and nurses’ self-reported perspectives and current
practices on addressing spiritual care.
Spiritual care in Taiwan
How do health professionals define spiritual care as a
discrete clinical phenomenon? Spiritual care has been
distinguished from religious care in its non-specificity to
a faith tradition, but may still hold religious influences
[1, 4]. Provision of spiritual care has also been known to
influence medical treatment intensity at the end of life
[5]. A systematic review on discussing spirituality in a
medical setting demonstrated that patients desire to discuss
spiritual concerns, but medical teams infrequently
provide spiritual care; however, life-threatening illness
can make a physician more likely to provide spiritual
care [6]. An international survey encompassing nearly
300 palliative care physicians across 87 countries demonstrated
that support for researching spiritual care was
high on a global scale to guide best practices in palliative
care [7].
Spiritual care has received increased attention in
Taiwanese inpatient settings in recent years, with the
first private hospice in Taiwan founded with a Christian
orientation and the first public hospice at National
Taiwan University Hospital with a Mahayana Buddhist
orientation in the 1990’s [1, 8]. Clinical Buddhist Chaplains
(CBC’s) remain a mainstay of Taiwanese hospice
care, and often provide spiritual guidance to patients
and families during life-limiting illness [1, 9]. Spiritual
care is conducted by CBC’s through identifying patient’s
and family’s physical, psychological, and spiritual suffering
and planning care according to traditional Buddhist
dharma teachings, effectively reducing fears surrounding
the dying process [9]. Of note, while the term “spiritual
care” in Mandarin Chinese may hold an additional connotation
of death acceptance and subsequent peace of
mind, the term itself serves a similar function in Chinese
as it does in English for purposes of hospital care [10].
Outside of chaplaincy, the role of spiritual care in
Taiwanese healthcare practice is less defined [11]. Hospice
and palliative care physicians in the National Taiwan
University Hospital are primarily family medicine physicians,
who receive mandatory hospice training in Taiwan;
spiritual care, including learning the role of CBC’s, is a
mandatory topic in their training curriculum [12]. For
nurses working in hospice, more initiatives in spiritual
care training and research have been undertaken across
Taiwanese institutions [8, 13]. As all palliative physicians
and nurses in Taiwanese healthcare are also hospice staff,
hospice and palliative will be used interchangeably to refer
to our physician and nurse populations [12].
In Taiwan, caring for patients with advanced illness
has been influenced by sociocultural taboos surrounding
speaking the truth of adverse health circumstances
openly [14–16]. A phenomenon describing families performing
medical decisions on behalf of the patient to
mitigate their spiritual and psychosocial distress can prevent
candid discussion of terminal illness; however, it is
unclear how such sociocultural phenomena may specifically
impact spiritual care practices among healthcare
providers [16]. Taiwanese family practice physicians and
nurses, for whom hospice and palliative care training is
mandatory, are the mainstay healthcare providers in Taiwanese
hospice settings [12]. A 2019 task force representing
six Asian countries on advance care planning
stated the spiritual domain was essential to end of life
care; the same expert panel provides a reminder that
Asian people generally regard death as a cultural taboo
to discuss openly and urges providers to perform advance
care planning discussions with sensitivity to said
taboo [17]. Based on Taiwanese end of life care literature
suggesting 1) great interest in spiritual themes in inpatient
care and 2) difficulties in candid discussion of
death and dying due to sociocultural norms, interviewing
physicians and nurses about their experiences in spiritual
care can yield valuable information about how spiritual
care is perceived and practiced in the inpatient
hospice setting and what challenges healthcare staff may
face by involving themselves in spiritual care [15–18].
Methods
We recruited a total of 20 participants through purposive
sampling during weekday working hours within the
palliative care unit physician and nurse working area of
a single tertiary care hospital (Table 1). We excluded
those with uncompensated work in the hospice, nonfamiliarity
with Mandarin Chinese, and inability to provide
informed consent. We invited 23 total participants
and 3 refused, citing conflicting obligations. We identified
physicians and nurses who had worked in hospice
care for at least 1 year at National Taiwan University
Hospital (NTUH); we excluded those participating as
study personnel for concerns of biasing interviews. IRB
approval was granted from National Taiwan University
Hospital [IRB number 201805065RINC, approved 6/8/
18], and all individuals signed a written consent form before
participation.
Interviews were conducted in July 2018 by ZT, a medical
student with a degree in Religion and Psychology
with prior experience in qualitative research unaffiliated
with NTUH outside of the study. Prior to initiation of
interviews, she was observed and given feedback by the
supervising faculty members of the study practicing and
recording 3 mock interviews with family medicine residents
who had worked in the hospice ward. Demographic
information was obtained from participants
immediately prior to the interview. Interviews lasted an
average of 20 min and were semi-structured in nature,
where participants responded in an open-ended manner
to a series of four set questions with encouragement to
elaborate if applicable and verbal probes to share experiences
[19]. Interviewees were given a written copy of the
questions as a guide (Fig. 1). Interviews were conducted
in Mandarin Chinese and recorded using a portable recording
device. The attending physician members of the
study did not have access to interview transcripts or recordings
for house staff confidentiality. Interviews were
transcribed in Chinese using dictation software, proofread
and edited by a staff research assistant, then translated
into English by the second student assistant. The
interviewer was present at every part of the transcription
and translation process and was available to answer
questions and resolve discrepancies where present.
Data analysis
We employed a qualitative design with semi-structured
interviews and a directed approach to content analysis of
the interviews. Directed content analysis is an approach
in qualitative methodology which validates or expands
on an existing theoretical framework or theory and differs
from conventional content analysis in its usage of
pre-determined broad categories for analysis [19]. Interview
content was organized using Corpus Tool software.
We employed prolonged engagement (ZT), peer review,
clarifying researcher bias, a second coder, and development
of a coding system derived from the interview
questions (Fig. 1) for data reliability and validity [20].
The second round of coding involved a summative
process tallying the number of participants for which individual
themes appeared from these three categories.
Overall, both theme frequency and qualitative emphasis,
determined by group consensus, were utilized to select
emerging themes for presentation. A primary coder
completed the first review of interview content by reading
interview transcripts in English, taking notes, and developing
themes such as “communication” and “pain”;
lines of interviews coded as multiple themes or subthemes
were resolved by group consensus. At this time,
the number of individual interviews in which each subcategory
appeared throughout the coded portions of the
interviews was noted, along with exemplar quotes pertinent
to the theme. Themes were then selected for analysis
based on their frequency of appearance and
qualitative emphasis, which was determined by consensus
of three members of the team in a single meeting.
Multiple themes were compiled into one if they had significant
content or quotation overlap, also determined
by group consensus. TH reviewed transcripts and
themes at each stage of the coding process independently
to ensure integrity of the derived themes with
interviews.
Results
The study participants are described in Table 1. Out of
20 participants, 7 identified as “spiritual,” with 3 of these
participants identifying as Buddhist, 1 as Christian, and
3 as spiritual but not religious. The amount of time
working in hospice care ranged from 1 to 23 years. All
nurses were female and out of the physicians, 6 were
male and 3 were female. 9 participants were physicians
and 11 were nurses. Results are organized by responses
to individual questions (broad categories): definitions of
spiritual care, sources of spiritual distress, and challenges
in providing spiritual care. Examples are shown both in
Table 2 and below.
Definitions of spiritual care
A recurrent theme in response to the question of defining
spiritual care was understanding patient values and
beliefs, but responses varied greatly. They included how
the patient sees the meaning of life, figuring out the role
of a patient’s faith in their medical circumstances, and
providing a caring presence to patients. Of note, many
providers expressed “this is hard” or “this is pretty difficult
to define” prior to giving a definitive answer to this
first question. Participants frequently made mention of
the relationships between psychological, physical, and
spiritual phenomena. Several reported the assessment of
physical symptoms, especially ones refractory to medical
management, as spiritual care, and others focused exclusively
on meaning and faith.
“So I usually, for example, would review his life experiences
with him, for example, work experiences,
or some experiences with his family, and through
that figure out what this person’s values were and
are.”
“So mainly we make sure that physical problems
have been addressed, then we can help with their
spiritual and psychological states.”
“I think spiritual care has two levels: one is belief,
one is faith…belief refers to for example what he
thinks the meaning of life is, and faith refers to the
traditional religions.”
“We look at whether or not his physical comfort
level can be properly controlled by the adjustments
of medication.”
Sources of spiritual distress
A frequently reported source of spiritual distress was the
idea of the afterlife, especially whether one would still be
in pain after death. This was often mentioned with the
theme of poor family relationships.
“In clinical settings, we aren’t able to tell patients
where they’ll go [after death] for sure. We can only
listen to them, reassure them of all the good things
they’ve done in their life that they really did them
well.”
“A lot of patients would think that they won’t get
better, they’re just dragging the time out, just
spending money, spending family’s money, spending
family’s time and energy, and becoming a really
heavy burden.”
“Some people may think that when they were
young, they were irresponsible to their families, so
their children are not visiting them now.”
“The most difficult things are probably relationships…
his family may be willing to take care of the
post-death issues, but aren’t willing to take care of
him. So that patient didn’t really talk much.”
“At the time, the mom had a very big…I think it’s
also a spiritual pain. She asked me a very shocking
question, “Am I a bad mom?” but to me this is a
very obvious spiritual pain. She’d feel like her role,
her problems, her decisions, what she’s done may
have hurt her child, or given him more pain.”
Another theme of spiritual distress was difficulty in
communication at the end of life, specifically how the
provider felt that death was a sensitive subject that patients
and families did not want to approach.
“…whether or not the friends and family around
him can accept his emotions, how they interact, or
if the communication between family members is
minimal or not effective, his emotions may not have
a way out.”
Challenges to providing spiritual care
Participants listed the relative emotional, physical, and
social status of the patient, especially altered consciousness,
as one of the greatest challenges to effectively providing
spiritual care for their patients.
“And for some patients who are referred later, we
predict that these patients will have some things
that they struggle to let go of, but his state of consciousness
may also make it difficult for us to assess
and help them in these aspects.”
An emphatically and frequently cited challenge to providing
spiritual care was providers’ lack of preparedness
to deliver spiritual care. This was expressed as unpreparedness
in approaching the patient with spiritual concerns
and difficulty identifying what constituted spiritual
care and how to move forward with spiritual concerns
when they were expressed to the provider.
“…I can’t define it. To me I won’t know if this is
called spiritual care.”
“….because there isn’t an easier way to let me know
what I’m doing is spiritual are, then if there are professionals
helping together that’d be better, because
this is still too intangible.”
Discussion
The objective of this study was to gauge Taiwanese
hospice physician and nurse perceptions of spiritual dimensions
of end of life care from their own experiences
and practices working in an academic tertiary inpatient
palliative care unit with Buddhist origins. While literature
on hospice care in Taiwan has made mention of
spiritual themes at the end of life, to our knowledge, this
is one of the first studies which focuses on the topic of
spiritual care at the end of life from Taiwanese hospice
physician and nurse perspectives. We developed a preliminary
understanding of Taiwanese spiritual care in
hospice care from the perspective of physicians and
nurses through a directed content analysis of semistructured
interviews. Content was organized by three
broad categories: definitions of spiritual care, sources of
spiritual distress, and challenges in providing spiritual
care.
Regarding how providers define spiritual care, we
found that our participants frequently noted that spiritual
care was difficult to provide a concrete definition for.
Providers then came up with definitions of spiritual care
focused on outlining patient beliefs and values, providing
presence, and addressing physical symptoms as well as
emotional needs. Intermittent but inconsistent reference
was given to God or a higher power. Our participants
also noted that sources of spiritual distress included the
afterlife, burdening one’s family, and roadblocks in communication.
Providers named the social unacceptability
of candid discussions as playing a role in their workflow
regarding spiritual care. Lastly, in response to being
asked about challenges to spiritual care, our participants
reported the general state of the patient and providers’
lack of preparedness to be barriers to provision of spiritual
care. A lack of time and lack of professional training
in spiritual care are sentiments that have previously been
echoed in numerous Western hospice care settings by
healthcare staff [21–23].
Clinical implications
Despite institutional leanings toward promotion of spiritual
care in the NTUH hospice through its Buddhist
origins, physicians and nurses report definitions of spiritual
care that focus on broader patient needs and do
not necessarily present provision of spiritual care as a
discrete phenomenon. The present study highlights that
providers believe spiritual care to address basic goals in
improving patient quality of life during serious illness
but offer differing definitions of the scope of spiritual
care practice in healthcare. Combined with providers’
self-perceived lack of preparedness to address spiritual
concerns, this paucity of consistent, discrete definitions
of spiritual care may stem from both a lack of professional
training in spiritual care and a lack of clear definitions
and roles for spiritual care on a more global scale.
As in other East Asian countries, Taiwanese hospice
care arose largely from adopting Western concepts while
retaining many of its own sociocultural roots [1, 24].
Studies in Taiwanese inpatient settings have defined
spiritual care with elements of existentialism, religiosity,
and personalized care, with documentation in the literature
of spiritual care curricula developed specifically for
nursing staff in Taiwan using such elements; presence of
such curricula may vary greatly from institution to institution
[1, 25–27]. In our study, we noted frequent mentions
of interpersonal connectedness and fear of
repercussions of not treating family well in the afterlife;
physicians and nurses described that patient spiritual
distress was intertwined with how much the patient felt
they contributed to their families in life. The issue of
such social merit, or lack thereof, causing spiritual distress
at the end of life may represent a potential avenue
for intervention in future hospice and spiritual care
practice. Other East Asian contexts such as Japanese end
of life literature have defined spiritual care as the act of
addressing a lack of meaning and spiritual distress, as
well as the loss of relationships, worth, and sense of having
a future [24, 28]. This emphasis on relationship loss
as a key cause of spiritual distress parallels a qualitative
study in the Midwestern United States which interviewed
dying cancer patients about their experiences of
illness; however, unlike in this American study, our hospice
healthcare staff did not consistently mention relationships
to God as an essential part of spiritual care
[29]. Our results from our population of mostly nonreligious
healthcare providers are surprisingly compatible
with a study surveying Jordanian Muslim nurses,
whom despite their overt religious identification reported
providing spiritual care that was more existential
rather than religious in nature and infrequently made
explicit references to God [30].
In relation to the issue of communication at the end
of life, hospice physicians and nurses made mention of
difficulties discussing general end of life concerns
openly, despite the fact that we did not ask nor prompt
providers about sociocultural death taboos known previously
in literature [16, 31, 32]. A survey randomly sampling
clinic patients and their relatives in Taiwan
revealed that most patients reported valuing autonomy
with respect to a diagnosis of cancer, whereas relatives
were more likely to value the principle of beneficence;
this indicates that the influence of truth-telling in
Chinese culture may differ based on one’s position as
the patient or family, and candid conversations on end
of life issues may be limited more by family factors rather
than a patient’s desire to not know the seriousness
of their disease [32]. Family-oriented decision making
has been noted to influence DNR signing among elderly
patients in Hong Kong, another ethnically Chinese setting
[31]. While the emphasis which providers placed on
communication and lack of candid discussion indicates
that truth-telling may influence spiritual care provision,
providers did not specify whether challenges arose from
talking to patient or to family; rather, they referenced
the difficulty of having conversations about end of life
care in general. This is consistent with previous Taiwanese
literature noting logistical difficulties in provision of
patient-centered care by healthcare staff due to such
communication concerns [15–18]. As a lack of candid
discussion of terminal illness has been associated with
lower respect for autonomy and decision-making participation
among elderly Taiwanese patients, further investigation
is warranted to determine an ideal balance
between respect for patient autonomy and respect for familial
sociocultural norms [14]. Potential future work includes
developing family psychosocial interventions to
reconcile “truth-telling” of serious illness with traditional
practices that obscure adverse health circumstances, as
well as training healthcare staff to approach candid conversations
about end of life issues such as spiritual
distress in a culturally-sensitive manner [14]. Further investigation
is also warranted to determine if barriers to
spiritual care stem from difficulty in discussing spiritual
distress in particular or difficulty discussing any subject
related to death in general.
Study limitations
There are several limitations to this investigation. First,
it is a single-institution study encompassing a largely
non-religious sample of physicians and nurses. Findings
in this study reflect a subculture of inpatient practice in
Taiwan and are not necessarily applicable to other hospice
practices, such as in Central or Southern Taiwan.
Of note, most of our participants did not personally
identify as spiritual or religious despite working in a hospice
with a Buddhist background. This may have impacted
the perspectives they were willing to share about
spiritual care, as well as their interpretation of patients’
spiritual needs in the inpatient setting. Second, although
participant information was protected and anonymous, a
positive bias toward wanting to provide spiritual care
may be influenced by the formal professional expectation
to provide spiritual care within the hospice itself.
Third, despite our efforts to recruit as many of our staff
as possible for a comprehensive view of how spiritual
care is practiced in our hospice, physicians and nurses
spending more time near the inpatient palliative care
unit were more readily available for interviews.
Additionally, limitations in our analysis include influence
from summative or quantitative paradigms as the
number of times participants volunteered themes influenced
our perceived importance of said themes; while
this method promoted fair representation of participant
perspectives, it also came at the expense of presenting
more rich and thick interview content as described in
other qualitative studies [19]. Lastly, we did not separate
perspectives of physicians from nurses during content
analysis but treated them as a whole. Despite more extensive
literature on initiatives in spiritual competency
for nurses than physicians in Taiwan, the ramifications
of these training differences for physician and nurse perspectives
on spiritual care did not stand out in the
present study and this represents another potential limitation
[8, 11, 13, 26]. More research on processes of education
and training in spiritual care in Taiwan is needed,
especially for physicians, to elucidate any key differences
between physicians and nurses in spiritual care practice.
Conclusions
Using a qualitative methodological approach, we identified
several themes from Taiwanese physicians and
nurses’ self-reported practices of spiritual care in a single
academic institution’s palliative care unit. Our study
identified a key sample of physician and nurses working
in a longstanding hospice ward with a Buddhist background.
Many of these participants reported spiritual
care to be difficult to define in practice. To provide a
definition of spiritual care, providers responded with
understanding patient values and beliefs to assist with
coping, providing presence for patients, and relating
spiritual care to physical and psychological phenomena.
Themes in spiritual distress among patients and families
involved apprehension over the afterlife, broken relationships
with family, and difficulty attaining candid discussions
regarding one’s situation in the end of life setting.
Challenges to providing spiritual care included the state
of the patient, such as their consciousness, and lack of
confidence, time, and formal preparedness in delivering
spiritual care.