Background
When a person dies, the impact of caring for the person
who had suffered a period of illness or disease continues
for significant others left to grieve. They enter a period
of bereavement and grief. For other bereaved it continues
as anticipatory grief as bereavement began before
the death of their loved one.
[1]. According to Sweden’s national clinical cancercare
guidelines, all significant others should be offered
bereavement support regardless of where or how their
loved one died. When the patient has links with a
palliative-care team, upcoming bereavement support is
routinely offered. The team prepares the significant
others for bereavement in natural and careful ways [2].
However, how significant others experience such support
requires further research to gain knowledge about
how to form effective bereavement groups in health
care.
In this report, according to Parkes [3] and Shear,
Reynolds, Simon and Zisook [4] the concepts bereavement,
significant others, and deceased are used. Bereavement
is a state of sadness, grief and mourning that
follows the loss of a loved one. In the context of this report,
the bereaved is the significant other who is designated
the person closest to the deceased, i.e. the person
or persons the nurses had met during the loved one’s
period of illness or a person suggested by the significant
others. He or she has suffered the loss of the deceased,
and they need not to be formally related.
Grief
When the deceased has died following to a chronic illness,
the bereaved have time to anticipate and prepare
for the death. Some significant others begin their experience
of bereavement before death as anticipatory grief,
which is a normal response to the anticipation of loss.
Significant others start processing the forthcoming loss
before the actual death, and this is important for the
grieving process [5, 6]. Anticipatory grief can cause feelings
of being trapped in the caregiver role, when the
death is imminent [7]. It can also place significant others
in situations where, cognitively, they recognize the severity
of the disease but, on another level, they hold onto
the belief that death is avoidable [8]. However, chronic
illness may also have the opposite effect; significant
others fail to anticipate death because of the long-term
nature of the illness, and they adapt to the situation as
being normal [9].
Grief is not a uniform concept; it differs depending on
an individual’s personality, cultural and spiritual beliefs,
coping skills, socioeconomic status, and availability of
bereavement-support systems. Although most people experience
normal grief and cope well. Research has shown
that, after 6 months, it can be distinguished from
complicated grief [6, 10]. Complicated grief is characterized
by continuing severe distress and dysfunctional
thoughts, feelings or behaviours related to the loss. A
feeling of yearning persists and includes a strong desire
to be with the deceased, along with an inability or refusal
to accept his or her death, preoccupation with thoughts
about the deceased, and a habit of keeping reminders
close. Complicating factors are rumination about the
death and unrelenting bitterness or anger. Emotional reactivity
to or avoidance of reminders and social estrangement
are common, as are suicidal thoughts, since
life seems empty and meaningless, and joy is impossible
[5, 10]. It may be difficult to distinguish grief from depression
because thoughts of death and feelings of guilt
can cause both conditions [6]. Complicated grief and bereavement
have also been associated with increased
physical morbidity such as cardiovascular events, pulmonary
embolism, and acute coronary syndromes [5].
A good death
The aim of bereavement support is to ease the process
of grieving and strengthen the ability of the significant
others to cope [7]. In Sweden, the 6S model for care
planning, documenting, and evaluating the quality of
death originating from person-centred care, was developed
aiming to connect to a nursing context [8, 9]. The
source of the model is the World Health Organization’s
definition of palliative care [11] and Weisman and Kastenbaum’s
[12] questions for retrospectively determining
whether the deceased had an appropriate death. The
central point of the criteria is the personal focus. Weisman
and Kastenbaum suggested that an appropriate
death may be attained by preserving a person’s selfesteem
and respecting his or her individuality for as long
as possible; then, he or she may face death with the same
dignity as life [12].
The 6S model
The 6S model comprises six keywords (see Table 1) and
was developed as a nursing model of care from the perspective
of person-centred care [9]. In person-centred
care, seeking information about who the patient is and
his or her preferences for life or for a good death are of
great significance.
Seeking information about the significant other’s preferences
for the care of a terminally ill loved one offers
the same measure of dignity [9, 13].
Bereavement support
Literature reviews show that bereavement support is offered
in different ways, for example, as individual sessions,
family therapy, follow-ups to bereavement-group
programmes, voluntary bereavement groups, breathing
and stretching sessions, relaxation and meditation,
telephone calls, chat groups or invitations to memorial
ceremonies. Counsellors involved in bereavement support
can represent many different professions; they may
be registered nurses, clinicians, clinical psychologists, social
workers, research assistants, trained professional
counsellors, volunteer bereavement counsellors, trained
staff and family caregivers, formal caregivers or hospice
staff [14–16]. In addition, members of the clergy and
deacons are represented among grief counsellors [17]. A
review by Currier, Neimeyer and Berman [18] showed
that universal bereavement support, targeting anyone in
bereavement, may ease grief in a post-participating
phase but not in follow-up. When bereavement support
was provided to a targeted population at risk of experiencing
symptoms of distress related to the loss of a significant
other or violent death, the groups had a
significant overall effect (ibid.). Receptivity towards bereavement
support depends on a number of factors at
the individual, societal and geographic levels. Bereaved
persons described support based on shared trauma with
other bereaved persons in similar situations. However,
not all bereaved persons want to share their loss with
family-support professionals [19], and others do not
others do not experience the need for bereavement support
from health care professionals, as they feel they
have adequate support from family and friends [17, 20].
Yet significant others can struggle following the death of
a loved one if they have a desire to talk to somebody
and do not know where to get help [21]. Aoun, Breen,
White, Rumbold and Kellehear [22] found that informal
support from family, friends or funeral providers was
perceived as very helpful (92–88.3%: n = 678). The same
study found that bereavement-support groups were perceived
as helpful by 58.8% of participants.
Specific interventions in bereavement support that investigate,
for example, children’s or youths’ loss of a parent
or parents’ loss of a child have been described [14, 16].
However, research found that, in rural areas, providing
support was difficult and sometimes impossible to tailor
according to the kind of loss experienced [17, 23, 24]. Furthermore,
some significant others may not benefit from
participating in blended bereavement groups [23]. These
factors require further research about bereavement support
for persons in general where predefined groups are
not possible.
Aim
The aim of this study is to describe significant others’
experiences of participation in bereavement groups.
Methods
Setting
The study setting was a county in Northern Sweden with
about 130,000 inhabitants in an area of 49,935 km2 (< 1%
of the total Swedish population and 2.7 inhabitants per
km2). The county is characterized by mountains, rural
areas, and an urban area close to the only city in the
middle of the region. One palliative home-care team
comprising registered nurses and physicians specializing
in palliative care was based at the hospital that served
the whole county. This team, in cooperation with the
district nurses, made it possible for persons to die at
home. In almost all cases, significant others were spending
time with the patients in their final days of life. This
team treats approximately 150 persons annually. The
distances from the hospital, where the team is located to
the farthest patient could be 250 km one way. When a
person who was cared for by the palliative home-care
team died, the nurses contacted the significant others
connected to the deceased, i.e. the person or persons
they had met during the loved one’s illness or a person
suggested by the significant others. They informed these
people that an invitation to a bereavement group held at
the hospital would arrive within three to 6 months after
the death of their loved one. Accordingly, within that
time frame, the social workers and clergy members or
deacons working at the hospital extended an invitation
to the bereavement group by telephone. About one-third
of the significant others invited accepted the invitation,
resulting in groups generally comprising 7–12 participants
and 2–3 counsellors.
The bereavement groups followed the same rationale
recommended by the Swedish Church, with an underlying
theory of potentially positive results through the
verbalization and re-exposure to grief in a safe group
context. Each of the five meetings had a predefined
theme: 1) a presentation of the methodology and an
introduction to the group’s members; 2) a focus on the
period of the loved one’s illness before death; 3) a focus
on the time at death; 4) a focus on the period following
the death and the funeral; and 5) a depiction of a metaphorical
picture of the deceased and the significant
other’s life together [25]. The groups met for2 h once a
week for 5 weeks and included afternoon tea. Counsellors
for the groups included a nurse from the palliative
home-care team, a social worker, and a clergy member
or deacon.
Counsellors’ salaries were paid entirely by tax money,
with no charitable or other contributions. All had several
years of clinical experience meeting with and counselling
the bereaved significant others of palliative-care patients.
Social workers and clergy members or deacons have formal
education in counselling, while registered nurses
broach the subject during their basic training. The role
of the counsellors was to listen rather than to lecture
and to ensure that all of the participants had opportunities
to take part in the discussions. They steered the discussions
towards the expression of thoughts and
emotions. In a small number of meetings, the nurse
serving as a support professional had been caring for the
deceased. A very small number of significant others
might have met the social worker or clergy member or
deacon during the course of their loved one’s illness. At
the same time, the Swedish Church also provided bereavement
groups with the same concept to bereaved
persons, independent of the cause of death. Leaders for
these groups were paid by the Swedish Church, and
meetings were held in different parishes, some geographically
closer to the bereaved individuals than others.
Data collection
This study is part of a larger project that aimed to
analyze quantitatively the effects of bereavement groups
on grief, anxiety and depression [17]. A total of 124 bereaved
significant others invited to 10 bereavement
groups completed questionnaires that utilized the Texas
Revised Inventory of Grief (TRIG) [26], from which 13
questions were used in the study; the Hospital and Anxiety
Depression Scale (HADS) [27, 28], with 14 questions;
background questions; and open questions.
One of the open questions gave the significant others
participating in the bereavement groups the opportunity
to offer their opinions about the role of the groups in
their bereavement. The wording for the question was as
follows: “If you participated in the bereavement group,
what role has it had in your processing of grief?” Most
participants wrote more than five sentences; only a few
answered in only one sentence. The total data set
resulted in a word count of 3652 words, divided into 158
meaning units. Questionnaires with this open question
were completed 5 weeks post-participation and 1 year
later as a follow-up. The open question was not qualitatively
analyzed earlier. The post-participation (n = 46)
answers and follow-up (n = 39) answers are analyzed in
this study. For sociodemographic data related to the significant
others, see Table 2.
Data analysis
Reading the written comments made the researchers
consider how to analyze them. A qualitative content
analysis with a directed approach [29] was performed on
the answers to the open question “If you participated in
the bereavement group, what role has it had in your processing
of grief?” using the predetermined structure of
the 6S keywords. The 6S seemed to be a relevant tool, in
this concept evaluating the bereaved persons’ feelings of
a good death [8, 9]. The analysis included several steps.
First, all open answers were read several times to acquire
a sense of the message. Second, the text was divided into
meaning units consisting of a sentence, several sentences
or a paragraph with similar meanings related to the aim
of the study. Third, these meaning units were compared
in order to identify similarities and differences, and then
categorized according to their proximity to each of the
6S’s [8, 9]. The two authors (UN, KBR) performed the
analysis and discussed minor disagreements in a critical
dialogue until consensus was achieved. Quotations are
presented in the results section with the words used by
the bereaved persons in italics. All persons are given
pseudonyms.
Results
The findings emanated from the open-ended answers to
the question “If you participated in the bereavement
group, what role has it had in your processing of grief?”
They show that the bereavement groups gave significant
others opportunities to share their inner feelings. Another
finding involved the impact of the role of the palliative
home-care team on bereavement; see Table 3.
Self-image
In regard to self-image, significant others described their
experiences of participating in bereavement groups as a
positive form of support. The bereavement group contributed
to a feeling of being seen by others and provided
increased understanding of their own identities.
The group was found to be valuable in a challenging
situation. Mr. A, whose age was between 61 and 70
years, commented 5 weeks post-participation: I [now]
better understand that those who do not have someone
in their own household to share their grief with have
much more difficulty. I can more easily accept that I was
present at the very moment of death.
Other significant others expressed receiving no or
minimal support in regard to cognitive and emotional
aspects. They seemed unable to move on from their grief
5 weeks post-participation: I still have a hard time and I
cry a lot, but I guess that’s the way I am (Mrs. B, age
61–70 years). Over time, the follow-up answers illustrated
that the groups gave the participants a feeling of
commonality but that grief persisted. Mrs. C, age 61–70,
wrote: However, grief goes up and down and it needs to
do so. A big thank you to everyone who attended the
meetings and for the support we received.
Self-determination
Significant others described their experiences of participating
in bereavement groups as a forum for strengthening
their self-determination. The bereavement group
supported them in regaining a sense of harmony within
themselves by being co-actors in the group. Participation
was described this way 5 weeks post-participation: It
meant a lot to set words on what happened. Painful
memories came up to the surface again, but it was also
nice to talk about them [the deceased]. By narrating, we
made him “alive” again (Mrs. E, age 41–50).
Significant others also compared themselves to others
in the group. These comparisons were mostly positive,
but some did not want to share their grief in this setting.
Mr. F, age 61–70, wrote 5 weeks post-participation: I do
not want to discuss my grief with unknown people; I
process it by myself and with my relatives. Thus, he participated
only twice. Other significant others commented
that they also needed other kinds of support, for example,
individual contact with a psychologist. Over time
the follow-up comments about the benefits of participation
in the bereavement groups were both positive and
negative.
Social relationships
Bereavement groups confirmed social needs and that
significant others could depend on each other. They
gained insights about other persons’ journeys through
the grieving process and those who were in the same
stage of grieving as they were. Mr. G, age 51–60, wrote
5 weeks post-participation: [I] found out that we are several
in the same situation as me. You are not alone. Significant
others also sensed positive support from the
counsellors. The continuity and composition of the
groups were important, and participants offered advice
about the arrangement 5 weeks post-participation including:
Good arrangement. Possibly smaller groups –
maximum of five significant others. Missed “my” nurse
from the palliative-care team – the feeling of belonging
that was built up during the illness (Mrs. H, age 51–60).
Over time in the follow-up, the significant others wrote
about the positive feelings of sharing experiences, but in
addition, a need for further support was declared. They
asked for support from either some kind of psychologist
or from the palliative home-care team. Mrs. I, age 51–
60, illustrated this: I do not know how only the bereavement
group has influenced my grief. However, together
with appointments with my psychologist, it has been very
good for me. I do not close up anything. I hope that these
bereavement groups will continue and expand to be additional.
We are many who need support and help. You
have all done fantastic work!
Symptom control
Only one significant other mentioned a physical symptom
in the post-participation questionnaires 5 weeks
after the bereavement groups. Mrs. D, age 71–80, wrote:
Now I feel calmer and can sleep without sleeping pills,
thereby, expressing positive benefits from participating
in the bereavement group. Over time in the follow-up,
significant others related that the groups had been premature
in relation to their declining physical and/or
mental health. Starting with adequate medication was
helpful; Mrs. J, age 71–80, wrote: None [effect of the bereavement
group]; I think it came a little too close to the
death. I got depression in the early summer. I now medicate
with Citalopram 20 mg and feel healthy and strong
again.
Synthesis and summation
The group provided support for the significant others’
retrospective existential needs and created meaning in
the present. Mrs. K, age 61–70, wrote 5 weeks postparticipation:
It [the bereavement-group] had a great impact,
where each one could tell and cry about the trauma
that everyone had experienced. We became like a big
family, who felt the same grieve after the loss of our loved
one died. I felt confidence from the leaders who were
there.
The reflections that arose in the bereavement groups
in regard to being in a phase of existential loneliness
were experienced as support, but the feeling of grieve
was still present in everyday life 5 weeks postparticipation.
It was of great value to me, but the grief is
still just as big (Mrs. L, age 61–70).
Over time, the answers showed that some of the significant
others did not get on with their lives but rather
continued to feel grieve. Mr. F, age 61–70 years, wrote in
the follow-up: Not much [benefit from the bereavementgroup]
more than that, I was told about other peoples’
grief. However, every grief and experience is unique to
that person.
Surrender
In regard to the need for support, the answers revealed
that the death of their loved one was always with them,
but that the bereavement group offered great support.
The bereavement group’s structure of five meetings over
time was designed for passing through the different
phases of grieving up to the death, at the time of death,
and the period following the death and the funeral 5
weeks post-participation. The bereavement groups fulfil
a great function. I began healing and gained insight on
how others experienced their grief (Mrs. M, age 61–70).
Participation in bereavement groups gave significant
others strategies to help them realize that life goes on
and grief reaches closure, although it is always present.
Mrs. N, age 71–80, wrote in the follow-up: The grief
must take “its time”.
Significant others expressed at both occasions that the
counsellors helped the participants express their inner
feelings about grief in the present. They also offered
counsellors advice about the composition of the groups;
they suggested that widows and widowers should have
been in one group and younger bereaved persons should
have had their own group. An additional number of
meetings was also suggested to ease the bereavement
process.
The role of the palliative-care team
There appeared to be two different experiences of support
in bereavement – support from the bereavement
group and support from the palliative home-care team.
The support from the palliative home-care team was a
finding outside of the 6S’s.
The bereavement groups were considered very valuable
for providing a context for grief. However, the answers
also indicated the high value placed on the earlier
close contact with the palliative home-care team. The
team had provided a sense of meaning to the significant
others related to difficult situations in life and appeared
to serve as a kind of lifeline for grief in both the 5 weeks
post-participation questionnaires and in the follow-up.
Thank you for being there. [...] What would I have done
if the palliative-care team had not been there; I cannot
think of that. You do an incredible job. You are the relatives’
lifeline and comfort. Thank you for being there
(Mrs. K, age 61–70).
Discussion
Care planning for grieving significant others is as important
as the care of the dying person. To be strong
and to succeed in going on with one’s life requires the
individual to affirm his or her self-image, selfdetermination,
social relationships, symptom control,
synthesis and summation, and surrender. The 6S model,
therefore, was found to be a well-functioning tool for
analyzing grief among significant others.
The findings of the present study indicate that the bereavement
groups, in some sense, contributed to
strengthening the significant others’ self-images and gave
them a better understanding of themselves. The groups
gave participants opportunities to process the story of
the death and to make sense of it and of their upcoming
lives without their loved one. This aligns with international
grief therapy as described by Neimeyer [30].
However, not all significant others used the bereavement
groups as a catalyst to affirm their self-image.
Whether these significant others had come to terms
with the imminent death is unknown. Holland, Futterman,
Thompson, Moran, and Gallagher-Thompson [31]
suggested that non-acceptance of the upcoming loss
when the patient is still alive is a predictor for negative
grief experiences later. Identifying those individuals who
are likely to benefit from bereavement services should be
part of the palliative-care process before the death of
their loved one. Other findings have shown, for example,
that psycho-educational group interventions for significant
others before death can increase competence for
caregiving and preparedness for the loved one’s end of
life [32]. Nurses and physicians in palliative care should
pay close attention to expressions of grief in the early
aftermath of loss. However, participation in groups is related
to the date of death and can lose its effectiveness
in the long term. Findings confirm that, over time, significant
others are hesitant about whether the bereavement
groups offer any support at all [31, 32]. However,
Blackburn, McGrath, and Bulsara [33] found that significant
others can struggle with difficulties for longer periods
than formal support services are aware of. Followup
support to some significant others may need to be
continued for a longer time. Blackburn et al.’s suggestion
is that the community should provide that kind of bereavement
support.
To reveal one’s inner feelings in a group can be difficult
and may require self-determination. In bereavement
groups, significant others had the opportunity to decide
whether they wanted to discuss their grief and share
their inner feelings. Hefren and Thyer [34] recommended
guided bereavement support, which may be
helpful for relieving participants’ negative emotions and
avoidance behaviours. Guided support can be valuable
for identifying grief and enhancing bereavement even in
complicated grief.
Feelings of loneliness and isolation are common, and
many times, the bereaved struggle with these feelings.
Many among the bereaved participants had been half of
a couple (Table 2), and the loss of a spouse or partner
can be a risk factor for prolonged grief disruption. Participation
in bereavement groups can improve relational
functioning in the post-treatment phase and well-being
at follow-up [18]. Social support is a source of finding a
meaning and can ease the risk of prolonged grief [35].
Being a member of a bereavement group is a form of social
support. Research shows that being an ageing couple
can imply that friendships outside the relationship are
lacking. The spouse and family members are the only social
network [36]. However, this study’s findings illustrate
that the bereavement groups had a positive
influence on social relationships close to the death of the
deceased. Significant others experienced that participation
as providing a sense of coherence and understanding
that they could share with others in the same
situation in connection to their loved one’s death, as
confirmed by Blackburn and Bulsara [19]. Findings from
this study show that social relationships benefitted by
meeting other persons in the same situation in bereavement
groups. Participation can give valuable meaning in
life. The loss of a spouse or partner has been shown to
be significantly negatively correlated with having meaning
in life (−.25, −.29: n = 171) and with prolonged grief
disorder (.36: n = 171) [35].
The findings of Oliver et al. [37] showed that using
technology in bereavement can be beneficial. On Facebook,
bereaved significant others shared confidential
posts in private groups with a social worker as the facilitator.
Members’ relationships with the deceased influenced
the group’s responses; in Oliver et al.’s study,
spouses offered significantly more support to each other.
In addition, newly bereaved significant others received
posts from significant others who suffered bereavement
earlier (ibid). Sharing bereavement through social media
can be a way to offer persons living far away from bereavement
groups an opportunity to manage to go
through the death of a loved one.
Symptom control is also a key term in palliative care
for both patients and significant others and is habitually
seen as physical needs [5, 11]. However, the findings in
this study did not seem to indicate that the symptoms of
physical needs were alleviated. Rather, the benefit
seemed to be psychological. This aligns with Bergman
et al.’s review [14] about bereaved children who showed
no physical distress in grief.
Findings from the present study demonstrate that bereavement
groups were a source of a feeling of synthesis
in the retrospect of the loved ones’ death. However, significant
others also gave valuable advice about how to
assemble the groups. Not all were comfortable in a
blended group or with the time at which the bereavement
process was offered. Developing groups can be
challenging in rural areas as the number of bereaved is
small, and thus, the number of those in need of bereavement
groups is even smaller. Findings from rural
Australia also confirm this. In rural areas, all significant
others were offered the same bereavement support,
while, in urban areas, bereavement support could be offered,
for example, solely for those who were grieving
the loss of a loved one from leukaemia; this distinction
was appreciated by participants [23]. The earlier study
by Näppä et al. [17] revealed that living a large
geographic distance from the groups could be a reason
for not participating in bereavement groups. In the
Internet age, a way to manage time and distances might
be the use of online services for bereavement. This
already exists but is, in general, directed to specific
groups, for example, bereaved parents after the loss of a
child [33, 34] or bereaved children, for example, as
through CanTeen [38], a website that has a page for
children with parents suffering from cancer.
This study shows that bereavement groups gave significant
others the tools to accept the loss they had suffered
and recognize that life must go on. Group
membership has been found to provide therapeutic benefits.
Small, time-limited groups can lead to intimacy
and cohesiveness and promote mutual aid and support.
Members in the groups benefit from opportunities to
give, not just receive, assistance in the form of support,
understanding, comfort, and suggestions about how to
go on in life. In the long run, this empowers the bereaved
and enhances their feelings of self-efficacy and
ability to cope in bereavement [36, 39]. However, earlier
research has shown that bereavement interventions provide
therapeutic outcomes close to the post-intervention
time but fail to last in follow-up [18].
The findings from this study also demonstrate that the
role of the palliative-care team was unexpected. Significant
others experienced the support from the palliativecare
team as more valuable than that from the bereavement
group. The relationship that developed earlier
seemed to be more valuable, yet they participated in the
bereavement groups. Other research has confirmed that
the close, pre-existing relationships that develop between
palliative-care teams and nurses working in home-care
and the family members of the patients are highly valuable.
The interactions create relationships characterized
by mutual sharing of understanding and trust, almost
like a family [19, 40]. Aoun, Rumbold, Howting, Bolleter,
and Breen [41] found that about half of the significant
others who had received support from a palliative-care
team (n = 298) felt they were given as much help as they
needed from the team. Of these, only 10% participated
in bereavement groups.
However, support provided by palliative-care teams is
strongly related to available resources and opportunities.
Caring for bereaved significant others for a long period
will take resources away from the primary task of such
teams – providing palliative care for living patients.
Therefore, it is important to be clear regarding the setup
of work by the team while the care is on-going.
Implementing some kind of program, for example, the
one described by Holm et al. [32] with three sessions by
health professionals involving significant others in palliative
caregiving, can be a way to support the lives of significant
others following the death of a loved one.
Methodological considerations
Using the 6S for analysis may be controversial since it
was developed with the goal of having a good death. Our
belief is that, if the significant others experienced that
their loved ones had had a good death, their own experience
of grief could be connected to the 6S’s. Using this
model provided a systematic structure to the analysis
that was easily repeated. Studying the effectiveness of bereavement
support should align with the actual settings
to the greatest extent possible [42]. The aim of the bereavement
groups studied in this research was to provide
a sense of the loved one having had a good death.
Written comments without the possibility of asking
follow-up questions are always a one-way type of communication,
the interviewer would have had opportunities to
further develop the questions and gain more-complete responses.
As it was, written comments gave the significant
others opportunities to describe their experiences in regard
to the influence of bereavement groups and their
thoughts about the value of these groups. The time it took
for participants to sit down with pen and paper gave them
a chance to reflect and then record their thoughts and
inner feelings without the stress an interviewer’s presence
may have caused them.
Conclusion
According to the findings viewed through the lens of the
6S model, different kinds of support are needed by those
participating in bereavement groups. An advantage of participating
in such groups was that they helped for the significant
others to capture and share expressions for
enhancing their self-image, self-determination and their
needs for synthesis and summation. Significant others experienced
participating in bereavement groups as a recognition
of each other’s grief and moving forward in the
process of creating meaning and acceptance in daily life.
Overall, the bereavement groups showed that the grief
of significant others close to the death of their loved one
could be eased. However, moving forward, several of the
significant others were not sure that their participation
eased their grief. In addition, whether the groups help to
ease grief over the long term is uncertain. Significant
others may remain in a state of complicated grief. To
identify these persons, a routine of planned contacts with
the bereaved should begin before the death of the loved
one in a controlled way and be followed up later than 6
months post-death. Bereavement support was also experienced
from the palliative-care team who had met the significant
others before the death. The care from the
palliative home-care team was considered highly valuable.
The findings of this study have provided valuable knowledge
about the needs of bereavement support for significant
others participating in bereavement groups and have
implications for health care and social welfare.
