Background
Ongoing evaluation of palliative care services is crucial.
Good palliative care is a moral imperative [1] which has
‘social profit’ by positively impacting communities and
families. Better understanding of palliative care helps future
planning, which is vital due to the expected growth
in demand. Demand drivers include medical technologies
helping to increase longevity, but stagnant morbidity
among an ageing population [2, 3] means noncommunicable
diseases now account for over two-thirds
of global deaths [4], a trend set to continue as the postwar
Baby Boom cohort ages [5]. Social trends including
increased employment and smaller and more fragmented
families means fewer familial carers [6], all of which
drive demand for palliative care services. This situation
is placing increasing financial pressures on palliative care
providers to continually redesign their service offerings
[7]. Consequently, assessing palliative care quality is a
priority of many governments [8].
Palliative care terminology lacks consensus; sometimes
it refers solely to the final stages of a terminal illness [4],
while in other circumstances patients receive palliative
care alongside life-extending treatments. The term hospice
is equally confusing. US hospice is for people who
have a prognosis of 6 months or less [9], while UK patients
can access hospice care at any stage of life-limiting
illness [10]. What is important is hospice is a philosophy
of care that, like palliative care, focuses on care not cure
[6]. In the study location (UK), over 200 hospice units
exist, collectively supporting around 200,000 patients annually,
free at the point of service. They receive an average
of 32% of funding from the government, with the
rest coming from fundraising [11]. Services are delivered
through inpatient units, outpatient and day care centers,
programs (e.g. Living Well, Bereavement), and clinics
(e.g. Breathlessness Clinic), and hospice@home services,
with the combination of services unit specific. UK Hospitals
also offer palliative care; some have bespoke inpatient
palliative care units, while others offer services to
outpatients via a variety of clinics similar to those offered
by hospices. Our study focuses on specialist palliative
care services delivered either through hospice or
hospital-based bespoke palliative care services.
Recently, palliative care providers have striven to expand
and reach consensus regarding key quality of care
indicators. In the UK, projects include ‘Listening Differently
to Users’ [12] and ‘Every Moment Counts’ [13].
Well-known surveys include the Palliative Care Outcome
Scales [14] aimed at patients, the SPARC questionnaire
which is an early screening tool that ascertains
palliative care needs [15], and the Carer Support Needs
Assessment Tool [16] which aims to assess carer support
needs. Examples of US initiatives include the Measuring
What Matters program [17] and the CAHPS Hospice
Survey [18]. There are also some commendable attempts
to validate international measures, including the IMPA
CT project spanning five European countries [3]. Such
initiatives focus on quality measurement and assessment
techniques to drive service improvements [17].
However, major gaps in evaluation remain. Most of
the available instruments comprise short satisfaction
surveys. Though important, metrics fail to capture overall
user experience and provide little information about
how people felt. Some outcome measures are prone to
floor and ceiling effects [19], and high misresponse levels
[20]. Many measures are disease or location specific [9].
Systematic reviews reveal no survey that incorporates all
areas important to palliative care patients and their families
[21, 22] with many evaluations failing to take place
within clinical practice [23] and often failing to detail
systematic processes for developing quality indicators
[24]. Currently, there is substantial variation in the quality
of palliative care that people receive [1, 4, 25], and
many recent calls for more research into ways of evaluating
it [3].
Well-documented data capture difficulties when
researching palliative care also hinder research. Difficulties
include variable definitions of key issues [26], a hesitancy
to discuss mortality [27], and a tendency for
patients to formulate perceptions of palliative care solely
on the basis of the interpersonal relationships they have
with care providers which often leads to agreement that
their care is superb [28]. Additionally, high participant
attrition and a prevailing view that many hospice patients
are too vulnerable to participate in research [8]
has led to much research relying solely on retrospective
views of family members [22], which of course misses
key inputs from patients.
Capturing patient perspectives is pivotal for evaluating
quality [29] and patient-centeredness. Despite considerable
debate regarding what exactly comprises patientcentred
care [30] and certainly the concept is not without
its critics [31], patient-centeredness is part of the larger
transition from paternalistic professional and passive
patient to a more collaborative partnership, both in the
clinical encounter and more recently to include organisational
structures, cultures, leadership, and processes
[32, 33]. People experience healthcare services holistically,
so research should incorporate the whole range of
service dimensions that may impact that experience.
Taking the argument further, a shift in focus from ‘patient-
centred’ to ‘person-centred’ care is not just about
semantics. Person-centred care is “understanding what is
important for the individual as a person, not just a patient
with a condition. This understanding facilitates discussions
and shared decisions about personalised care
planning and management” [34]. Acknowledging that a
universal definition of person-centred care is elusive, the
Health Foundation [30] offers a person-centred care
framework that 1) affords people dignity, compassion
and respect; 2) is co-ordinated; 3) is personalised to fit
around individual needs; and 4) is enabling in that that
the traditional balance of power shifts from the professional
being paternalistic to a more collaborative partnership.
Additionally, person-centred care includes
families and caregivers [31], which is important because
family dynamics strongly influence individual experiences
of palliative care [35]. Thus, being person-centred
is about focusing care on the needs of the person rather
than the needs of the service [36]. To shape the service
around user needs, an in-depth understanding of these
needs is required. This concept is at the heart of service
design, which provides the techniques required for shaping
services in a way that ensures they are personcentred,
systematic, and collaborative [37].
It is on these foundations, i.e., the need to develop a
novel way of understanding and shaping specialist palliative
care services, using a methodology that is personcentred,
that captures overall user experiences, irrespective
of the nature of their illness and where they receive
their care (hospital, hospice, at home), and that uncovers
real opportunities for service improvement, that the Trajectory
Touchpoint Technique (TTT) was designed. The
aim of this paper is to introduce the TTT to palliative
care research. First, we explain the underlying theories
and concepts used to design the TTT. We then detail its
application across multiple palliative care settings with a
variety of palliative care service users. We define users as
patients and their families. Finally, we evaluate the benefits
of the new technique.
Methods
To design our new TTT, we used design science research
(DSR) as our overarching method. DSR is a
process that focuses on creating innovative artefacts that
solve organisational problems [38]. We followed the
well-established DSR process [39], which incorporates
three major phases: design, apply, evaluate. The design
phase includes setting objectives and actual artefact design.
The DSR process then moves to application, where
the artefact in used real settings. These two steps – design
and application – are detailed in our methods section
here. The final DSR stage is evaluation. We evaluate
our artefact – the TTT – against our objectives in the
results section of the paper, and against alternative
methodologies in our discussion.
Solution objectives
Our preceding discussion outlined three major issues to
consider when developing our objectives: the limitations
of existing palliative care evaluation methods; specific
data capture difficulties that beset palliative care
research; and the need for a person-centred methodology
able to capture the full service experience. Consequently,
our objectives are that our new methodology
should:
1. Be user friendly for all palliative care service users
irrespective of illness type or place of care.
2. Systematically capture the lived experiences of
service users, including subjective and abstract
dimensions.
3. Enhance understanding of what ‘good palliative
care’ means from the service user’s perspective.
4. Though innovative, be practical and functional from
the researcher’s perspective.
5. Uncover feasible opportunities for improvement to
palliative care services.
Kernel theories
New artefacts start with kernel theories and current
available methods and use these as building blocks to
design better artefacts [39]. Evaluation of potential kernel
theories from the service design and service systems
literature led us to utilize six different concepts as our
building blocks in designing the TTT, which we now
explain.
Service blueprinting
Service blueprints entail breaking down services into
their logical components, establishing different steps in
service processes, and examining the execution of these
steps in order to map a service at multiple levels [40].
Our service blueprint of ‘Blue Hospice’, our first collaborating
organisation, comprised service user actions
(e.g., accessing different information channels); service
user-provider contact (with doctors, nurses, counsellors);
support processes (e.g., admission processes) and the
physical evidence that impacts the service experience. In
sum, service blueprinting forces service designers to consider
countless tangible and intangible elements that impact
service experiences.
Servicescapes
Often overlooked in health, the physical, sensorial, and
social dimensions of services are key issues, yet little research
investigates the impact of servicescapes on the
psychological and social needs of patients, as well as
their coping resources [41, 42]. Servicescapes incorporate
three major dimensions: ambient (e.g., cleanliness,
olfaction, noise, furniture, visual attractiveness), design
(e.g., architecture, comfort, signage), and social. Servicescapes
have recently been recognized as extremely pertinent
to people at end-of-life [43].
Touchpoints
Touchpoints represent any point of contact between a
service user and any aspect of the service [44]. Touchpoints
are also “clusters of experiential elements that
foster product or service experiences” [45]. Hence our
touchpoints incorporate issues central to palliative care,
such as quality-of-life, spirituality, dignity, and ability to
cope with grief; acknowledging that palliative care experiences
comprise cognitive and emotional elements as
well as physical, sensorial, symbolic, and social [42]. We
wanted participants to discuss those touchpoints that
they felt were important, hence a crucial part of the
TTT is that people are free to select those touchpoints
that resonate with them. Nevertheless we had to begin
the process, so we identified as many potential touchpoints
as possible, from the sources in Table 1.
Journey mapping
The TTT examines the flow and processes involved in
accessing different palliative care services. As such, it
considers the uniqueness of individual journeys [10],
which are often nonlinear and incorporate different locations
(hospital, home, and hospice). This process, known
as patient journey mapping, is reflected in the TTT together
with emotional and physical touchpoints [42, 46].
Consequently, the TTT blends these two different approaches
to incorporate opportunities to explore different
experience dimensions. The starting point for a
service journey is when the user needs the service, not
when they first come into contact with the provider. In
order to understand access to palliative care, our methodology
needed to capture the point at which the patient
needed palliative care, through to the present day. For
some, the present day is days from death, for others it is
a state of bereavement. Using the journey concept, we
grouped the touchpoints into 7 categories, each representative
of one stage or major aspect of the palliative
care journey experience. The seven sets of touchpoints
are detailed in Fig. 1.
Rich picture methodology
We used rich pictures in the form of cartoons to depict
each potential touchpoint. Rich pictures enable people
to explore their subconscious [47] and can act as an
aide-memoir to help patients to construct their stories
[48]. Increasingly used in health research, rich pictures
are a systems thinking tool useful to explore complex
phenomena [49], and can reveal issues missed when alternative
methods are used [50]. In the first iteration of
the TTT we used real photographs and cartoon drawings.
However, during early testing of the TTT it became
clear that people far preferred the cartoons, hence the
images in Fig. 1. We printed each set of touchpoint images
onto large laminated cards and uploaded them onto
tablets. What is important is that respondents are free to
use all, none, or some of the images.
Experienced based co-design (EBCD)
Designed for healthcare services in the UK, EBCD
uses various qualitative techniques (interviews, observations,
group discussions) to identify emotionally significant
key elements – or touchpoints - of a
healthcare service. A video then shares key findings
with a group of staff and patients to explore ways to
improve the care pathway. Central to EBCD is its
qualitative focus on storytelling which allows for rich
insights into experiences, ultimately enabling codesign
and service innovation [51]. However, EBCD
limitations include its inability to deal with multiple
aspects of service, which leads only to small scale
changes rather than systemic alterations to service delivery
[52], yet it demands substantial resources [53].
Nevertheless, we took two key concepts of EBCD.
First, narrative and storytelling is at the heart of
EBCD [54] and we believed few other methods were
capable of capturing the complexity and emotionality
of palliative care services. Second, in recognition that
patients and their families may experience healthcare
services very differently to the intuition of staff [55],
we designed a methodology to allow users to talk
about touchpoints from their own perspective.
Ethics
The full institutional ethical process took in excess of 6
months to complete and included University attendance
and defence. The central research ethics considerations
of anonymity, confidentiality, voluntary participation, informed
consent, and vulnerability took on elevated scrutiny
for this study. To address these considerations, all our
communications (written and verbal) stressed both guarantees
of anonymity and our independence from the palliative
care providers. All communications stressed that
participants were free to stop their narratives at any point,
and without incurring any disadvantage. We allowed, and
encouraged, patients to have a friend or family member
with them when they narrated their stories; this was
mandatory for children and optional for adult participants.
Prior to accessing the children’s hospice, we returned to
the Ethics committee and one of the amendments to our
original approval was that we designed a child-friendly alternative
information sheet (containing cartoon pictures)
which was used by guardians to discuss the research with
the child prior to attaining informed consent. A second
amendment was that two researchers collected data when
doing so at a patient or bereaved family’s home. We also
designed a distress protocol which afforded participants
the opportunity to contact the hospice counsellor, their
family doctor, or their mental health provider. The protocol
also included steps to enable us to refer to the hospice
counsellor, with the participant’s permission. As a tightknit
research team, we had regular de-briefs and candid
discussions between ourselves, and we too had access to
counsellors if needed.
Sample and participant selection
Blue Hospice comprised the first (and pilot) study, after
which we collaborated with the range of palliative care
providers shown in Table 2. Table 3 profiles the respondent
samples. To ensure as much diversity as possible,
we used purposive sampling [56] to select hospices
and palliative care providers serving people of very different
socioeconomic backgrounds (Table 2). We also
ensured our sample comprised a full range of different
service users, including inpatients, outpatients, family
caregivers, and bereaved families. We incorporated
different socio-economic statuses though, as Table 3
shows, it was relatively difficult to identify ethnic minorities,
females were more willing to participate than
males, and service users tended to be of higher socioeconomic
groups. The sample does have a wide age
range, spanning 13 to 91 years old. In terms of sample
size, the first three rounds of administration of
the TTT (Blue, Red, Yellow hospices) suggested saturation
occurs at around 20 narratives. As the hospital
inpatient unit differed from the hospice, we oversampled
but found saturation to occur at the same
point. Because the Hospice@Home was a totally new
service, the sample size is greater for this
organisation.
Recruitment technique depended upon the type of
participant. For inpatients, during ward rounds, a doctor
decided which patients were well enough to participate.
A senior nurse then explained the study and gave those
identified as well enough an information leaflet with details
of how to volunteer. Recruitment of inpatients and
relatives was via posters and information leaflets given
out at reception. Outpatients and their families were
given information sheets at clinics and caregiver groups.
All recently (within 6 months) bereaved families and the
small number of discharged patients were sent letters
and in-depth information sheets containing contact details
of the team if they had any further questions, and
details of how to volunteer.
Data collection
Most in-patients chose to narrate their experiences at
their bedside, though others preferred to talk in a quiet
room at the hospice/unit. Some bereaved families opted
for a quiet room at the organisation, others elected for
the researchers to visit them at home. All the hospice@-
home patients, their caregivers, and the majority of those
bereaved requested home visits. Additionally, two researchers
paired up to conduct the first five to six conversations
for each organisation, ensuring a consistent
style across each in-depth interview.
After an initial introduction, participants were reassured
that the researchers were independent and all interviews
were anonymous and in confidence. We
clarified that rather than a traditional interview with lots
of questions, the conversation was about their story. The
touchpoint images merely act as examples and guides to
enable people to narrate their experiences in a systematic
manner. We made it clear that none of the touchpoint
image sets were completely comprehensive:
participants could talk around some or all of the pictures
at each stage. Participants were also encouraged to talk
about anything else in their journey that the touchpoints
omitted. We stressed that the aim of the conversation
was to capture their unique story of their palliative care
journey.
Every interview began with the ‘pre-arrival card’, i.e.,
the beginning of the palliative care journey from the
point at which palliative care was needed. For some,
other sets of touchpoints were not needed, for example
the final set ‘discharge and aftercare’ was not relevant
for inpatients and their families, while the ‘facilities’ set
was not relevant for hospice@home patients. The pictures
enabled participants to focus on the details at each
major stage of their journey, while they helped us to collect
data in a systematic manner. The technique we
employed allowed for a deep-dive in terms of probing
experiences, issues, examples, and feelings, yet interviewer
input was restricted mainly to questions such as,
“and how did that make you feel?”
Data analysis process
Manual thematic analysis [57] followed the verbatim transcription
of the audio files. In step one, vastly aided by the
touchpoint groupings, three experienced social science researchers
separately examined the data within each set of
touchpoints, identifying core and sub-themes. In step two
the researchers shared their identified themes, reviewing
and verifying the outcomes of step one. The TTT ensured
systematic data collection, which had the added benefit of
systematic and relative ease of data analysis. Between the
researchers, extremely high levels of agreement arose
around the identified themes.
Results
Tables 2 and 3 detail the 8 different palliative care providers
and the 239 participants who made the research
possible. The multi-cite study spanned 4 years, during
which time the TTT was designed, applied, and evaluated,
with several refinements made based on extensive
feedback. The resulting data set exceeds 2 million words,
making any full discussion of the results beyond the
scope of this paper, with its primary focus on introducing
the new TTT and evaluation of how it overcomes
several limitations of other palliative care evaluation
techniques. Moreover, in design science research projects
the results pertain to an evaluation of the artefact.
Consequently, what we predominantly give attention to
here is not so much the outcomes themselves but the
benefits of the TTT as a methodology that enables a better
understanding of all aspects of palliative care from
the user’s perspective. We therefore structure this section
around our five objectives.
Our first objective related to the methodology being
user friendly with all palliative care service users irrespective
of illness type or place of care. The cartoon images
made people smile and ensured the researchers
came across as friendly and informal. Unprompted
remarks such as, “It shows that you people appreciate me
and you are listening” (Patient), and “oh what a clever
way of doing it!” (Patient) were often expressed. We used
the TTT with one person who was illiterate, one with
severe learning disabilities, with children, and with older
people. The TTT did not exclude on the basis of illness:
we used it easily with patients with cancer, motor neurone
disease, severe COPD, and heart disease. Ease of use
extended to participants feeling comfortable with the research
instrument: “it was thoughtful and you made me
feel at ease” (Bereaved). Others felt narrating their pathographies
in this way was therapeutic, “it was important
for his story to be told and I’m glad I’ve done it” (Bereaved).
Thus, the first objective is met.
Certainly, the TTT achieved the second objective of
systematically capturing the lived experiences of service
users. The focus on journeys helped people to narrate
their story in a methodical way, with many commenting
on the depth of narratives, “you have gone through everything
so thoroughly, thank you very much” (Patient). Unlike
many palliative care data collection instruments, the
TTT captures the whole experience rather than focusing
solely on aspects of clinical care, and while the clinical
care results are rich, detailed, and extensive, narratives
also revealed a range of problems in the pre and post
phase of palliative care provision. For example, there are
often complications with referral, “… the communication
between the organisations is appalling … the left hand
doesn’t know what the right is doing” (Bereaved). People
told of the grave difficulties in access, “the situation at
home was disintegrating” (Bereaved), and too often
people heard of services serendipitously, “we were at the
hospital and I spotted a leaflet – I don’t know why the
GP had not mentioned it – we needed it a lot earlier …
because we have struggled” (Caregiver). Post core service
issues also arose, with examples including lack of clarity
among some inpatient’s relatives, “we were really worried
that we wouldn’t be able to cope with her at home”, and
outpatients, “if I have a recurrence … will I be able to access
some of the services? Hopefully I would, but erm …” .
The rich pictures proved to be excellent aide memoirs,
with “oh that reminds me!” being common responses
from both patients and their families. Hence the second
objective, to systematically capture the lived experiences
of service users, is met.
The TTT goes beyond the clinical encounter, and
while our results revealed deep and vital issues around
major dimensions such as pain management, ease of suffering,
dignity, quality of death, etc., in line with objective
3 our results also revealed the significance of an
assortment of seemingly small details that transpired to
be very important. Particularly important for female cancer
patients is haircare: “her hair...It just got the point of
being important” (Bereaved). Aromatherapy, too, was an
important aspect of wellbeing, “It feels lovely … It was
really relaxing … and I closed my eyes … It was marvelous”
(Patient). The therapeutic prominence of pets, and
the range of salutary activates such as music, arts and
crafts are also crucial service aspects: “I keep going to the
craft room and doing stuff, because it’s my way of escaping”
(Patient); “I’ve been baking. I’ve never baked in my
life …. And we’ve had such a laugh. I didn’t think I’d be
here laughing” (Outpatient).
Indeed, interaction with others who understand has a
major impact on wellbeing: “[My son] was with another
little boy and they were chatting away and this little boy
went ‘yeah, my sister’s dead now’ and my son said ‘oh
really?’ he said ‘yeah, but she was a bloody nuisance anyway’
so you know, it was just, they can say whatever they
want to say and it doesn’t matter, it doesn’t matter, they
need to say it, they don’t mean it but they need to say it,
so that’s why the hospice is brilliant” (Caregiver). However,
a preference for a shared ward over a private room
is clearly dependent on the individual: “he is a relatively
quiet and private person, he would prefer a room of his
own but that is not possible is it?” (Caregiver), while for
others the opposite is true, “he went into a side ward he
didn’t like it at all … he was very upset …. They moved
him back eventually, but he was really really upset over
that, maybe he should have been asked beforehand?” (Bereaved).
In line with our third objective, these examples
clearly enhance our understanding of what ‘good palliative
care’ means from the service user’s perspective.
Our fourth objective was to design a methodology that
was innovative yet practical and functional for researchers
to use. Collectively, this team of researchers has over 50
years’ experience in gathering and analyzing experiential
data. In comparison to alternative data collection methods,
we found the TTT to be extremely advantageous. First, the
absence of an interview protocol allowed us to concentrate
solely on the stories told by participants; enabling us to
probe intensely to gather rich and deep data. People were
astonished as to how much they had so say, having previously
thought they could contribute little. Second, because
the touchpoint sets follow a journey, the TTT enabled us
to capture experiential data around different and sometimes
complex service aspects in a highly logical way. Systematic
data collection also made for systematic analysis, and
striking was the relative ease of analysis and the high levels
of agreement between us regarding emerging themes. Finally,
the cartoon images somehow makes people feel
more relaxed than they expected, which in turn makes it
easier for researchers to initiate potentially distressing
conversations. Indeed, expressions of gratitude at the sympathetic
manner in which the TTT gathers data is
summed up by comments such as: “you’ve both been so
kind, it was thoughtful and you made me feel at ease” (Bereaved).
Undoubtedly, the TTT achieves this objective.
That the TTT also met its final objective of uncovering
feasible opportunities for improvement to palliative care
services is succinctly articulated by this quote from a Hospital
Trust executive, “… in the development of this novel
approach of patient engagement for evaluating the quality
of clinical care, findings have illustrated the approach uncovers
data which had hitherto remained hidden/undisclosed
using traditional approaches. The collaboration
seeks to maximize the learning and innovation from different
clinical and academic sectors, to address a problem
which has often been tackled from a singular perspective –
with limited success …. We are already exploring additional
areas where the TTT may provide novel solutions
to longstanding clinical problems.”
We discovered many examples of excellent care and
outstanding staff. We fed back our findings and recommendations
to each provider using a format whereby we
couched our results in terms of the areas where palliative
care was already excellent, and where it could be
made better. Rather than detailed reports that many
front-line staff members would have no access to, we fed
back to staff with presentations based on the colourful
touchpoint images. Around each journey stage, we explained
those service areas (and there were many) that
were already excellent. We then presented those areas
where improvements could be made. We always used
quotes from patients and their families when we presented
these results. These quotes resonated: indeed,
several times staff were visibly moved by the praise and
admiration provided around those areas that were
already excellent. This seemed to open up a willingness
to push to do even better, and when areas where service
did not reach excellence were presented in the words
used by patients and families, staff became energized to
rectify problems. We did not provide solutions: we
merely provided the results and recommendations for
change, synthesized into themes, and illustrated through
quotes that resonated. We then summarised the major
findings on large posters, each poster relating to one set
of touchpoints. The posters were divided into 4 sections.
One section illustrated (using quotes) those service areas
that were already excellent; the second detailed those
areas that could be improved. The third pertained to our
recommendations for change. The fourth was blank: it
merely invited staff to write (or use post it notes) their
ideas for how change could be implemented from a practical
perspective. Thus the start of the change process, via
involvement, had begun. On the whole we found an appetite
among staff to engage with the process and make an
often very good service even better.
Our collaborating organisations have already begun to
make changes based on the results, and a great deal of
work is still ongoing for all our partners. Hence, for the
sake of brevity, we limit our reporting of some of the
changes to a brief overview, which are detailed in
Table 4. As can be seen, there is no doubt that our final
objective, to uncover feasible opportunities for improvement
to palliative care services, has been exceeded; testimony
to this is demonstrated by the many changes
already implemented.
Discussion
Recognising the many problems pertaining to palliative
care assessment discussed in the beginning of this paper,
Meier [58] recently acknowledged the difficulties of fashioning
an empirical tool that is “feasible, actionable, and
patient centred to directly assess the patients’
perceptions of hospice or palliative care” (p.352). The
TTT is indeed an empirical tool designed with the patient
and their families firmly at its centre. Interpretive
methodologies, particularly narrative and stories, are by
far the most powerful way of accessing personal human
experience [54]. Not only does this overcome the limitations
of surveys or even qualitative methods with predetermined
questions, it also takes a truly personcentred
perspective. Person-centeredness epitomises the
deepest parts of our humanity and represents the intangible
components of patient-centred care [30]. The
uniquely human and subjective nature of stories enable
a deep dive into the lived experiences of palliative care
service users, and not only confirmed and enriched understanding
of known factors, but also brought new factors
into view [59].
The TTT eliminates the need for predetermined questions
and therefore avoids problems of metric-based
measures which fail to reveal how people really feel. The
TTT captures subjective and abstract dimensions of palliative
care services that are important to users, effectively
spotlighting aspects often omitted from surveys
[21–23]. The TTT gives control to participants; they are
free to talk about service aspects important to them,
which may differ from those intuitive to providers [55].
Unlike surveys that are prone to misresponse and fall/
ceiling effects [19, 20] the TTT encourages people to reveal
their stories of their palliative care journeys deeply,
extensively, and in great detail. Nor is the TTT disease
or location specific. The TTT is inclusive: it overcomes
the prevailing view that palliative care patients are too ill
to participate in research [8] and allows extremely ill
and vulnerable people to still have their voices heard.
We utilised the TTT with cancer and non-cancer patients,
with inpatients and outpatients, with families currently
caring for people, and with bereaved families. No
disease or location problems emerged in terms of administering
the TTT. Unlike many alternative evaluation
methods that fail to provide recommendations for improvement
[21], the TTT uncovers feasible, actionable,
and workable solutions to some palliative care problems.
The TTT also overcomes some well-documented data
collection problems specific to palliative care. We found
no evidence of the reluctance to speak about death and
dying that is prevalent in society [27]. Rather, we found
a real appetite among patients and their families to participate
in the research. In fact, several times a patient
who had not been invited to participate on the basis that
they seemed too unwell, actually asked could they be
considered after they had heard of the study from other
patients. We also found the TTT enabled people to talk
candidly even when they had formed an attachment to
caring staff [28]. Perhaps it is the abstract nature of the
cartoon pictures, which without doubt put people at
ease, which enabled these frank discussions. Certainly
prior research finds rich pictures are able to uncover
previously hidden issues [48].
The design of the TTT enables data to be collected and
analysed systematically, which is crucial given that literature
often omits the systematic processes utilized to develop palliative
care quality indicators [24]. Importantly, the TTT
goes beyond the clinical encounter, viewing a person’s palliative
care experiences as a holistic journey that incorporates
myriad tangible and intangible touchpoints. This
broader perspective is increasingly important in palliative
care research [22, 32], but too often pre-designed healthcare
evaluation surveys focus solely on the care provided to
patients by healthcare staff, and fail to consider these wider
issues [33]. Finally, the healthcare paradigm shift to personcentred
care shifts our view of healthcare services from a
dyadic exchange between clinician and patient to one that
acknowledges that health services operate as complex networks
of multiple entities. Our results demonstrate problems
with key linkages in the current system and highlight
some significant research gaps.
Conclusions
Palliative care providers are already under pressure to
conduct research that facilitates better understanding of
user needs [12, 18, 22], not least because there is currently
a struggle to meet the demands of adequate palliative
care [4], and demand is set to rise dramatically [2].
Understanding palliative care user needs is important
because person-centred care recognises that users have a
right to inform decisions and collaborate with healthcare
providers about services [34]. Palliative care assessment
is also a priority for many governments [8], with quality
assessment important for ascertaining both financial
value [60] and social value, as well as the moral imperative
to ensuring terminally ill people receive quality care
[1]. Yet, relatively little research is conducted into this
core element of healthcare [61]. Reviews of current palliative
care evaluation tools have revealed major gaps in
that they fail to assess all dimensions of care [21, 22]
with many not tested in clinical practice [23]. Consequently
there are many recent calls for more research
into evaluating palliative care [13, 32]. In response we
developed the trajectory touchpoint technique (TTT), a
deep dive methodology that harnesses experiences for
enriched understanding of palliative care and uncovers
areas for improvement. The TTT incorporates a variety
of social science perspectives as its kernel theories, including
service blueprinting [40], recent thinking on service
journeys [45], touchpoints [44], servicescapes [42],
EBCD [51, 54], and rich picture methodology [47, 48].
The result is a unique methodology that captures the
whole palliative care journey, including the linkages between
the stages and phases of that journey. The methodology
includes both patient and family experiences,
which is important for palliative care services [9].
DSR demands that new artefacts are tested and validated
in real situations [39]. We have demonstrated empirically
that the TTT overcomes many limitations of
existing methodologies. The TTT is not difficult to use,
irrespective of user type or place of care. Its use of cartoons
put people at ease and enable in-depth storytelling
in a relaxing manner. The 7 groups of touchpoints aid
systematic data collection across the whole palliative
care journey. The technique incorporates all dimensions
of the service that are important to the user; integrating
the emotional, physical, sensorial, and social elements of
the service. It also allows people to talk about areas specific
to the final journey: issues such as spirituality, dignity,
the need for counselling and support, and grief.
Unlike the traditional methods of medical record review
and retrospective data, data collection methods that reveal
actionable results that lead to meaningful changes
are crucial to implementing improvements to palliative
care [24]. Our TTT uncovered numerous areas for palliative
service delivery improvement, and our collaborating
organisations have already begun to make improvements
based on our results. Hence the TTT overcomes a limitation
of many palliative care tools which often fail to make
recommendations to address unmet needs [21]. The resource
and time costs of the TTT are perhaps marginally
higher that of a survey, but are a fraction of the $40,000
for a typical EBCD project [53], and yet provide far richer
results. Limitations of the study include the fact that it has
not been applied in all locations where palliative care occurs
(for example, care homes) and is thus far limited to
UK palliative care providers. As noted in our introduction,
the UK differs from other countries so testing the TTT
outside the UK is worthy of further research.
In research, storytelling [62], servicescapes [42], touchpoints
[44], and rich pictures [49, 50] are not new. The
ways these concepts, and others such as service blueprinting
and patient journeys, are blended together
makes the TTT unique. The TTT responds to calls for
more comprehensive tools to assess palliative care,
expanding the focus of inquiry from the clinical encounter
to macro-level organisational systems [33] in order
to enable discrete interventions that enhance patientcentred
palliative care.