Background
In the literature, only 10 case of cecal epidermoid cysts
(CECs) have been reported [1, 2], with its pathogenesis
remaining unclear. CEC can be congenital or acquired in
origin. In the congenital form, it is thought to develop
from ectodermal implantation during embryogenesis
and development, whereas in the acquired form, it is
thought to develop from epithelial implantation secondary
to previous trauma or surgery [3, 4]. Additionally,
epidermoid cysts are more commonly found in the
mediastinum, head and neck, sacrococcygeal area, central
nervous system, and gonads [3]. Thus, we report a
case of congenital CEC and discuss its clinicopathological
findings and possible pathogenesis.
Case presentation
A 28-year-old woman underwent regular follow-ups at
an antenatal clinic, without needing any medication. At
24 weeks of gestation, an intra-abdominal cystic mass,
approximately 2.0 × 1.5 cm in size, was found during
routine prenatal ultrasonography (US). Its size increased
to 3.5 × 2.4 cm at 32 weeks of gestation, and thereafter,
it ceased to grow until delivery. The amniotic fluid index
at 32 weeks of gestation was 1.5 cm, and this was maintained
at 1.3 cm by 36 weeks of gestation. Eventually,
the male neonate was born at 38 weeks and 2 days of
gestation via normal spontaneous vaginal delivery, with
Apgar scores of 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively.
He had a body weight of 3500 g (50th percentile), height
of 49.0 cm (45th percentile), and head circumference of
35.5 cm (55th percentile). Initial physical examination
revealed a soft abdomen with no distention.
Abdominal US performed 25 h after birth showed a
large cyst (4.2 × 2.3 × 4.2 cm) with echogenic material,
fluid, and calcification, which originated from the
retroperitoneum and was located in front of the inferior
vena cava and descending aorta (Fig. 1a). Due to the
echogenic shadowing of the calcific components, we decided
to perform magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
rule out the possibility of a retroperitoneal teratoma. At
2 days of age, contrast-enhanced MRI of the abdomen
was performed for further evaluation. Pre-contrast coronal
T2-weighted MRI showed an intermediate to high
signal intensity (SI) of a heterogeneous mass with a
small low SI component. Further contrast-enhanced fatsaturated
T1-weighted MRI of the coronal and transverse
views revealed a cystic mass (4.6 × 4.5 × 5.3 cm)
with an air-fluid level and multiple minute low SI components
(Fig. 1b, c). Moreover, an increasing radiolucent
cystic mass in the right lower quadrant (RLQ) began to
appear 8 h after birth on serial infantography (Fig. 2).
The patient underwent emergency laparotomy performed
by a pediatric surgeon on day 3 of life. Under
general anesthesia, the cystic mass was exposed, and
over 20 mL of air and dark brown mucinous fluid were
aspirated through a syringe (Fig. 3a). The cystic mass
was attached to the cecum, prompting the need for an
ileocolectomy with end-to-end anastomosis. Five days
post-surgery, the patient started feeding with mother’s
milk, and the postoperative course was uneventful. He
was discharged 10 days after the surgery without any
complications.
On macroscopic examination, a cyst was identified
without any macroscopic connection to the cecal lumen.
The cyst contained a dark brown mucinous fluid, and
the mucosal and serosal surfaces of the cecum were unremarkable
(Fig. 3b). On microscopic examination, cyst
wall was located at the subserosal layer of the cecal wall,
composing of mucosal lining cells and submucosal connective
tissues. The cyst cell lining was composed of mature,
keratinized, or non-keratinized stratified squamous
epithelium and focally mucin-producing ciliated stratified
epithelium; however, there were no findings of
gastrointestinal mucosal epithelium in the entire cyst
and there was no smooth muscle outer layer in the cystic
wall, except for an attached portion of the cecal wall.
Transition areas between the squamous and mucinproducing
ciliated epithelia were noted in some foci. Immunohistochemical
examination revealed that the colonic
mucosa was reactive to MUC2, while the mucinproducing
ciliated epithelium of the cystic mucosa was
reactive to MUC5AC (Fig. 4). The boy has had no further
symptoms and is doing well. We are scheduled to
follow up at age 6 months with abdominal US.
Discussion and conclusions
The present report describes a case of CEC in a newborn.
Only 10 CECs have been reported in English literature,
with the only one pediatric patient being an 8-year-old girl [1, 2]. Epidermoid cysts are generally considered
sequestration cysts that may be congenital, but
some CEC cases were attributed to iatrogenic implantation
of epidermal fragments by surgical devices during
the previous abdominal operation, such as appendectomy
or cesarean surgery [2]. With recent advances in
US techniques, fetal abdominal cysts are being reported
more often, with ovarian cysts as the most common type
in the fetal period [5]. CEC clinical diagnosis remains
difficult because it can be confused with ovarian cysts,
lymphatic cysts, mesenteric cysts, intestinal duplication,
appendiceal mucocele, and meconium pseudocyst, especially
if the diagnosis is established in the prenatal period
[6]. The treatment of choice for CEC is surgical
resection. Since residual squamous epithelial tissues may
lead to recurrence and have malignant potential,
complete removal is warranted [7, 8]. Although accurate
preoperative diagnosis allows appropriate surgical planning
and provides a good prognosis, this becomes difficult
for neonatal CECs.
Two pathogenic mechanisms have been proposed for
congenital sequestration. One mechanism suggests that
ectodermal implantation occurs at the time of neural
groove closure during embryogenesis; however, some researchers
have postulated that given the location of the
cecum and the neural groove or other epithelial fusion
lines, this mechanism would be unusual [3]. Another
mechanism is that the origin of the congenital
heterotopic tissue may have transpired during the
intrauterine rotation of the gut back into the abdominal
cavity, especially since the cecum is one of the
last elements to re-enter the abdomen [4]. Furthermore,
the fact that most CECs occur in the subserosal
layer supports this mechanism. In the present case
of congenital CEC, heterotopic epithelial tissue was
located in the subserosal layer, which is suggestive of
ectodermal implantation during intrauterine rotation
of the gut. Additionally, mucin-producing ciliated
stratified epithelium was identified in this case and
this epithelium resembled a bronchial epithelium.
This finding could suggest a possible pathomechanism
which may be related to the bi-differentiation of heterotopic
ectodermal inclusion tissue. We hypothesized
that ectodermal tissue was sequestrated in the subserosal
layer of the cecum during the rotation of the gut
back into the abdominal cavity, wherein these tissues
differentiated into both squamous and mucinproducing
ciliated epithelium. A previous report suggested
that the most likely explanation for CEC development
and its sharing of the cecal muscular wall is
the result of aberrant embryonic ectodermal implantation
during embryogenesis [9]. Our present case
showed a subserosal cyst composed of squamous mucosa
and submucosal connective tissue, which supports
the aforementioned proposed mechanism.
Furthermore, immunohistochemical phenotypes of
cecal and cystic mucosal epithelium were different;
colonic mucosa was reactive to intestinal mucin
MUC2, while the mucosa lining the cyst wall was reactive
to gastric and bronchial mucin MUC5AC.
When we evaluated the serial radiographs in this case,
the RLQ intraluminal gas, which initially did not appear
until after birth, continuously expanded. These
findings suggest that the cyst was connected to the
intestinal lumen, even though the macroscopic examination
revealed no connection between two. On
microscopic examination, there was one focus of the
junction between the cecal and squamous epithelium
which was located in the cecal muscularis propria,
suggesting a microscopic fistula. Thus, we assumed
that the two lumens may have been connected
through the microfistula.
In conclusion, considering that epidermoid cysts can
develop in the cecum during the perinatal period, the
management of a fetal abdominal mass should be tailored
individually. Moreover, the possibility of CEC
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of subserosal
cysts in the cecal area, and the cyst should be
completely removed to achieve a good prognosis.

