Background
Biannual oral mass azithromycin distribution to children
aged 1–59 months has been shown to reduce all-cause
child mortality in some settings in sub-Saharan Africa
[1–4]. The primary mechanism is likely via reduction in
infectious burden [5]. Undernutrition is an underlying
cause in as many as 50% of child deaths [6]. Undernutrition
may predispose children to infection, and infection
may prevent weight gain during the period of recovery
[7]. Children experiencing undernutrition have elevated
risk of mortality from infection compared to those with
infection who are not undernourished [8]. Antibiotics
have growth-promoting effects in children with recognized
clinical illness such as HIV, and have been shown
to reduce mortality in some settings in children with severe
acute malnutrition [9, 10]. Antibiotics may lead to
increased weight gain via reduction in clinical and subclinical
infections, through reducing inflammation, or
through alteration of gut microbiome [7, 11]. Azithromycin
may affect growth and nutrition outcomes via
such pathways, contributing to overall observed reductions
in mortality.
Studies of mass distribution of azithromycin for trachoma
control have evaluated the effect of azithromycin
distributed to entire communities on anthropometric
measurements in children [12–15]. These studies have
not shown evidence that mass azithromycin distribution
or increased frequency of mass azithromycin distribution
significantly affects indicators of nutritional status including
stunting, underweight, and wasting. These studies
randomized entire communities to different
azithromycin distribution strategies or to no azithromycin
distribution. They were therefore limited by the
number of clusters randomized and by lack of longitudinal
measurements.
We recently conducted an individually randomized
trial designed to assess potential mechanisms for any effect
of azithromycin on childhood mortality, including
alterations in the pediatric microbiome and infections.
Here, we report linear and ponderal growth in children
receiving a single oral dose of azithromycin compared to
placebo with longitudinal measurements. We hypothesized
that children receiving azithromycin would have
improved growth compared to those receiving placebo.
Methods
Study design
This study was a 1:1 individually randomized placebocontrolled
trial comparing single dose azithromycin
(20mg/kg) to matching placebo. This study was
registered at clinicaltrials.gov before recruitment of
the first participant (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03676751,
registered 19/09/2018).
Study setting
This study was conducted in the town of Nouna, Burkina
Faso in northwestern Burkina Faso. Nouna is the
capital of the province of Kossi and has approximately
20,000 residents. Children were enrolled in November
2019 during the annual harvest season and the primary
endpoint occurred in June 2020, at the beginning of the
rainy season. All primary endpoint visits occurred during
the pre-specified visit window, which allowed visits to
occur up to 6 weeks after the scheduled time point (6
months after enrollment).
Ethics
This study was reviewed and approved by the Institutional
Review Board at the University of California, San
Francisco and the Comité National d’Ethique pour la
Recherche (National Ethics Committee of Burkina Faso)
in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Written informed consent
was obtained from the guardian of each child prior
to participation.
Eligibility and recruitment
Study staff visited households with children under 5
years of age known to be resident and informed caregivers
about the study. Interested caregivers were asked
to bring their children to the Nouna District Hospital
for eligibility assessment and enrollment. Eligibility criteria
included: 1) between 8 days and 59 months of age;
2) living in the town of Nouna and not planning to move
during the 6-month study period; 3) ability to feed orally
(and thus receive the oral study medication); and 4) no
known allergies to macrolides. Caregivers were given a
small reimbursement for transportation costs for each
study visit (approximately USD$1.85 per visit).
Study procedures
All study procedures occurred at the Nouna District
Hospital by trained study staff and healthcare workers.
Participants were evaluated at baseline, 14 days after enrollment,
and 6 months after enrollment. At baseline,
caregivers completed a short baseline questionnaire that
included mother’s age and educational status and the
child’s breastfeeding status (Supplemental Material).
Randomization and masking
Children were randomized in a 1:1 fashion to azithromycin
or matching placebo. The allocation sequence was
generated through unrestricted randomization by the
study biostatisticians with no blocking or stratification.
The randomization sequence was implemented by
assigning a letter to azithromycin and placebo and
assigning each child a study identification number that
was linked to the treatment letter in the study’s mobile
application. Allocation concealment was achieved as
study staff did not have access to the randomization list
and were not aware of which treatment letter was associated
with a study identification number until the child
had been enrolled in the study and completed their
baseline assessments. The placebo preparation was identical
to azithromycin in composition for all ingredients
except the active ingredient, and they were identical in
taste, smell, and appearance. Study staff and investigators
were not aware of which treatment letter was associated
with azithromycin or placebo.
Interventions
Azithromycin and matching placebo were prepared as
pediatric oral suspension. A single oral dose of 20 mg/kg
azithromycin or equivalent volume of placebo was offered
to each enrolled child. Weight measurements were
taking to facilitate dosing in children under 12 months
of age, and a height stick approximation was used for
those 12 months of age and over, as is done in trachoma
control programs [16, 17]. All study treatments were directly
observed and study staff indicated in the mobile
application if the child did not receive their randomized
treatment assignment.
Anthropometric measurements
Anthropometric measurements were collected at baseline,
14 days after enrollment, and 6 months after enrollment.
Standing height was measured for children who
could stand and recumbent length for those who could
not (Shorrboard, Weight and Measure LLC, Maryland,
USA). Height measurements were recorded in triplicate
and the median measurement was used for analysis.
Children were weighed standing if able or in the arms of
a caregiver after removing heavy garments and jewelry
(Seca 874 flat floor scale, Seca GMBH & Co, Hamburg,
Germany). MUAC measurements were taken at the midpoint
between the tip of the elbow and tip of the shoulder
of the left arm using a standard MUAC tape. Weight
gain velocity was calculated in grams per kilogram per
day (g/kg/day) from the baseline weight measurement.
Height gain was calculated in mm/day since baseline.
Weight-for-height (WHZ), weight-for-age (WAZ), and
height-for-age (HAZ) Z-scores were calculated based on
2006 WHO standards [18].
Sample size considerations
The sample size for the trial was based on the primary
outcome, which was Shannon’s diversity index of the gut
microbiome. We estimated that a sample size of 225
children per arm (450 total) would provide at least 80%
power for a detectable effect size of 1.02 standard deviations
of Shannon’s diversity with no loss to follow-up.
We estimated the detectable difference for anthropometric
outcomes given this fixed design. Assuming a 2-sided
alpha of 5%, and assuming the empirical standard deviations
observed in the trial for anthropometry outcomes,
we estimated that 225 children per arm would have at
80% power to detect a difference of 0.8 g/kg/d in weight
velocity at 14 days (SD = 3.1) and a difference of 0.1 g/
kg/d at 6 months (SD = 0.5). For comparisons of weight
and height, we adjusted observed standard deviations to
account for correlation with baseline (r = 0.97) [19]. We
estimated the trial had 80% power to detect differences
in weight of 0.19 kg (adjusted SD = 0.72) and differences
in height of 0.74 cm (adjusted SD = 2.8).
Statistical methods
The pre-specified primary analysis for anthropometric
outcomes was weight gain velocity expressed in g/kg/day
analyzed at the 14-day and 6-month time point separately
(Supplementary Material). Weight gain velocity
was analyzed using a linear regression with a term for
the randomized treatment assignment as the sole predictor,
without adjustment for baseline weight as baseline
weight is included in the outcome calculation. Secondary
outcomes included HAZ, WHZ, WAZ, MUAC, and
height gain (expressed in mm/day) at the 14-day and 6-
month time points separately. Each outcome was analyzed
using a linear regression model with terms for the randomized
treatment assignment and the baseline value of
the outcome. We also analyzed stunting, wasting, and
underweight using a cutoff of − 2 SD for HAZ, WHZ, and
WAZ respectively using a logistic regression model with a
term for randomized treatment assignment. As all outcomes
were pre-specified, no adjustment for multiple
comparisons was made. No subgroup analyses were conducted
due to the relatively small sample size. All analyses
were conducted in R (The R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria).
Results
Of 450 children who were eligible and enrolled in the
study, 230 were randomized to azithromycin and 220 to
placebo (Fig. 1). At baseline, one child had invalid anthropometric
measurements and was excluded from
analyses. Participants were a median of 26 months of age
(interquartile range, IQR, 16 to 38), 51% were female,
and 38% were breastfeeding (Table 1). Among participants
randomized to azithromycin or placebo, 227
(98.7%) and 214 (97.3%) of participants took the study
medication, respectively. At baseline, 18 and 9% of children
randomized to azithromycin and placebo, respectively,
were classified as underweight based on WAZ, 17
and 13% were stunted based on HAZ, 11 and 6% were
wasted based on WHZ, and 5 and 3% were wasted based
on MUAC (Table 1). Approximately 6 and 13% of children
were lost to follow-up at 14 days and 6 months, respectively.
Demographics and anthropometric indices
were similar among children who were and were not lost
to follow-up (Supplemental Table 1).
Adverse events at 14 days have been previously reported
and were most often gastrointestinal in nature
[20]. Caregivers of children randomized to receive azithromycin
more often reported vomiting than those receiving
placebo (7.2% compared to 1.9%, P = 0.01), but
there was no significant evidence of a difference in other
adverse events including diarrhea (8.1% azithromycin
versus 6.2% placebo, P = 0.44) and fever (16.7% azithromycin
versus 16.7% placebo, P > 0.99).
At 14 days, children randomized to azithromycin gained
weight significantly faster than those randomized to placebo
(mean difference 0.9 g/kg/day, 95% CI 0.2 to 1.6 g/kg/day,
P = 0.01). In a linear regression model adjusting for baseline
weight, at 14 days children in the azithromycin arm were on
average 122 g heavier than those in the placebo arm (95% CI
9 to 236g, P=0.035). There was no significant difference in
height gain in children receiving azithromycin compared to
placebo at Day 14 (mean difference 0.3 mm/day, 95% CI −
0.07 to 0.7mm/day, P = 0.11). There was no difference in
WAZ, WHZ, HAZ, or MUAC between children randomized
to azithromycin or placebo at day 14 (Tables 2 and 3). Similarly,
there were no significant differences in the odds of
underweight, wasting (defined by WHZ or MUAC), or
stunting at Day 14 (Tables 2 and 3).
At 6months, there was no difference in weight gain velocity
in children randomized to azithromycin versus placebo
(mean difference 0.04 g/kg/day, 95% CI − 0.05 to
0.13 g/kg/day, P = 0.46) or absolute difference in weight
(mean difference 7 g, 95% CI − 7 to 22g, P = 0.32). Rate of
change in height was also similar between the two groups
at 6months (mean difference 0.02mm/day, 95% CI − 0.02
to 0.06mm/day, P = 0.57). There were no differences in
WAZ, WHZ, HAZ, or MUAC or in underweight, wasting,
or stunting at 6 months (Tables 2 and 3).
Discussion
We found significant evidence of a short-term increase
in weight gain velocity in children who received a single
oral dose of azithromycin compared to placebo, but no
difference in longer-term weight gain. Possible mechanisms
for short-term increases in weight gain following
azithromycin have been hypothesized to include reducing
clinical or subclinical infection or via alteration of
the microbiome [10]. Mass azithromycin distribution has
been shown to reduce mortality primarily in a 3-month
period following distribution, but the precise mechanism
is unknown [21]. Short-term increases in weight gain
may confer some benefit against infection in children
that prevents mortality, or a reduction in infection may
both increase weight gain and reduce mortality, or the
two may be independent. We were unable to assess specific
mechanisms for the effect of azithromycin on
weight gain in the present analysis. Future studies
collecting additional information on infection following
azithromycin distribution may allow for further elucidation
of the mechanism.
Observational studies in high resource settings have
shown an association between antibiotic consumption
and increased child growth, leading to concerns about
antibiotic consumption and childhood obesity [22, 23].
Potential biases including unmeasured confounding limit
the ability to draw causal conclusions from these studies
[24]. Randomized controlled trial evidence has generally
shown increased growth among children with known
acute or chronic illness following antibiotic administration
in lower resource settings [10]. Given complex relationships
between infection and malnutrition, children
with concurrent infection that is treated by antibiotic administration
may experience increased growth catch-up
as they recover from their illness. A study of amoxicillin
compared to placebo for nutritional recovery among
children with severe acute malnutrition in Niger found
short-term effects of amoxicillin on weight gain velocity
but no longer-term benefit in growth outcomes in
amoxicillin-treated compared to placebo-treated children
[25]. Results from the present study suggest that a
similar relationship between antibiotic use and child
growth may exist for children without known clinical illness,
and the magnitude of the increase in weight gain
velocity at 14 days was similar to that in children with
severe acute malnutrition receiving amoxicillin compared
to placebo at 14 days (mean difference amoxicillin
versus placebo 1.2 g/kg/day at 2 weeks) [26]. Antibiotics
may be growth-promoting in children for short periods
of time after administration.
We found no evidence of an effect of a single dose of
azithromycin on height outcomes at either time point.
HAZ is often considered an indicator of longer-term nutritional
status, which may be influenced by repeated
bouts of infection with enteric or other pathogens [27,
28]. Interrupting the undernutrition-infection cycle via
antibiotic administration may theoretically improve
height-based anthropometric outcomes via treatment of
infection. In the present study, a single dose of azithromycin
was insufficient to affect longer-term nutritional
outcomes. Given that children in this study setting experience
a high burden of infection, it is possible that infection
re-establishes itself too quickly for a single dose
of azithromycin to have any effect on a child’s height.
Stunting may also be influenced by perinatal or in utero
exposures that can cause children to be born small for
gestational age and affect postnatal growth patterns.
Antibiotic administration during childhood would not
be expected to affect stunting through these pathways,
which may in part explain the null effect for height
outcomes.
These results must be considered in the context of
several limitations. We enrolled a wide age range in the
present study (1 to 59 months). Children gain weight at
markedly different rates during early childhood [29]. Including
a wide age range should not bias estimates due
to the randomized and masked nature of the trial, but it
likely introduces heterogeneity in outcomes. Given the
limited sample size of the trial, we did not have statistical
power to conduct age-based subgroup analyses.
Such analyses may be useful for better understanding
heterogeneity in the effect of azithromycin on growth
during different periods of early childhood. Children in
the azithromycin arm had a higher prevalence of underweight
at baseline compared to those in the placebo
arm, indicated some moderate chance imbalances in
weight at baseline. All models except for weight gain velocity
included the baseline measurement as a covariate,
and weight gain velocity is a difference in difference
measure, thus taking into account baseline. Small sample
sizes precluded subgroup analyses by baseline nutritional
status, but it is possible that children with lower nutritional
status at baseline are more likely to benefit from
azithromycin compared to well-nourished children [30].
Future studies with larger sample sizes could evaluate
any benefit of azithromycin in this subgroup. We did
not collect information on children who did not participate
in the study, and thus are unable to comment on
how representative this sample is of children in the recruitment
area. Loss to follow-up was less than 15% at
each time point, but differences in children who were
and were not lost to follow-up could attenuate effect
sizes between arms. The 29 children lost by day 14 had
similar anthropometry to those who remained, though
children who were lost to follow-up by 6 months were
slightly more stunted, underweight, and wasted at enrollment
than those who were not lost to follow-up. If
underweight and stunted children benefitted more from
azithromycin treatment, this could attenuate the 6-
month effect estimates towards the null. Antibiotic consumption
is fairly common in the study population, with
children under 5 years of age receiving approximately 2
antibiotic courses per child-year [31]. Over time, the two
groups may appear more similar to one another if they
are receiving similar amounts of antibiotics between the
two groups, which may mask any longer-term differences
in weight gain. Finally, this study was conducted
in a peri-urban Burkina Faso where childhood undernutrition
and infection are common. Burkina Faso experiences
strong seasonal patterns in food supplies and
malaria incidence. Recruitment and follow-up occurred
primarily during the dry season, corresponding to the
low malaria transmission season and with less food insecurity.
Results may differ in the high food insecurity
period if baseline nutritional status is worse and undernourished
children have greater improvements in growth
with azithromycin compared to well-nourished children.
Conclusion
Short-term increases in weight as documented in this
study may be protective against adverse health outcomes
and partially explain any benefit of mass azithromycin
distribution for childhood survival. The lack of longerterm
difference in weight outcomes suggests that recent
concern that antibiotic use contributes to excess weight
gain in children is unsubstantiated, although the cumulative
effect of multiple courses of antibiotics were not
evaluated in this study. Antibiotics have previously
shown to be growth-promoting in lower resource settings
in children with known acute or chronic illness,
and these results indicate that a similar relationship may
exist between antibiotic use and weight gain in
community-based samples of children.