Background
Spontaneous renal pelvis rupture, also known as forniceal
rupture or pyelosinus backflow, is an uncommon
complication of acute urinary tract obstruction. In the
context of intravenous urography during acute renal
colic, Schwartz et al. defined a rupture as ‘spontaneous’
if it occurred in the absence of trauma, abdominal compression,
destructive renal lesion or prior surgical and
endoscopic intervention [1].
It is thought to occur as a result of rapidly increasing
intraluminal pressure [2] presumably overwhelming
slower reactive mechanisms that act to reduce urine output,
as seen in chronic hydronephrosis. Typical symptoms
mimic those of acute abdomen or pyelonephritis,
with unilateral flank pain and nausea [3]. This event has
been reported most frequently in association with obstructive
ureteric calculi, with other aetiologies such as
extrinsic ureteric compression or bladder outlet obstruction
following distantly behind [4].
Asymptomatic spontaneous rupture occurring bilaterally
in the absence of urinary tract obstruction is hence
extremely unusual. To the best of the authors’ knowledge,
this has not been described in current English literature.
We report one such case precipitated by CT
urography and discuss possible pathophysiological
mechanisms.
Case presentation
A 58-year-old woman with no significant past medical
history was referred to the outpatient urology clinic for
asymptomatic microscopic haematuria noted incidentally
on urinalysis. Routine CT urography was performed
in the pre-contrast, nephrographic and delayed phases.
A total of 75 mL of iodinated contrast agent (300 mg I/
mL concentration) was administered, and no diuretics
were given.
On the pre-contrast and nephrographic phases, a 2
mm non-obstructive renal calculus was noted on the
right but the kidneys were otherwise unremarkable. No
calculus was seen in the ureters and urinary bladder
(Fig. 1). The latter was well-distended from voluntary retention
of urine in preparation for the study. No perinephric
fluid collection was noted at this point.
On the excretory phase performed at 6 min 13 s postcontrast,
peripelvic contrast extravasation was observed
bilaterally - suggestive of acute rupture (Fig. 2). No other
site of urinoma was observed. A further delayed phase
was performed at 50 min post-contrast to evaluate the
extent of urinoma, which showed tracking of contrast
along the retroperitoneum without further peripelvic
extravasation.
Throughout the study, no flank pain or other symptom
was reported; the patient remained asymptomatic even
after the event was observed acutely on-table. No abdominal
or flank tenderness was elicited on examination.
She was managed conservatively and a radiograph performed
the next day revealed no persistent contrast
pooling. Follow-up intravenous urography performed a
month after showed no recurrence of contrast extravasation
(Fig. 3). Thereafter, she was discharged from followup
after resolution of microscopic haematuria.
Discussions and conclusions
This is a case demonstrating an exceedingly rare radiological
event in the absence of classically associated risk
factors. Reviewing related case reports, we discuss possible
pathophysiological mechanisms though these are
difficult to prove with a single case alone.
Rupture is reported to occur when intra-pelvic pressures
exceed 25 to 75mmHg and is seen most frequently
at the fornices [5], possibly where the walls are the thinnest.
Iodinated contrast agents are potent osmotic diuretics,
and their role in precipitating rupture during an
acute obstruction is clear. An early prospective study by
Bernardino et al. demonstrated a positive relationship
between the administered dose of intravenous contrast
and the incidence of peripelvic contrast extravasation in
patients with acute renal colic [2].
However, osmotic diuresis alone is an insufficient factor
in the absence of obstruction. The primary mechanism
is nonetheless likely dependent on this diuretic
effect, given the temporal relationship between contrast
administration and onset.
Unilateral renal pelvis rupture in the absence of obstruction
has been described in the emergency care setting.
Patients present first with flank pain, with a
following CT demonstrating rupture where no obstruction
is identified. Eken et al. suggest that unwitnessed
transient obstruction, such as from a passed calculus,
may be the most plausible mechanism [6]. Though that
reported case had no known history of urinary calculi,
another reported by Pampana et al. did [5].
The bilateral nature of rupture in this case makes transient
obstruction by a passing ureteric calculus less
probable. Moreover, a calculus was only demonstrated
on one side prior to contrast administration. Transient
obstruction more distally can affect both kidneys and remains
a possible mechanism.
One other report of bilateral renal pelvis rupture occurring
during contrast-enhanced CT was described by
Chien et al. [7]. The case occurred during CT venography
of the iliac veins, where a total of 170 mL of
intravenous contrast was administered and post-rupture
catheterization drained a urine volume in excess of 1 l. A
background of bladder outlet obstruction from prostatomegaly
was reported, and the authors attribute it as the
cause of rupture. Acute flank pain during the scan first
alerted radiological staff of this complication.
Notably, the case we report did not manifest flank pain.
There was also no known history or symptom of urinary
obstruction, though the bladder did appear distended on
CT. It is plausible that voluntary urinary retention acted
as a form of transient ‘obstruction’ at the bladder outlet.
Even so, majority of patients with a filled bladder do not
develop this complication. The initial presentation of
microscopic haematuria in this specific case may hence be
relevant. Urinary calculi predispose to urinary tract rupture,
with one postulated mechanism of urothelial injury
during passage [8]. As no urothelial mass was identified in
this case, the cause of haematuria could have been recent
asymptomatic passage of calculi. We postulate that this
could have additionally predisposed to rupture.
In the case reported by Chien et al., the patient was
also treated conservatively. Interval imaging and urinalysis
showed resolution of both microscopic haematuria
and contrast extravasation. Serial imaging is of value, as
large or persistent urinomas carry a risk of infection and
loss of renal function [9]. Other modalities such as sonography
can be considered as well [5]. Existing literature
suggests that such a conservative approach is appropriate
in the absence of complications (e.g. superimposed infection,
kidney injury), risk factors for complications (e.g.
sizeable urinoma 100 mL or larger) or a solitary kidney
[10–12]. The detection of further contrast extravasation
or unresolving urinoma in this case would have prompted
consideration of drainage and urinary diversion.
In conclusion, spontaneous rupture of the renal pelvis is
a potential (albeit rare) complication of intravenous contrast
administration in the absence of urinary tract obstruction,
and it can occur bilaterally. Although cases can
uncommonly be asymptomatic, typical symptoms such as
flank pain following contrast injection behoove physicians
to evaluate the kidneys – particularly when they are not
included in the initial study or no delayed phase is protocolled.
A missed or untreated complication (i.e. large urinoma),
could become a nidus for intra-abdominal
infection and damage the urinary tract by fibrosis and
granuloma formation. Rupture should also prompt physicians
to actively evaluate for underlying causes. Interval
follow-up imaging for resolution is clinically relevant to
monitor for and avoid such infective sequelae through
radiological-guided drainage or urological intervention.
