Background
Sunitinib, a multitargeted kinase inhibitor approved
for the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma
in humans, is known to be cardiotoxic, resulting in
hypertension, electrocardiogram (ECG) changes [1],
reduction of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)
[2], and heart failure [3] via various mechanisms [4],
thereby limiting its clinical use. In contrast, among
sunitinib-treated patients experiencing adverse cardiac
events, decreased cardiac function was reportedly reversible in > 50% of the patients [5]. Thus, we could
develop new strategies to mitigate sunitinib-induced
cardiac injuries by recapitulating reversible cardiac injuries and elucidating the molecular mechanisms driving cardiac events in preclinical models. We
previously demonstrated that many cancer drugs, including sunitinib, significantly disrupt the sarcomeres
in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs), and the extent of disruption
could help predict the occurrence of drug-induced
cardiotoxicity [6]. Therefore, in the present study, we
investigated whether the reversibility of sunitinibinduced cardiac events in clinical settings can be
mimicked in vitro by analyzing the sarcomere structure in iPSC-CMs before and after sunitinib washout.
In addition, we attempted to identify the molecular
pathway involved in sunitinib-induced sarcomere disruption in iPSC-CMs.
The organization of cardiac sarcomeres is strictly
regulated by the balance between synthesis, assembly,
and sarcomere degradation, to maintain the physiological states of contraction and relaxation [7]. We focused on the Hippo pathway, as it reportedly plays a
pivotal role in tissue regeneration, organ size regulation [8], and cardiac regeneration following injury [9].
Though dysregulation of the Hippo pathway is reportedly associated with various cardiac diseases [10], it is
unclear whether this pathway is involved in sunitinibinduced adverse cardiac events. Treatment with
XMU-MP-1, a small molecule inhibitor of kinases
MST1/2 (homologs of Hippo), has been shown to
preserve cardiac function following pressure overload
in mice [11]. Additionally, XMU-MP-1 conferred tissue repair capability in a liver injury mouse model
[12]. Thus, to examine the role of the Hippo pathway
in sunitinib-mediated cardiac injury, we focused on
the structure of the cardiac sarcomere and nuclear
localization of yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) in
iPSC-CMs following stimulation with sunitinib and
after washout of the drug. We also analyzed the
sarcomere structure after simultaneous simulation
with sunitinib and XMU-MP-1 to confirm whether
the inhibition of the Hippo pathway has a beneficial
effect on sunitinib-induced cardiac injury.
Methods
Materials
All reagents and compounds were purchased from either
Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical (Osaka, Japan), Thermo
Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA), or Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO, USA), unless stated otherwise.
Cell culture
The human iPSC-derived “iCell Cardiomyocytes2
”
(iPSC-CMs) used in this study and their culture method
are the same as those reported in our previous study [6].
Briefly, iPSC-CMs were purchased from Fujifilm Cellular
Dynamics International (Tokyo, Japan). The purity of
cardiomyocytes was ≥99%. The cells were seeded onto
collagen I-coated 96-well plates (Corning, Inc., Corning,
NY, USA) at a density of 93,750 cells/cm2 using iCell
Cardiomyocytes Plating Medium, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The cells were grown and maintained in 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Four hours after seeding, the
plating medium was replaced with the manufacturerprovided iCell Cardiomyocytes Maintenance Medium.
The maintenance medium was refreshed every two days
throughout the experiment.
Compound preparation and stimulation
After the iPSC-CMs were cultured for 5–6 d, they were
stimulated with sunitinib with or without XMU-MP-1
for 72 h. Both sunitinib and XMU-MP-1 were dissolved
in 100% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The compounds were added to the wells of a 96-well plate to obtain the final concentrations 0.3 μM, 1, μM, or 3 μM for
either sunitinib or XMU-MP-1. The final DMSO concentration was 0.1% (v/v). The cells were then cultured
with each compound for 72 h. To evaluate the effect of
drug washout on sarcomere structure, the sunitinibcontaining medium was removed and replaced with
fresh drug-free medium after 72 h of sunitinib
stimulation.
Paraformaldehyde (PFA) fixation and immunostaining
The PFA fixation and immunostaining processes were
performed according to our previously reported methods
[6]. After drug stimulation and washout, cells were fixed
with 2% PFA for 15 min at 37 °C then washed twice with
PBS. After blocking the cells with blocking buffer [1×
PBS Tween-20 (28,352; Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 1.5% (v/v) bovine serum albumin (A9205; SigmaAldrich)] for 30 min at room temperature (22–25 °C),
the cells were incubated with a polyclonal antibody
against rabbit alpha-actinin (AB90776; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), diluted with blocking buffer to a final concentration of 2 μg/mL, at 4 °C for 18 h. To analyze YAP1
nuclear localization, we used a rabbit monoclonal antibody against active YAP1 (AB205270; Abcam), diluted
with blocking buffer to a final concentration of 0.2 μg/
mL, at 4 °C for 18 h. After discarding the primary antibody solution, cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated with a secondary antibody solution, including
goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) secondary antibody
(A11034, Alexa Fluor 488, 1:400) and Hoechst 33342 (1:
800; Thermo Fisher) at 4 °C for 1 h. Finally, cells were
washed twice with PBS, and each well was filled with
PBS before performing high-content analysis (HCA).
Assessment of cardiac sarcomere structure and YAP1
nuclear localization using HCA
The protocol for the analysis of the cardiac sarcomere
structure has been described previously [6]. Briefly, automated fixed-cell fluorescent images of immunostained
cells were obtained using the IN Cell Analyzer 6500 device (GE Healthcare Japan, Tokyo, Japan) using a 60× or
4× objective lens. To analyze the sarcomere structure,
nine image fields per well were acquired using the 60×
objective lens. To analyze YAP1 nuclear localization, six
image fields per well were acquired using the 4× objective lens. For all image analyses, we used the IN Cell Developer Tool Box software (GE Healthcare). The number
of cell nuclei per image field was calculated by observing
the pattern of Hoechst-stained nuclei, and the total
number of cell nuclei per well were determined. For
quantification of the sarcomere morphology, we measured the lengths of all the Z lines of the sarcomeres observed in each cell by analyzing the image exhibiting the
immunofluorescence signal of alpha-actinin, then we
calculated the average length of all recognized Z lines
per cell. Next, to determine whether the observed cells
were healthy or morphologically damaged, based on the
average length of all recognized Z lines per cell, we
counted the number of cells per field that differed concomitantly according to changes in the cutoff value, to
determine the average length of Z lines of cells. By
searching for an optimal cutoff value, we defined cells
with an average Z line sarcomere length > 3.1 μm as cells
with a “ well-organized sarcomere.” Then, we counted
the number of cells with well-organized sarcomeres per
well using the analysis software, and determined the ratio of the number of cells with well-organized sarcomeres to the total number of cells observed in each well,
which we defined as the “Healthy sarcomere index
(HSI)” in all experiments. To determine the HSI, approximately 200 cells were analyzed in each well (because of high magnification (× 60)), one well was used
for each data point, and five or six wells were used as
the data for one group (n = 5–6 wells/group) Similarly,
the ratio of HSI in the treatment group to that in the
control group was calculated. For quantification of the
YAP1 nuclear localization, immunofluorescence intensity of YAP1 in the cytoplasm and nuclei, respectively,
were measured. Then, cells having a significantly more
intense signal of YAP1 in the nuclei than in the cytoplasm were defined as cells showing nuclear localization
of YAP1. Then, the degree of nuclear localization of
YAP1 was determined by calculating the ratio of the
number of cells showing nuclear localization of YAP1 to
the total number of cells observed in each well and
expressed as the relative ratio to the control group. For
the quantitation of nuclear localization of YAP1, approximately 4000 cells were analyzed in each well (because of low magnification (× 4)), one well was used for
each data point, and five or six wells were used as the
data for one group (n = 5–6 wells/group). Since the
iPSC-CMs from Fujifilm Cellular Dynamics International have been previously reported to be predominantly mononuclear cells [13], we conducted image
analyses in all the experiments assuming that the iPSCCMs are mononuclear cells.
Statistical analysis
All results are presented as mean ± SD values and all
graphs were created using the GraphPad Prism 8 software. Statistical analyses were performed using
EXSUS2014 software. The HSI and degree of YAP1 nuclear localization between the DMSO and the drugtreated group were compared using Williams’ test or
Shirley-Williams’ test, depending on whether the variances were heterogeneous or not. Statistical significance
was set at p < 0.025. Student’s t-test or the Wilcoxon
rank sum test was conducted to perform comparisons
between DMSO and 3 μM sunitinib-treated groups in
Fig. 3D; p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Regular striped staining images of sarcomeric Z lines
exhibiting the immunofluorescence signal of alphaactinin were seen in the DMSO-treated control groups,
whereas dot-like staining images showing apparent disruption of sarcomeric Z lines were observed in the
sunitinib-treated group (Fig. 1A). Sunitinib treatment
decreased the percentage of cells with well-organized
sarcomeres in a concentration-dependent manner, as indicated by the reduction in HSI (Fig. 1B). Seventy-two
hours after stimulation with sunitinib, the HSI values of
groups treated with 0.3 μM, 1 μM, and 3 μM sunitinib
were 64.3, 13.7, and 1.1% of the control group, respectively. This result suggests that sunitinib caused sarcomere disruption in iPSC-CMs.
Next, we analyzed whether iPSC-CMs had the ability
to spontaneously recover from sunitinib-induced sarcomere disruption by analyzing sarcomere morphology following stimulation with sunitinib and subsequent drug
washout. We set two different time points (72 h and 144
h) for sarcomere analysis after sunitinib washout
(Fig. 2A). Immediately after 72 h of sunitinib stimulation,
sarcomeric Z lines were observed as dot-like staining images indicating sarcomere disruption in most iPSC-CMs,
but after 72 h of drug washout, the dot-like staining images partially changed to stripe-like staining images, and
after 144 h of washout, the dot-like staining images almost disappeared and almost completely changed to
normal stripe-like staining images (Fig. 2B). The HSI
values of groups treated with 0.3 μM, 1 μM, and 3 μM
sunitinib 72 h after drug washout were 86.0, 69.3, and
16.7% of the control group, respectively. Further, 144 h
after drug washout, the HSI values of groups treated
with 0.3 μM, 1 μM, and 3 μM sunitinib were 101.5, 94.1,
and 89.1% of the control group, respectively, and there
was no statistical significance in the HSI between treatment groups (Fig. 2C).
We next investigated the molecular pathways involved
in the disruption or recovery of sarcomere structure
following sunitinib-mediated injury in iPSC-CMs. We
focused on the Hippo pathway and examined whether
an alteration in one of the molecular components of the
pathway was involved in sunitinib-induced sarcomere
disruption and/or spontaneous recovery. Seventy-two
hours after stimulation with 3 μM sunitinib, a reduction
in the degree of YAP1 nuclear localization was clearly
observed (Fig. 3A). The extent of YAP1 nuclear
localization in iPSC-CMs following stimulation with 0.3
μM, 1 μM, or 3 μM sunitinib was 62.6, 52.6, and 40.0%
of the control group, respectively (Fig. 3B). Then, we investigated the extent of changes in YAP1 nuclear
localization following sunitinib washout. At 144 h after
washout of 3 μM sunitinib, no apparent difference was
observed in the extent of YAP1 nuclear localization between control and sunitinib treatment groups (Fig. 3C).
The degree of YAP1 nuclear localization 72 h and 144 h
after 3 μM sunitinib washout was 79.3 and 102.0% of the
control, respectively (Fig. 3D).
From these results, we assumed that the Hippo pathway may be involved in the sunitinib-induced sarcomere
disruption, and spontaneous recovery, observed after
drug washout. To further examine the involvement of
the Hippo pathway in the disruption and/or recovery
process, we modulated the pathway with a small molecule kinase inhibitor, XMU-MP-1, with the expectation
that this could recapitulate spontaneous recovery of cardiac sarcomeres. We added either 1 μM or 3 μM sunitinib with or without 0.3 μM or 1 μM XMU-MP-1 for 72
h. XMU-MP-1 suppressed sunitinib-induced sarcomere
disruption in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 4A
and B). Compared to the control (DMSO) group, the
HSI values of groups treated with 1 μM sunitinib, 1 μM
sunitinib with 0.3 μM XMU-MP-1, and 1 μM sunitinib
with 1 μM XMU-MP-1 were 19.8, 55.7, and 74.7%, respectively. On the other hand, the HSI of the group
treated with 3 μM sunitinib alone was 3.3% compared to
the control group. For the groups treated with 3 μM sunitinib and either 0.3 μM or 1 μM XMU-MP-1, the HSI
values were 9.6 and 11.8%, respectively. Stimulation with
≥3 μM XMU-MP-1 resulted in a decreasing trend in the
number of cell nuclei (data not shown).
Discussion
Currently, there are almost no radical treatments available for cancer drug-induced cardiotoxicity, and the demand for prevention of chemotherapy-induced
cardiotoxicity is growing [14]. The molecular mechanisms responsible for sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity
are complicated and, despite their severity, remain
largely unclarified. In this study, we focused on the
morphology of cardiac sarcomeres following stimulation
with sunitinib, since cardiac sarcomeres are major components of myofibrillar fibers and play a pivotal role in
myocardial contraction and relaxation [15]. We, for the
first time, discovered that a recovery of the sunitinibinduced disruption in cardiac sarcomeres to an almost
normal state in iPSC-CMs can be achieved, following
drug washout. This suggests that our in vitro assay can
mimic the reversibility of LVEF decreases observed in
sunitinib-treated patients [5].
At present, limited information is available regarding
the reversibility of sunitinib-induced cardiac injury in
clinical settings. A previous study showed that, in cancer
patients treated with sunitinib and exhibiting cardiac adverse events (e.g., reduction of ejection fraction, ECG
changes), recovery was observed after the interruption of
sunitinib treatment and administration of cardiovascular
treatments including medical intervention, coronary
angiography, and surgical procedures [1]. However, because it is unknown whether this recovery was achieved
through the interruption of sunitinib treatment or cardiovascular management, it is difficult to accurately
understand the potential and extent of spontaneous recovery from cardiac events in sunitinib-treated patients.
Thus, to further demonstrate the relevance of these
findings in iPSC-CMs to the clinical setting, and to gain
a better understanding of the mechanism behind the recovery process, an assessment of drug-induced functional readouts (e.g., contractility, beat rate, extra field
potential) in iPSC-CMs would be required in future
studies.
The Hippo pathway negatively regulates the activity of
transcriptional co-activator YAP1 [16], which controls
the transcription of genes related to cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and cell fate [17]. We observed a significant
reduction in the extent of nuclear localization of YAP1
following sunitinib stimulation. Sunitinib inhibits various
receptor protein-tyrosine kinases, including VEGF and
PDGF [18], which are both known to regulate the Hippo
pathway [17]. Indeed, the pharmacological inhibition of
PDGF causes the redistribution of YAP1 from the nucleus to the cytosol and downregulates YAP1 target
genes [19]. Therefore, one of the causes of the reduction
in YAP1 nuclear localization following stimulation with
sunitinib may be due to the inhibition of VEGF and/or
PDGF. Further studies using various VEGF or PDGF inhibitors would clarify the relationship between the degree of reduction in nuclear localization of YAP1 and
the extent of sarcomere injury. Interestingly, the level of
YAP1 nuclear localization, which had been reduced after
treatment with 3 μM sunitinib, became almost normal
144 h after drug washout. Since this washout period resulted in the complete recovery of disrupted sarcomeres,
the increased nuclear localization of YAP1 may be related to the recovery process of injured sarcomeres in
iPSC-CMs.
XMU-MP-1 is a potent small-molecule kinase inhibitor of MST1/2 [12]. We found that XMU-MP-1-mediated inhibition of the Hippo pathway only slightly
mitigated the disruption of cardiac sarcomere caused by
3 μM sunitinib exposure, as opposed to the sarcomere
disruption caused by 1 μM sunitinib. Therefore, in
addition to the Hippo pathway, other molecular pathways may also be involved in the spontaneous recovery
of cardiac sarcomeres. Indeed, as described earlier, various pathways or molecules, such as autophagy-related
pathways [20], proteases [21], and ubiquitin-proteasome
pathways [22] are known to be involved in the degradation, synthesis, and assembly of the cardiac sarcomere
[7]. Although their functional significance in the disease
setting is still unknown, the modulation of each pathway
using specific inhibitors may also affect the sarcomere
structure, even after stimulation with sunitinib. Furthermore, global gene or protein expression analysis would
allow us to further decipher the molecular pathways responsible for the recovery of cardiac sarcomeres after
sunitinib-induced injury.
Taken together, we observed that recovery from disruption of the cardiac sarcomere and reduction of
nuclear localization of YAP1 caused by sunitinib, could
occur following drug washout. Importantly, a small molecule inhibitor of the Hippo pathway, XMU-MP-1, suppressed the sunitinib-induced disruption of cardiac
sarcomeres. These findings help understand the therapeutic potential of inhibition of the Hippo pathway in
sunitinib-induced cardiac injury. Furthermore, the clarification of the molecular mechanism underlying the recovery of cardiac sarcomeres from a sunitinib-induced
disruption would enable discover and development of
novel drug targets for the treatment of sunitinib-druginduced cardiotoxicity.
Conclusions
The present findings demonstrate that iPSC-CMs have
the ability to recover from sunitinib-induced sarcomere
disruption, suggesting that our in vitro assay can mimic
the reversibility of LVEF decreases observed in sunitinibtreated patients. This study also indicates that the Hippo
pathway is involved in the process of sunitinib-induced
disruption of sarcomere and its recovery after drug
washout (Fig. 5 A, B and C). Additionally, inhibition of
the Hippo pathway with XMU-MP-1 suppressed the
sunitinib-induced disruption of sarcomere. These results
suggest that inhibition of the Hippo pathway may lead
to the development of a co-medication strategy to reduce the risk of sunitinib-induced adverse cardiac
events.