Introduction
Doxorubicin (DOX) is an antibiotic anthracycline that was
first isolated in 1960 and has been used for the past 30
years to treat cancer patients [1]. DOX has several side effects,
such as cardiac and renal toxicity. DOX-mediated
nephropathy is caused by glomeruli destruction and tubule
damage [2, 3]. DOX-induced nephrotoxicity has been
studied much less than other anthracycline-related side effects.
DOX induces nephropathy via a complex mechanism.
Free radicals, lipid peroxidation, and decreased
antioxidant enzyme activity are among the most likely primary
mediators in developing nephrotic syndrome [3, 4].
Inflammation also plays a significant role in DOX-induced
kidney damage via the effects of topical cytokines and
other cytotoxic factors [2]. DOX can also cause proteins
to be excreted in the urine by destroying the nephrons
directly.
DOX-induced nephropathy is a classic model of renal
failure in rats. Damage to the filtration barrier is the primary
cause of protein excretion due to renal failure [2].
DOX is responsible for this filtration barrier damage [5, 6].
Thus, administering drugs with anti-inflammatory and
antioxidant effects could mitigate the side effects of
DOX. Alamandine is a new member of the reninangiotensin
system (RAS) family that protects the cardiovascular
system and kidney functions [7].
Alamandine, like angiotensin (1–7) [Ang (1–7)], is a
heptapeptide. It differs from Ang (1–7) in only one
amino acid in the N-terminal region. It exerts its effects
by binding to the Mas-related G-protein coupled
receptor of the type D (MrgD) receptor[8–10]. The renal
actions of Ang (1–7 (might be related to reductions in
oxidative stress and the activation of anti-apoptotic
pathways [11].
Lu et al. showed that Ang (1–7) protects kidneys
from injuries caused by hypoxia by reducing oxidative
stress, fibrosis, and inflammation [11]. Also, Mori
et al. used a model of diabetic nephropathy to show
that Ang (1–7) can protect the kidneys by reducing
inflammation, oxidative stress, and lipotoxicity [12].
In addition, it was recently reported that Ang (1–7)
reduces DOX-induced cardiotoxicity in rats through
antioxidant mechanisms[13].
Alamandine also has anti-fibrotic and antiinflammatory
effects [7, 14]. For example, alamandine
increases antioxidant expression in ventricles exposed to
ischemia-reperfusion injury[15].Moreover, alamandine
reduces pro-inflammatory factors induced by aortic constriction,
such as TNF-α and IL-1α, in mice [16]. In a
study on an animal model of sepsis induction by polysaccharides
in C57BL6/J mice, plasma and tissue levels
of interleukin-1B (IL-1B) and tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNFα) increased. At the same time, alamandine
reduced the levels of inflammatory cytokines and apoptosis
in cardiac tissues [17]. To the best of our knowledge,
no prior studies have examined the effects of
alamandine on renal function and DOX-induced
nephrotoxicity.
Many experimental and clinical reports have
highlighted the protective role of Ang (1–7) in renal
hemodynamics and functions under different conditions
[18]. Also, alamandine has similar effects to Ang (1–7)
[9, 19]. Therefore, we assumed that alamandine protects
against DOX-induced nephrotoxicity.
In this study, several biomarkers of renal injury were
measured in DOX-treated rats and alamandine/DOX coadministrated
rats. These biomarkers included blood
urea nitrogen (BUN); creatinine; creatinine clearance;
serum urea; albumin; and pro-inflammatory cytokines,
including IL-1β and IL-6, pro-inflammatory transcription
factor nuclear kappa B (NF-κB), pro-fibrotic proteins
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and renal
antioxidant enzymes [superoxide dismutase (SOD),
glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and malondialdehyde
(MDA)]. Histological and immunohistochemistry analyses
were also performed.
Materials and methods
Materials
This experiment was performed on 35 male Sprague-
Dawley rats (180–220 g) obtained from the Experimental
Animal Centre of Fasa University of Medical Sciences.
All procedures followed relevant guidelines and regulations
regarding the care and use of animals for the
experimental procedures. The procedures were also approved
by the Committee of Animal Care of the Fasa
University of Medical Sciences (IR.FUMS.REC.1397.014)
in compliance with the ARRIVE guidelines [20]. All animals
were acclimatized under the controlled standard
conditions of 12 h light/12 h dark cycles, at a
temperature of 20–22 °C, standard pellet diets, and
water ad libitum for one week before the start of experiments.
Alamandine and DOX were obtained from Phoenix
Pharmaceuticals Inc., CA, USA, and Tocris
Bioscience, respectively.
Experimental group design
After one week of acclimatization to cages, the rats were
randomly divided into five groups:
1. The control group comprised intact animals that
experienced no surgical interventions and were
given no drugs.
2. The sham group received normal saline as a vehicle
for 42 days via mini-osmotic pumps (model 2006;
ALZET Osmotic Pumps, CA, USA) that were surgically
placed subcutaneously between the scapulae.
This group also received normal saline intraperitoneal
(i.p) on days 14, 21, 28, and 35.
3. The DOX group received DOX dissolved in normal
saline (3.750 mg/kg) i.p on days 14, 21, 28, and 35
to reach the total cumulative dose (15 mg/kg).
4. The alamandine group received alamandine dissolved
in normal saline for 42 days by mini-osmotic pumps
with an infusion rate of 0.15 μl/h (50 μg alamandine/
kg/day) as described by Liu et al. [21].
5. The DOX + alamandine group received alamandine
by mini-osmotic pumps for 42 days (50 μg alamandine/
kg/day) and DOX (3.750 mg/kg) i.p on days
14, 21, 28, and 35 to reach the total cumulative
dose (15 mg/kg) as described by Warp et al. [22].
On day 41, rats were housed in the individual metabolic
cages. A 24-h urine sample was collected from
each animal so that the creatinine clearance, creatinine,
albumin, and TGF-B levels could be measured. On day
42 (seven days after the final DOX injection), the animals
were euthanized with pentobarbital sodium
(150 mg/kg, intraperitoneal, IP). Blood samples were
taken, and both kidneys were removed from all rats. The
blood samples were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min.
Serums, which were used to evaluate biochemical parameters,
were taken and maintained at -80 °C. Creatinine
clearance (used to estimate the glomerular filtration
rate (GFR)) was determined as described by Iyalomhe
et al. [23] and Ogundipe et al. [24] This was done based
on the 24-h urine samples obtained under the following
formula (expressed as ml/min): Creatinine clearance
ml/min) = mg creatinine/dl urine×ml urine 24 h/mg
creatinine/dl serum×1440.
Rats’ right kidneys were dissected and washed with
PBS (10 mM PO43−, 137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl;
pH = 7.4). They were then dried on filter paper and
weighed. Afterward, they were homogenized in the PBS
and centrifuged at 10,000×g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants
were stored at -20 °C until the analyses of
oxidative stress parameters, antioxidants, and TGF-β.
These analyses were carried out using Eliza kits.
Assessment of Water Intake and urine volume
Water intake and urine volume were assessed using
metabolic cages. Water intake was calculated as the difference
between the final volume measured and the
remaining volume over 24 h. This measurement was
considered as the daily water intake for every animal in
each experimental group.
The volumes for both water intake and urine output
were measured using measuring cylinders.
Assessment of inflammatory cytokines in serum
The IL-6 assay kit (cat. no. SEA079Ra), NF-κB assay kit
(cat. no. SEB824Ra), and IL-1β assay kit (cat. no.
SEA563Ra) were purchased from Cloud-Clone Corp
(Cloud-Clone Corp Technology co., Ltd., Wuhan,
China). Briefly, for IL-6 assay,100 μl of a standard blank
or samples was added into the appropriate wells and
then incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. After aspiration, 100 μl
of prepared detection reagent was added to each well
and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. After aspiration and
washing, 90 μL of substrate solution was added to wells
and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C. Finally, 50 μL of stop
solution was added, and OD was immediately measured
with a BioTek ELISA reader at 450 nm. The IL-6 concentration
was determined by comparing the OD of the
samples to the standard curve. The protocols for IL-1β
and NF-B assays were similar to those used for IL-6..
Assessment of oxidative stress markers and TGF-β in
kidney tissue and urine
TGF-β levels in the urine and kidney tissue were determined
using ELISA kits (cat. no. DB100; R&D Systems,
Inc., Minneapolis, MN), according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. All measurements were performed in duplicate.
Urine samples were collected in metabolic cages
and centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000×g before being
assayed or aliquoted and stored at -20 °C. As part of the
assay procedure, 50 μl of assay diluent was added to
each well. Afterward, 50 μl of standard, control, or sample
was added to each well and incubated for 2 h at
room temperature. After aspiration and washing, 100 μl
of a polyclonal antibody specific for TGF-β1 conjugated
to horseradish peroxidase was added to each well and
incubated for 2 h at room temperature. After aspiration
and washing, 100 μl of substrate solution was added to
each well and incubated for 30 min at room
temperature. Then, 100 L of a stop solution was added,
and color changes were measured at 450 nm using a
BioTek ELISA reader. The protocols for measuring
TGF-β1 levels in kidney tissues were similar to those
used for the urine samples.
The markers for oxidative stress, MDA, SOD, and
GPx in kidney tissue homogenates were determined
using available kits according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The MDA assay kit (cat. no. ZB-MDA-96 A)
and SOD assay kit (cat. no. ZB-SOD-96 A) were purchased
from ZellBio (Ulm, Germany).
The thiobarbituric acid (TBA) method was used to determine
MDA levels. The products of lipid hydroperoxide
decomposition can condensate with TBA to form
red compounds with an absorption peak at 532 nm.
SOD measurements were based on the conversion of
superoxide anion into hydrogen peroxide and oxygen.
Absorbance at 420 nm was used to quantify SOD
activity.
The GPx assay kit (cat. no. RS 506) was obtained from
Randox Laboratories Limited, Crumlin, UK. The oxidation
of glutathione by cumene hydroperoxide was catalyzed
by GPx. In the presence of NADPH and
glutathione reductase, oxidized glutathione was converted
into a reduced form with a concomitant conversion
of NADPH to NADP+. The decrease in absorption
was determined at 340nm using a spectrophotometer..
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
IL-6, IL-1, P53, and NF-κB expressions were evaluated
on paraffin-embedded tissues by a standard immunostaining
assay. Briefly, xylene and a graded alcohol series
were used for deparaffinization and rehydration, respectively.
Then the slides were incubated for 30 min in a
blocking reagent containing 1.5 % hydrogen peroxide in
methanol. Antigens were retrieved and placed on slides
using a microwave protocol. They were then incubated
in serum for 30 min and immunostained with IL-6 (cat.
no. sc-28,343; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), IL-1 (cat.
no. sc-32,294; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), P53 (cat.
no. sc-81,168; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), and NF-
κB (cat. no. sc-48,366; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.)
primary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature.
Afterward, the slides were washed with PBS three
times and then incubated with secondary antibodies for
30 min. The sections were stained using 3,30-diaminobenzidine
(Dako liquid DAB color solution), and the
slides were then counterstained with hematoxylin. An
Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan)
was used to visualize the results. Five different microscopic
fields were randomly selected from each slide,
and positive staining within each slide was measured
using Image-Pro Plus 6.1. Finally, quantitative analysis
was performed in a blinded manner.
Histopathological studies
The left kidneys of male rats were harvested and immediately
fixed in 10 % buffered formalin phosphate (pH
7.4) for histological tests. The tissue samples were dehydrated
by being passed through graded concentrations of
alcohol, cleaned in xylene to remove alcohol, incorporated
in paraffin, and allowed to harden. Subsequently,
5-μm sections of the paraffin blocks were prepared by
microtome and left floating in the water bath. These
floating kidney sections were then mounted onto microscopical
slides, placed into a drying oven at 60 °C, and
stained with Harris’ hematoxylin and 1 % eosin. Afterward,
histological examinations were carried out using
light microscopy. All sections were graded for tubular
degeneration, tubular necrosis, and tubular cast formation.
The severity of these pathological lesions was
assigned as follows: score 0 was considered to be normal;
score 1 as mild; score 2 as moderate; score 3 as severe..
Data and statistical analyses
Prism software was used for the statistical analysis. The
results are expressed as means ± SD. All data sets were
first tested for normality using the D’Agostino and Pearson
omnibus and Brown-Forsythe tests to ensure the
data satisfied the criteria of normal distribution and
homogeneity of variances, respectively. A one-way
ANOVA was used to analyze all datasets with a normal
distribution, and homogeneity was evaluated using
Tukey’s test for post-hoc comparisons. When unequal
SDs were detected, Brown-Forsythe and Welch’s
ANOVA tests were applied, followed by Dunnett’s T3
multiple-comparison test. If the data were not normally
distributed and for analysing the results of kidney damage,
the Kruskal Wallis test with Dunn’s post-hoc test
were performed. P values less than 0.05 were considered
statistically significant..
Results
Effect of different treatments on water intake, urine
output, and renal toxicity markers
Water intake and urine output were checked one week
after DOX injection (Table 1). Higher water intake (p =
0.003) and lower urine output (p < 0.001) were observed
in rats in the DOX group than in the control group. Cotherapy
with alamandine significantly decreased the effects
of DOX. A comparison with the control group revealed
that alamandine alone had a diuretic effect.
One week after the last dose of DOX was administered,
serum albumin was significantly lower (p = 0.002)
than in the control group, and urinary albumin was significantly
higher (p < 0.001). These changes in urinary albumin
were significantly (p < 0.001) reduced when
alamandine was administered (50 mg/kg/day).
DOX administration increased serum BUN (p < 0.001)
and serum creatinine (p < 0.001) while significantly decreasing
urine creatinine (p = 0.033). Co-treatment with
alamandine significantly reduced serum BUN (p = 0.017)
and serum creatinine (p = 0.005) compared to the DOX
treatment. Alamandine co-therapy produced an insignificant
increase in urine creatinine (p = 0.405).
The results also revealed that creatinine clearance
levels were lower in the DOX group than in the control
group (p = 0.003). Rats co-treated with alamandine exhibited
an insignificant increase in creatinine clearance
compared to the DOX group (p = 0.535).
Effect of different treatments on inflammatory
cytokines and NF-kB
DOX administration increased the serum levels of IL-1β
(p = 0.005), IL-6 (p < 0.001) and NF-κB (p = 0.011). Alamandine
co-therapy resulted in lower IL-6 levels when
compared to therapy using DOX alone (p = 0.040). Insignificant
reductions were observed in IL-1β and NF-B
levels (p = 0.439 and p = 0.091, respectively).
TGF-β levels in the kidney and urine were higher in
the DOX group than in the control group (p < 0.001).
Co-treatment with alamandine decreased these levels
(p = 0.009 for the kidney and p = 0.002 for the urine)
(Table 2).
Effects of different treatments on renal oxidative stress
markers
DOX administration markedly increased kidney MDA
(p = 0.005). The reduction induced by alamandine Cotherapy
was not statistically significant (p = 0.999). DOX
administration caused a significant decrease in kidney
SOD (p = 0.006) and a significant decrease in renal GPx
activity (p = 0.004) relative to rats in the control group.
Alamandine co-therapy insignificantly diminished these
differences (p = 0.554 for kidney SOD and p = 0.999 for
GPx activity) (Table 3).
Immunohistological study
All immunohistochemical sections of kidney tissues are
presented in Fig. 1. The minimum expressions of IL-6,
IL-1, P53, and NF-κb were seen in the control group.
Moreover, the expression levels of P53 were negligible in
all groups. Intense staining of IL-6, IL-1, and NF-κb was
observed in the DOX group (p < 0.01).
However, the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IL-1, IL-6, and NF-κb) was lower in the alamandine
+ DOX treatment group than in the DOX group.
The results obtained from the alamandine group were
similar to those of the control group, except for the finding
that IL-1 expression was significantly higher in the
alamandine group (Fig. 1).
Histopathological study
All hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained kidney sections
from different experimental groups were evaluated histologically.
The kidney sections of the alamandine group
did not show any significant histopathological changes
However, the histopathological evaluation of the kidneys
of DOX-treated animals showed severe tubular degeneration,
tubular cast and moderate tubular necrosis. Alamandine
co-therapy decreased these pathological
changes (Fig. 2).
Discussion
DOX is used to treat multiple solid tumors but has severe
adverse effects on the kidneys [25, 26]. The mechanisms
by which DOX causes glomerular toxicity have
are not yet fully understood. However, previous reports
have shown that reactive oxygen species and free radicals
are the most significant contributors to DOXinduced
nephrotoxicity [26–28]. The conversion of DOX
to its semiquinone is thought to play an essential role in
its nephrotoxic actions[29]. Semiquinone is unstable
under aerobic conditions and, therefore, reacts with molecular
oxygen to form superoxide anion radicals[30]. As
the number of primary free radicals increases, locally infiltrating
neutrophils and active mesenchymal glomerular
cells generate more free radicals that damage kidney
tissues [31]. DOX exerts direct toxic damage to the
glomerular base membrane, podocytes, and glomerular
endothelial cells, inducing tubular interstitial inflammation
and fibrosis[32]. As a result, renal function is compromised
following DOX administration—in turn, serum
urea and creatinine concentrations increase while serum
albumin, urea, and creatinine clearance decrease, ultimately
leading to extreme proteinuria [33, 34].
In the current research, we used a cumulative dose of
DOX injections to induce an experimental nephrotic
syndrome model. This model was characterized by albuminuria,
hypoalbuminemia, increased serum levels of
BUN and creatinine (two significant indicators of renal
function), and decreased creatinine clearance) indicator
of GFR), all of which are associated with increased oxidative
stress and inflammatory factors.
The toxic effects of DOX administration observed in
the current study are consistent with the findings of previous
studies in which renal function parameters, including
serum urea and creatinine, increased [35, 36].
However, administering almandine before, during, and
after DOX injections yielded improvements in renal
function parameters, including attenuated serum urea,
creatinine, albumin, and creatinine clearance. These improvements
in DOX-induced renal dysfunction have
been confirmed by histological and biochemical findings.
For example, DOX has been shown to increase oxidative
stress in the kidneys, as indicated by increased lipid peroxidation
and changes in antioxidants’ status [37].
Oxidative stress is crucial to the development of podocyte
damage, glomerular sclerosis, and proteinuria [38].
Our results showed that alamandine co-therapy restored
the levels of ROS end products (MDA) and ROSpreventing
enzymes (SOD and GPx) in the kidneys compared
to the control group. Thus, this treatment could
relieve renal oxidative stress in rats with DOX-induced
nephrotoxicity. Alamandine’s protective effects on albuminuria
and glomerular basement membrane damage
could be partly explained by its antioxidant property.
MDA can indicate lipid peroxidation, and it is used indirectly
to assess how much damage has been done to
cell membranes [39]. SOD catalyzes the dismutation reaction
of superoxide anion to hydrogen peroxide, which
is then detoxified into oxygen and water by catalase or
glutathione peroxidase. Such proteins prevent damage
caused by oxidative stress [40]. The results presented in
this research are consistent with those of a previous
study indicating that alamandine increased antioxidant
protein expression in ventricles exposed to I/R injuries
[41].
NF-kB is a transcription factor that regulates a wide
variety of genes involved in developing renal disease [42,
43]. NF-kB activation plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis
of DOX-induced renal inflammation [44]. NF-kB
is responsible for inflammatory reactions via the mediation
of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 expressions [45, 46]. In
this study, serum and tissue elevations of TNF-α, IL-1β,
IL-6, and NFκB were observed in DOX-treated rats. Alamandine
co-therapy reduced the extent to which NFκB,
IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 levels were altered by DOX.
These results suggest that alamandine has antiinflammatory
effects and can reduce the harm done by
DOX in harvested tissues.
In this study, alamandine alone increased IL-1. Macrophages
have MrgD receptors [47], and it is has been proposed
that alamandine binds these receptors, thus
increasing IL-1 secretion [47]. However, this increase in
IL production requires further investigation.
TGF-β was found to be a central mediator of renal fibrosis
[48, 49]. TGF-β1 can be synthesized by a wide variety
of cells, including macrophages, T and B fibroblast
lymphocytes, and resident renal cells [50]. In the present
study, alamandine reduced renal TGF-β1 levels. TGF-β1
expression in the kidneys is considered to be the final
common pathway leading to structural damage and fibrosis
in various glomerular diseases [51, 52]. Urinary TGF-
β1 appears to be a marker of glomerular damage severity.
In our study, urinary levels of TGF-β1 were also increased
(and subsequently reduced by alamandine co-therapy).
P53 induction mediates cell apoptosis by activating the
caspase-3 protease family and inducing apoptotic cell
death [53]. However, in the present study, the expression
of P53 IHC did not change in either the DOX or alamandine
groups, indicating that DOX side effects are reduced
independent of P53. Perhaps other pathways,
including ROS, inflammatory cytokines, and NFκB, work
together to damage the kidneys. The elimination of
intracellular H2O2 protects myocytes from DOXinduced
apoptosis, probably by inhibiting NF-κB activation
[54]). Thus, alamandine could protect the kidneys
by reducing superoxide and blocking the NF-B pathway.
The beneficial effects of alamandine were further illustrated
by a histological evaluation using H&E staining.
Histopathologic examinations showed marked pathological
lesions. These lesions were characterized by severe
proximal and distal tubular cell swelling (cell
degeneration), tubular cell necrosis, and a deterioration of the architecture of the kidney. Alamandine treatment
reduced these pathological lesions.
Surprisingly, the results of this study showed that alamandine
alone increased urine volume. Evidence indicates
that Ang (1–7) can counterbalance the vascular
and tubular action of AngII [55, 56]. Ang (1–7) induces
vasodilator, natriuretic, and diuretic effects through the
mas receptor [57]. It has been suggested that alamandine,
a heptapeptide with an Ang (1–7)-like structure,
exhibits actions similar to Ang (1–7) [7, 58–60]. However,
alamandine’s effects on urine volume require further
investigation. Figure 3 is an overview of
alamandine’s effects on DOX-induced nephrotoxicity.
Both alamandine and Ang-(1–7), owing to their respective
receptors Mas and MrgD, are members of the
RAS protective arm. This counter-regulatory RAS axis
has anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic
effects. The ACE2/Ang-(1–7)/Mas axis plays a protective
role in some renal disease models. A few human studies
have revealed the beneficial effect of Ang-(1–7) [61].
However, further studies must be done to elucidate the
downstream events triggered by alamandine/MrgD receptors
that modulate this protective effect. Understanding
the alamandine/MrgD receptor pathway can lead to
new pharmacological strategies for repairing the proinflammatory
environment that causes various diseases.
Current research suggests that drugs that activate this
protective arm of the RAS could improve treatments for
various disorders, including renal diseases..
Our results suggest that alamandine alleviates DOXinduced
nephrotic syndrome in rats, likely owing to its
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. These
findings indicate that alamandine could be used as a
therapeutic agent for DOX-induced nephrotoxicity.
Study limitations
Our study had several limitations, including the use of
pentobarbital at such a high dose (150 mg/kg) during
exsanguination. This dose might have influenced some
cytokines and biochemical parameters, such as liver enzymes,
urea , and creatinine [62].
Another limitation is that the animals used in this
study did not have cancer. Therefore, they did not exhibit
all the cellular and molecular changes associated
with cancer pathophysiology..
Nevertheless, understanding the mechanisms of DOXinduced
nephrotoxicity at an early stage of the disease is
important for preventing additional health problems,
such as nephrotoxicity, and resulting complications in
cancer patients.