Background
Substandard and Falsified (SF) medicines are a wellestablished
threat to public health [1–4]. World Health
Organization (WHO) defines ‘substandard’ medicines
which are often termed as ‘out of specification’ medicines
as authorized medical products that fail to meet either
their quality standards or specifications, or both.
On the other hand, falsified medicines are those that deliberately/
fraudulently misrepresent their identity, composition
or source [5]. In general, the problem of
substandard medicines, as defined by Newton et al. [6,
7], has been overshadowed by the focus on falsified medicines
[8–12]. Indeed, the proportion of substandard
medicines in circulation is difficult to ascertain because
of inadequate reporting. A recent study by the WHO
found a failure rate of 10.5% of tested samples [13],
while a review by Caudron et al. stated that the percentage
of substandard medicines in several Asian and African
countries is in the range of 8–46% [9]. A similar
study in six African countries revealed that 35% of the
collected samples were substandard [12]. Moreover, the
problem of substandard medicines is being exacerbated
by the rise of online pharmacies [14], which have made
drug sub-standardization profitable to unethical manufacturers
[15, 16]. Approximately 60% of internet users
in Japan and the USA use the internet for health-related
activities [17]. Thus, there is a clear risk that international
trade in pharmaceuticals via sales on the internet
will facilitate the entry of poor-quality products into
the legitimate supply chain and for the final users.
In this study, we focused on pioglitazone, which is widely
used for the treatment of adult type-2 diabetes mellitus as
an adjunct to exercise and diet to improve glycemic control
[18]. It is sold in the market as a single product under the
brand name Actos or in combination with metformin
(Actoplus Met, Actoplus Met XR) and glimepiride (Duetact)
[19, 20]. A few reports on the quality of pioglitazone
and other medicines from China or Myanmar have appeared
[21–23], and provide useful data for comparison
with the findings of this study. Additionally, recent reports
on the nitrosamine impurities detected in ranitidine and pioglitazone
products suggest the presence of scarce quality
pioglitazone products in the market [24, 25].
The aim of this work was to assess the quality of pioglitazone
circulating in China and Myanmar, as well as
that of pioglitazone sold online for personal import. The
information obtained here will be of value to public
health officials and pharmaceutical practitioners to determine
the extent of the problem, and also to provide a
baseline for future studies to evaluate interventions designed
to improve the drug supply quality, especially in
relation to online imports. It will also help guide further
research to better understand the health impact of poorquality
medications in these countries.
Methods
Ethics approval
Institutional ethical approval was not needed for this
study as it is does not involve human subjects, although
good ethical practice for such studies has been suggested
by Tabernero et al., to maintain the privacy and confidentiality
of the surveyors and the surveyed [26]. Regulatory
approval was given by the respective countries’
Medicine Regulatory Authorities (MRAs), and annual reports
have been submitted to them.
Study design and sample collection
As suggested by the regulatory authorities of the respective
countries, pioglitazone was chosen as a target medicine
because of the past history of similar medicines to
show problems in the dissolution test. The medicine also
appears in the essential drug list of Myanmar. The design
and analytical methods used in this study followed
as far as possible the guidelines of the WHO and those
proposed by Newton et al. [27, 28]. Cross-sectional sampling
with the mystery shopper approach was used. In
each sampling location, the initial sampling plan was to
follow a random sampling protocol, though in practice
this was not always possible due to the unavailability of
medicine, availability of insufficient quantities, incomplete
list of shops, or closure of a listed shop at sampling
sites [28, 29]. Samples were collected with prescriptions
from hospitals and clinics of Huangpu District and
Pudong New Area of Shanghai, China, between October
and December in 2012. Personally imported samples
purchased via internet sites were collected based on the
availability of commercial brands in the site during
September and December, 2013. Google Japan was used
as a search engine to find sites; the search term was ‘ピ
オグリタゾンAND 個人輸入’ for Japanese language
sites and ‘Pioglitazone and personal import’ for English
language sites. In Myanmar, samples were collected without
prescription from shops in Yangon during October 2015.
The samples were purchased by the mystery shoppers without
any preference to specific brands in an attempt to purchase
as wide a variety of available commercial brands as
possible. Medicines collected from the same shop/site and
labeled with the same international non-proprietary name
(INN), strength, size, brand name, batch/lot number, and
manufacturing and expiry dates were considered as one
sample. The maximum number of samples collected from
each shop was three.
Sample analysis
Chemical assessment of the quality of pioglitazone tablets
purchased in all the sampling location was carried
out at the laboratory of Kanazawa University, Japan.
Every sample was placed in an individual ziplock bag together
with the recoded data, and securely stored in an
air-conditioned laboratory (20–25 °C) until analysis.
Analysis of all samples was carried out before the stated
expiry date. The analysis consisted of observation, authenticity
and legality investigation, registration verification,
pharmacopoeial analysis (identification, potency,
content uniformity and dissolution test) and dissolution
profiling.
Visual inspection
Each sample was given a unique code after the shipment
was received. Details of the packaging condition and
label information were noted carefully. Observations included
the packaging and labeling, and physical appearance
of the tablet (size, shape, color, etc.) according to
the WHO guideline and the International Pharmaceutical
Federation (FIP) checklist for visual inspection of
medicines [28–30]. For personal import samples shipped
to Japan from internet pharmacies, the websites were
checked for compliance with the Pharmaceutical Affairs
Law of Japan [31, 32].
Authenticity investigation and legitimacy verification
For the authenticity investigation of the products and legitimacy
verification of the manufacturers, a detailed
questionnaire was sent to each manufacturer and regulatory
authority of the manufacturing country. Sample
questionnaire for product authentication and legitimacy
verification are presented in Supplemental File S1 and
Supplemental File S2. Each questionnaire contained detailed
information about the product, including manufacturer,
batch number, manufacturing and expiry dates,
and dosage and strength of the product, as indicated by
WHO and other related studies [17, 28, 29, 33]. The
registration status of all products as stated on the product
packaging was recorded, and included on a questionnaire
sent to the importing country to confirm the
registration of the product and manufacturer (sample
registration verification form is presented as Supplemental
File S3).
Laboratory analysis
Pioglitazone hydrochloride as a reference standard, benzophenone
as an internal standard, methanol, acetonitrile,
ammonium acetate, potassium chloride and other chemicals
of reagent grade were procured from the Wako Pure
Chemical Industries Ltd. Japan. Hydrochloric acid was
purchased from Nacalai Tesque Inc. and acetic acid from
Alfa Aesar. Analysis of the sample was done by highperformance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) according to
the modified and validated JP (Japanese Pharmacopoeia)
protocol [34, 35], using a Shimadzu Prominence HPLC
equipped with a Phenomenex Gemini NX C18 column
(150 × 4.6mm) and a UV-photodiode array detector
(SPD-20A/20AV Series). The flow rate, injection volume,
and detection wavelength were kept unchanged throughout
the entire analysis. The dissolution test was performed
using 900mL of a solution for each of the units with an
NTR-VS 6P dissolution apparatus (Toyama Sangyo Co.
Ltd., Osaka, Japan). The dissolution medium was prepared
by mixing 50 mL of 0.2 mol/L hydrochloric acid and 150
mL of potassium chloride solution, adding water to make
1000 mL, and adjusting to pH 2.0 with 5 mol/L hydrochloric
acid. Drug release studies were carried out according
to the United States Pharmacopoeia (USP) Type II
dissolution apparatus paddle method. The paddle was set
to rotate at 50 rpm (revolutions per minute) for 45 min
and the temperature was maintained at 37 ± 0.50 °C.
Standard solutions were prepared by dissolving accurately
weighed quantities of pioglitazone hydrochloride (reference
standard) and benzophenone (internal standard) in
the diluent to obtain concentrations of 0.2 mg/mL and
0.1mg/mL, respectively. Serial dilutions were made to
0.025mg/ml. The concentration of the test solution was
kept at 0.1mg/ml. The relationship between the peak area
and concentration of each reference standard was linear
within the range of 25–200% of the active ingredient (r2 =
0.999–1.000), and the quality test was performed within
that range.
Compliance criteria
Samples were evaluated as meeting the quality specifications
if the amount of active pharmaceutical ingredient
(API-pioglitazone hydrochloride) in each of the units, as
determined by the content uniformity test, lay within the
range of 95.0–105.0% of the label claim. For content uniformity,
the acceptance value (AV≦15.0) was calculated
according to USP 34 [36]. In the dissolution test, Q =
80% or more was used as the criterion of acceptability as
indicated by the pharmacopoeia [34–36].
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistical analysis was performed using
Microsoft Excel.
Results
We collected n = 44 samples from Shanghai, China, n =
60 sample from Yangon, Myanmar and n = 59 samples
personally imported into Japan. Details of the collected
samples are presented in the Table 1.
Observational analysis
No unusual or suspicious features were found for any
sample during visual inspection of the samples, except
for two samples from one manufacturer, where two different
batch numbered strips were found in one box.
The physical appearance of the samples was also compliant.
However, some serious issues were observed with
online sites during sample collection. Among the n = 32
online sites visited, all were in breach of Japanese regulations
in some respect [37]. Site observation results of online
pharmacies are summarized in Table 2.
Authenticity, legitimacy investigation, and registration
verification
The response rate to our questionnaire (Supplemental
File S1 and Supplemental File S2) was very low, but the
manufacturers who replied confirmed their products to
be genuine (Table 3). In the case of manufacturing
countries, the best response was found for the personal
import samples: 71.4% (5 out of 7) National regulatory
authorities (NRAs) confirmed that the manufacturers
had approval to manufacture pioglitazone. All the samples
collected from Shanghai were found to be registered
(Supplemental File S3). Among the n = 60 collected samples
from Myanmar, one sample was found to be unregistered
at Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
Myanmar.
Results of laboratory analysis
The results of the identification test are not shown in the
table, as all the samples were confirmed to contain pioglitazone.
Quantitative analysis by HPLC showed that all
samples were within the compliance range (95–105%), except
for one sample from China (1 out of n = 44 samples)
among the total of n = 163 samples from China, Myanmar,
and personal import combined (Table 4). The average
quantity of API in all the samples was 98.1% ± 2.7 (mean ±
Standard Deviation-SD) of the label claim. Content uniformity
for all samples was within the compliance range
(AV value was below or equal to 15). Figure 1a, b, and c
shows the frequency of the mean API in the quantity test
of all samples collected between 2012 and 2015.
However, In the case of the Myanmar and personal
import samples, there was a major problem with dissolution.
Figure 1d, e, and f shows the frequency of the
mean API dissolved in the medium in the dissolution
test. In the case of the personal import samples, n = 32
samples were analyzed for each manufacturer and batch
number, and 15.6% failed to release the required amount
of pioglitazone within the specified time. Among the n =
60 Myanmar samples, 13.3% were non-compliant in the
dissolution test. The average percent release of the compliant
samples was 95.0 ± 3.9 (mean ± SD). The average
percent release of the non-compliant samples is shown
in Table 5 and their quantity versus dissolution rate in
the dissolution medium are presented in Fig. 2. Time
course studies of drug release from the non-compliant
samples confirmed that they did not meet the threshold
requirement for dissolution time in the dissolution
medium (Fig. 3a and b), and most did not disintegrate in
the dissolution medium (Supplemental Figure 1 and
Supplemental Figure 2).
Discussion
Our findings revealed serious issues with pioglitazone
purchased via the internet and imported into Japan.
According to the Pharmaceutical Affairs Law in Japan,
selling prescription drugs without a prescription is prohibited,
but among the n = 32 online pharmacy sites visited,
none required a prescription to sell pioglitazone
(Table 2). In addition, 45 mg pioglitazone is not approved
for sale in Japan, but 4 pharmacies were selling
this formulation. Also, 14 pharmacies were selling pioglitazone
without any restriction on the amount purchased.
We found that most of the non-compliant
samples were obtained from sites that did not give any
physical address (Table 2).
On the other hand, the Myanmar samples, which also
showed a high failure rate (Tables 4 and 5, Fig. 3), were
all of foreign origin, which may suggest that medicines
can enter the country through unauthorized channels.
The authenticity of the products and legitimacy of the
manufacturers remained unclear due to the poor responses
to our questionnaire (Supplemental Files S1 and
S2) from both manufacturers and medicine regulatory
authorities (Table 3), as observed previously [17, 38, 39].
A possible explanation of the low response in the
former case might be that manufacturers are already
aware that their products are of low quality. However,
there is clearly a need to improve legitimacy verification
as well [40, 41].
In the case of China, only 1 sample out of =52 failed to
meet the pharmacopoeial requirement for API (Table 4).
This may mean that quality of pioglitazone in China is
better than has been suggested [22, 42, 43].
Poor dissolution was the predominant problem among
non-compliant samples. Among personally imported
samples, up to 8.5% were substandard (Table 4, Fig.
1e), and n = 3 released less than 30% of the required
amount (Table 5, Fig. 2). Nevertheless, we could
not establish whether these samples were falsified.
Among the Myanmar samples, the prevalence was
even higher, at 13.3% (Table 4, Fig. 2). The dissolution
test is an important indicator in bioequivalence
testing, e.g., to compare generic products with
the parent drug. However, many studies have shown
that there can be marked differences in dissolution
times between originator brand and generic drugs
[12, 44–46]. Time course studies of the noncomplaint
samples showed a marked differences in
the dissolution behavior compared to the standard
sample. Release rate of pioglitazone for most of
these non-compliant samples were below the
threshold limit even after 180 min in the dissolution
medium (Fig. 3, Supplemental Figure 1 and Supplemental
Figure 2). The ineffectiveness of these formulations
could easily result in treatment failure.
Drug dissolution testing is still being considered to
be a minimal requisite in many pharmaceutical
quality studies, given that the dissolution testing is
one of the key parameter to observe the physicochemical
changes in a solid formulation [47].
This study has several limitations. One minor limitation
of this study is that the data are relatively old. Medicine
regulatory authorities often show reluctance on
data sharing and publication. There are also limitations
and conditions on data sharing even if they approve and
in many cases, it takes longer time than usual to get
their final approval. However, the entire process is time
consuming and eventually lead to the delayed publication,
which is similar to this situation. Additionally, it
deals only with a single drug, pioglitazone, collected by a
cross-sectional method from specific areas of Myanmar
and China, so our results may not reflect the situation in
other regions of those countries. Therefore the results
may not be directly comparable with other reported
findings.
Conclusion
Many studies still only focus on the content of API
which can provide a sense of false security, as the
samples are classified as ‘good quality’ without any information
of dissolution/availability. High levels of
substandard pioglitazone with poor dissolution properties
were identified among samples purchased from
online sites and personally imported into Japan, and
also among samples collected in Myanmar, whereas
only a single sample from China was non-compliant.
The internet sites all failed to comply with Japanese
law in various respects. Coordinated steps should be
taken to ensure best practices including improvement
of national and international regulatory oversight to
address the situation.