Background
Gasoline station attendants are an important group at occupational
risk to BTX (benzene, toluene, and xylene) compounds
[1–3]. Among the constituents of gasoline, benzene
stands out for its hazardous effects on human health [4–6].
Furthermore, simultaneous exposure to benzene and other
aromatic hydrocarbons, such as toluene and xylene, contributes
to maximizing benzene toxicity [7].
Benzene exposure in occupational settings has been progressively
decreased as a result of preventive actions [8].
However, there are health concerns for workers related to
low levels of occupational exposure. These concerns are
linked to the fact that benzene is a well-recognized genotoxic
human carcinogen, classified as a Group I chemical
by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, and
without any known threshold dose [3].
In addition, it is well known that the hematologic disorders,
leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome are caused
by occupational benzene exposure, as well as various
deleterious effects on many other biological systems after
long-term exposures [9, 10]. Epidemiological and experimental
studies have shown that benzene exposure can
lead to non-cancer health effects, such as, genotoxicity,
hematotoxicity, hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity [2, 11,
12]. The mechanisms of benzene toxicity remain elusive.
However, it is well-known that reactive oxygen species
(superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical)
resulting from benzene metabolism may damage biomolecules,
inducing oxidative stress [10, 11].
Biomonitoring is a mandatory health protection measure
for workers occupationally exposed to benzene [13, 14].
Biological monitoring has been used as a potential tool for
better assessing integrated benzene exposures and may
contribute to the diagnosis and treatment of occupational
diseases [15]. Since there are no safe limits for exposures to
carcinogens such as benzene, simultaneous evaluation of
biomarkers of exposure and effect may be useful in the
estimation and reduction of risks caused by occupational
exposure to this xenobiotic. Such assessments may also be
adopted for preventative health initiatives for improving the
safety of occupationally exposed workers [9, 16].
A number of previous studies by our research group were
conducted with the aim of establishing new biomarkers of
early damage, which might be helpful in biomonitoring
actions related to occupational exposure to benzene. Many
early biomarkers of genetic [11], hematological [4], renal,
hepatic [2], and immunological [2, 17] alterations, caused
by low levels of occupational benzene exposure, were
proposed for the continuous monitoring of occupational
benzene hazards. Furthermore, these findings may be key
elements in the elucidation of different benzene toxicity
mechanisms.
Based on immunological biomarkers previously proposed
by Moro et al. [4], the work conducted by Sauer
et al. [17] showed possible immunotoxicity and carcinogenicity
mechanisms arising from benzene exposure.
Furthermore, alterations in inflammation biomarkers
were also reported by Sauer et al. [17]. In order to continue
the previous studies of our research group, this
paper aimed to evaluate immunological, inflammatory,
and oxidative stress biomarkers in gasoline station attendants,
and verify the possible influence of benzene exposure
on these biomarkers of effect.
Methods
Study population
Sixty-six individuals were enrolled in this study. The exposed
group consisted of 38 gasoline station attendants
(GSA) from Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. All subjects had
been working in their current job position for at least 6
months. The non-exposed (NE) group consisted of 28
subjects who were non-smokers and who had no history
of occupational exposure to benzene or other xenobiotics.
Each participant was interviewed about aspects of general
health, lifestyle, smoking status, and history of exposure.
The average ages of the GSA and control groups were
32.1 ± 1.7 years and 30.4 ± 1.8 years, respectively. No significant
difference between the GSA and control groups
was found related to age. The mean exposure time in
the GSA group was 8.5 ± 1.6 years (range: 0.5–32 years).
This study was approved by the research ethics committee
of the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul/RS (No.
21728/11) and written informed consent was obtained from
all participants prior to their enrollment in the study.
Sample collection
The sampling was conducted at the end of the work shift
after 3–4 consecutive days of exposure. Personal monitors
were used to assess airborne BTX concentration during
the daily work shift, for approximately 8 h. After air sampling,
the samplers were stored at − 20 °C until analysis.
Urine samples were collected for benzene, toluene, and
xylene metabolites and creatinine determination. The
samples were stored in polyethylene bottles at − 80 °C
until further analysis. Venous blood samples were collected
by venipuncture using vacuum tubes. EDTA-blood
tubes were collected and centrifuged at 1500 g for 10 min
at 4 °C. Aliquots of EDTA-plasma were stored at − 80 °C
until analysis of the protein carbonyl content. A blood
heparin tube was collected for glutathione S-transferase
enzymatic activity determination and co-stimulatory molecules
of CD80 e and CD86 assay analysis. A vacuum
blood tube without anticoagulant was centrifuged at
1500 g for 10 min at room temperature. The serum
obtained was aliquoted and stored at − 80 °C until
inflammatory cytokine analysis.
Exposure assessment
Personal breathing-zone air samples were collected using
passive samplers (SKC 575–002®). BTX (benzene, toluene,
o-, m-, p-xylene) were desorbed with dichloromethane and
analyzed by gas chromatography and flame ionization
detection (GC-FID; PerkinElmer, USA). GC column Innowax
(25m, 0.2mm, 0.4 μm) was used. The initial oven
temperature was 40 °C, and the temperature was increased
by 4 °Cmin− 1 until it reached 53 °C, followed by an oven
ramp rate of 40 °Cmin− 1 up to 200 °C. The FID detector
temperature was kept at 250 °C.
Quantification of urinary benzene metabolite (trans,
trans-muconic acid - t,t-MA) was carried out by highperformance
liquid chromatography with UV detection
(HPLC-UV; Shimadzu, USA) after solid phase extraction
(SPE) according to a previously described analytical
method [18], with modifications as previously described
[4]. Quantification of urinary metabolites of toluene
(hippuric acid - HA) and xylene (methylhippuric acid -
mHA) were simultaneously performed by HPLC-UV
[19]. The creatinine concentration was measured by
spectrophotometry as previously described [20] using
commercial kits (Doles reagents, Brazil).
Immunological biomarkers
CD80 and CD86 expression by monocytes was analyzed
by flow cytometry. The samples were processed within
24 h. Erythrocytes lysis was performed using an ammonium
chloride solution (0.13 M) and the leukocytes were
resuspended with PBS buffer. 106 leukocytes were incubated
with PE-conjugated anti-CD80 and FITCconjugated
anti-CD86. The antibodies were diluted 1:
100 with PBS and incubated in the dark at 4 °C for 20
min. Cells were analyzed by FACSC Canto II Flow
Cytometer (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA) with Flow
Jo Software (TreeStar). Monocyte cells were identified
by manual gating according to side scatter and size.
Inflammatory biomarkers
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-10
(IL-10), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interferon-
γ (IFN-γ) were analyzed using ELISA methods according
to the manufacturer’s instructions (Quantikine human immunoassays,
R&D Systems).
Oxidative stress biomarkers
Protein carbonyl (PCO) levels were determined using a
noncompetitive ELISA method in accordance with Buss
et al. [21] with some modifications. Total protein concentration
in plasma was measured by the Bradford method
using bovine serum albumin as standard. PCO levels were
determined as follows: plasma samples were diluted with
PBS buffer to a normalized concentration of 4 mg protein
mL− 1 and then samples were derivatized with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine
(DNPH) and incubated in Maxisorb multiwallplates
(Nunc Immuno 96 MicrowellTM Maxisorp)
overnight at 4 °C in the dark. Protein carbonyls were detected
using a dinitrophenyl rabbit IgG-antiserum (Sigma)
as the primary antibody and a monoclonal anti-rabbit immunoglobulin
G peroxidase conjugate (Sigma) as the secondary
antibody. Color development was performed with
o-phenylenediamine and H2O2 and the reaction was
stopped with H2SO4 after 15min incubation at 37 °C. The
absorbance was measured using a microplate reader with
a detection wavelength of 492 nm.
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity was performed
in 96-well microplates and was read in a microplate reader
(SpectraMax M2e, Molecular Devices), in accordance with
Habig et al. [22]. GST was determined using CDNB (1-
chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) as substrate and 0.15M GSH.
Statistical analysis
The data analysis was performed using the IBM SPSS Statistics
software (version 19). All study variables were tested
for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Comparisons
between groups were obtained using Student’s t-test and
the Mann-Whitney U-test. The results were expressed as
mean ± SEM or median (interquartile range), according to
variable distribution. Correlation tests were performed
using Pearson’s correlation coefficient and Spearman’s
rank according to each variable. Multiple linear regression
models were applied to verify the relation between BTX
exposure, immunological biomarkers, inflammatory biomarkers,
and oxidative stress biomarkers. The significance
level for all tests was p < 0.05.
Results
The data on environmental BTX exposure levels are reported
in Table 1. The GSA group was exposed to significantly
higher BTX concentrations than the non-exposed
group (p < 0.001). Additionally, the data showed that the
GSA group was exposed to very low levels of BTX, with
all values found to be below the ACGIH (American Conference
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists) limits.
Higher t,t-MA levels were found for the GSA group
when compared to the non-exposed group (p < 0.001;
Table 1). Although the t,t-MA levels were higher in the
GSA group compared to the non-exposed group, the
median values were below the biological exposure index
(BEI: 500 μg g− 1 creatinine) established by the ACGIH.
The urinary biomarker of exposure to toluene was not
significantly changed between the groups (p > 0.05;
Table 1). HA median values were below the biological
limit value for occupationally exposed people (BEI: 1.6 g
g− 1 creatinine; ACGIH). Furthermore, the urinary
biomarker of exposure to xylene could not be detected
in any members of the study population (Table 1).
Figure 1 shows the immunological biomarker results. Decreased
expression of CD80 (Fig. 1a) and CD86 (Fig. 1b)
was observed in the membrane of monocytes of the GSA
group compared to the non-exposed group (p < 0.001).
The cytokines levels are shown in Fig. 2. The GSA
group showed increased levels of pro-inflammatory IL-
1β, IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ in relation to the nonexposed
group (p < 0.001). In addition, reduced levels of
anti-inflammatory IL-10 was observed in the GSA group
compared to the non-exposed group (p < 0.001).
In relation to oxidative stress biomarkers, the protein
damage was assessed through PCO levels (Fig. 3a). The
GSA group showed an elevated PCO concentration compared
to the non-exposed group (p < 0.001). The antioxidant
status was evaluated through GST enzymatic activity
(Fig. 3b). Decreased GST activity was observed in the GSA
group compared to the non-exposed group (p < 0.05).
Univariate correlations were performed in all subjects,
as a single sample. Strong correlations were found among
the BTX organic solvents present in the gas station environment.
Personal benzene exposure was positively correlated
with airborne toluene concentration (r = 0.70; p <
0.001), o-xylene (r = 0.40; p < 0.05), m-xylene (r = 0.80;
p < 0.001), and p-xylene (r = 0.73; p < 0.001) levels. Additionally,
personal toluene exposure was also correlated
with o-xylene (r = 0.40; p < 0.05), m-xylene (r = 0.75; p <
0.001), and p-xylene (r = 0.64; p < 0.001) concentrations.
Also, the increased levels of personal benzene exposure
was accompanied by urinary t,t-MA excretion (r =
0.35; p < 0.01). Environmental toluene and xylene levels
were not significantly correlated with their urinary biomarkers
(p > 0.05).
Environmental BTX levels and t,t-MA concentrations
were significantly correlated with immunological, inflammatory,
and oxidative stress biomarkers (Table 2).
Table 3 summarizes the correlations found among the
evaluated biomarkers of effect. It was possible to observe
significant correlations between immunological biomarkers
and inflammatory biomarkers, immunological
biomarkers and oxidative stress biomarkers, and oxidative
stress biomarkers and inflammatory biomarkers.
Furthermore, a negative correlation was observed between
the oxidative stress biomarkers PCO levels and
GST activity (r = − 0.31; p < 0.05).
Exposure time was positively correlated with urinary t,t-
MA levels (r = 0.67; p < 0.001). Additional correlations between
exposure time and immunological, inflammatory,
and oxidative stress biomarkers are shown in Table 4.
Based on the correlations shown above, variables were
selected to verify their influence on the increased pro-
inflammatory biomarkers (IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-
γ). The multiple linear regression model, displayed in
Table 5, accounted for approximately 58, 55, 58, and 63%
of the increased pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6,
TNF-α, and IFN-γ, respectively. For all the inflammatory
biomarkers, benzene exposure was the only factor that significantly
contributed to the increased levels of the
markers: IL-1β (β estimate = 0.437; p = 0.018); IL-6 (β
estimate = 0.519; p = 0.007); TNF-α (β estimate = 0.496;
p = 0.008); and IFN-γ (β estimate = 0.388; p = 0.031).
Discussion
In this study, we observed the influence of BTX compound
exposure on the immunological, inflammatory,
and oxidative stress biomarkers evaluated. Furthermore,
the data suggest that the immunological and inflammatory
alterations observed in this study are interrelated,
and connected to the imbalance of the oxidative status.
Personal occupational exposure to BTX, shown in our
study, characterizes low-level exposure to these aromatic
hydrocarbons, since all the found values were below the
Threshold Limit Value-Time Weighted Average (TLVTWA)
proposed by ACGIH for working environments.
However, even so, it was possible to observe significantly
higher levels of benzene, toluene, and xylene exposure in
the GSA group compared to the non-exposed group.
These findings are in accordance with previous studies
that have also found airborne BTX concentrations lower
than the ACGIH limits [2–4, 11, 17]. Additionally, the
strong correlations shown between airborne BTX concentrations
evidenced that the GSA group was exposed
to a mixture of multiple organic solvents.
According to Carrieri et al. [3], urinary t,t-MA is a
widely used biomarker in routine practice for the biological
monitoring of benzene exposure, mainly because
of the simple analytical method used for its determination,
easily available in most industrial and environmental toxicology
laboratories. However, diet and smoking interference
in this biomarker of exposure may compromise its
specificity. Despite that, in our study, t,t-MA was confirmed
as a good indicator of exposure to low levels of
benzene exposure, since there were significantly elevated
levels in the GSA group in relation to the non-exposed
group. In addition, t,t-MA excretion correlated with personal
benzene exposure, which points to the relevance of
this biomarker of exposure, even at reduced levels. The
same cannot be visualized for the urinary biomarker of exposure
to toluene, since HA did not show any significant
difference between the groups, nor was it correlated with
personal toluene exposure, as previously shown in studies
by our group [4, 17]. Also, m-HA, urinary biomarker of
xylene exposure, did not prove to be a good marker.
The alterations observed in the immunological biomarkers
evaluated in our study (CD80 and CD86 expression
in monocytes) are in accordance with previously
described data [2, 4, 17]. Furthermore, the univariate correlations
showed that the reduced expressions of CD80
and CD86 were related to BTX exposure, proving the
interference of these chemical compounds in the immune
system of occupationally exposed individuals.
The co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 are recognized
as the main co-stimulatory molecules of the immune
system [17], and are considered one of the most
important signaling mechanisms and regulators of adaptive
cellular immunity [23, 24]. The absence or depletion of
these co-stimulatory molecules results in hyporresponsiveness,
development of anergic T cells, or inefficient immune
surveillance [17, 25, 26]. According to Sauer et al. [17], immunological
alterations, as observed in our study, could
contribute to the development of benzene immunocarcinogenic
effects, since it is known that the immune system is
highly involved in carcinogenesis.
The GSA group evaluated in our study presented increased
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α,
and IFN-γ), accompanied by decreased levels of the antiinflammatory
IL-10 cytokine, which is in accordance
with previous literature [27]. Although the lower expression
of the CD80 and CD86 adhesion molecules are
linked to an ineffective immune response, and consequently,
to a compromised inflammatory response, studies
have shown that chronic exposure to toxic agents,
such as BTX compounds, could contribute to the development
of an inflammatory process, which is involved in
the development of different types of cancer and tumor
progress [28, 29]. In addition, during the hepatic biotransformation
of BTX compounds, many oxidative and
reactive species are produced, which could contribute to
the increased of pro-inflammatory cytokines, as evidenced
in our results through of moderate correlations
among immunological and inflammation biomarkers.
CD86 expression in monocytes was positively correlated
with IL-10 levels and negatively associated with proinflammatory
biomarkers. These data suggest an immunological
impairment scenario, accompanied by an
inflammatory process, which could contribute to carcinogenesis,
as described above.
According Spatari et al. [30], aromatic hydrocarbons
found in fuel are active agents responsible for suppressing
immune response. In our study, according to the
multiple linear regression model, personal benzene exposure
was the only variable that significantly contributed
to the increased levels of the pro-inflammatory
biomarkers (IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ), These
findings suggested that the immunological and inflammatory
alterations observed in our study could be related
to carcinogenic process development due to
benzene exposure. However, additional and further studies
are needed to confirm this hypothesis.
The immunological and inflammatory alterations observed
in our study are connected to the oxidative stress
biomarkers, which could be shown by the univariate correlations.
Additionally, the GSA group showed increased
levels of PCO accompanied by decreased GST activity
when compared to the non-exposed group. Furthermore,
these alterations were linked to BTX exposure, confirming
the involvement of these xenobiotics in the imbalance
of the oxidative status observed.
According to Barreto et al. [31], during the biotransformation
of benzene, multiple forms of reactive species
are produced, which could contribute to the development
of oxidative damage, and could be the cause of increased
levels of the biomarkers of protein damage
observed in our study. Besides oxidative damage to protein,
the continuous production of reactive species during
benzene metabolism could induce toxicity in key
cellular components, such as DNA [32]. Indeed, the activation
of benzene and its metabolites culminates in
damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA carbohydrates
through various chemical reactions, leading to functional
alterations in different tissues [33]. Furthermore, chronic
benzene exposure compromises antioxidant capacity,
which also contributes to the development of oxidative
damage in exposed individuals [10, 34].
All the immunological, inflammatory, and oxidative
stress biomarkers evaluated were correlated with exposure
time. These findings indicate the possibility of using
these biomarkers in the continuous monitoring of occupational
hazards.
Conclusions
The main findings of this study are related to the fact
that all the alterations evidenced could be involved in
the damage caused by occupational benzene exposure,
especially the inflammatory process, which had not yet
been detected in previous studies of our group, involving
individuals occupationally exposed to benzene. Additional
studies should be performed to elucidate the potential
involvement of each biomarker. However, the
continuous monitoring of these biomarkers could contribute
to the early detection of the damages caused by
benzene.
Taken together, these findings showed the influence of
exposure to BTX compounds, especially benzene, on the
immunological, inflammatory, and oxidative stress biomarkers
evaluated. Furthermore, the data suggest a relationship
among the evaluated biomarkers of effect, which,
if continuously monitored, could contribute to providing
early signs of damage to biomolecules in subjects that are
occupationally exposed to BTX compounds. Additional
measures, such as antioxidant intake, exposure elimination,
also could contribute to the improvement of the life
quality of occupational exposed subjects.