Background
Pain is the major protective response that is initiated by
peripheral sensory neurons to protect the organism from
any harm by infection or tissue injury [1]. Pain helps the
body to take corrective actions in the presence of any
noxious stimuli. However, the presence of pain is not
always beneficial, in certain clinical scenarios; pain
increases the suffering when there is a dysfunction in
nociceptive pathways for example in neuropathic pain
and abnormal central amplifications syndromes [1].
Inflammatory pain results whenever injury to the tissues
ensues, causing the release of inflammatory mediators,
which decreases pain threshold by increasing the
transduction of painful stimuli [2]. These inflammatory
mediators including tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α),
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-6, reduces pain threshold
by directly sensitizing nociceptors and causing its increased
responsiveness leading to a state of hyperalgesia
and allodynia [3, 4]. In addition to directly activating
nociceptive fibers, these cytokines also potentiate the
inflammatory responses and increase the release of
proalgesic agents including nerve growth factor (NGF),
extracellular protons, bradykinin, and prostaglandins,
resulting in pain hypersensitivity [5]. These inflammatory
mediators are also linked with an increased transcription
of various inflammatory genes through
transcription factors including mitogen activated protein
kinases (MAPKs), cAMP response element-binding
protein (CREB) and Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB),
which further aggravates the immune and pain responses
by altering the neuronal threshold [5–7].
Although, painful conditions either acute or chronic
inflammatory pain, constitute a major health problem.
There is still need for safe and effective therapeutic
options. For example, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) are widely used for the management of
inflammatory pain conditions, are unable to completely
abolish pain and are associated with several serious adverse
effects including gastrointestinal bleeding and
renal toxicity [8]. On the other hand, opioid analgesic
represents a potent class of analgesics are also associated
with major adverse effects including physical and psychological
dependence, lethargy, euphoria, respiratory
depression [8]. Current therapies available for treating
acute and chronic inflammatory are inadequate and
there is a need of newer and safer analgesics and anti-inflammatory
drugs, that have better efficacy and tolerability
[9, 10].
Medicinal plants have been used for centuries for pain
management, which can be used as a potential source
for the development of novel analgesics for treating pain
[11]. Poncirin is a flavanone derivative obtained from
dried immature fruits of Poncirus trifoliata. Poncirus
trifoliata belongs to genus Citrus, which have been used
in Chinese medicine for the treatment of asthma and inflammation
[12]. Several studies reported that poncirin
exhibit anti-inflammatory [13], anti-tumor [14], antiosteoporotic
activity [15] and anti-colitic properties
(Kang and Kim 2016). Therefore, in the present study
various animal models of pain were carried out to assess
the anti-allodynic, anti-hyperalgesic and anti-nociceptive
properties of poncirin as a potential new analgesic to
treat different types of inflammatory pain.
Methods
Chemicals and reagents
Carrageenan, Complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA), formalin,
acetic acid, dexamethasone, Griess reagent, acetone,
piroxicam, and poncirin were obtained from Sigma
chemical company (St. Louis, MO, USA). Trizol reagent
was obtained from Invitrogen (USA).
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All procedures were complied with “Animal care guidelines
of QAU” Islamabad. The study was also approved
by Bioethical Committee (Approval No: BEC-FBS-QAU
2017–2) of QAU University, Islamabad. All the experiments
were designed to cause minimum harm to
animals.
Animals
All experiments were performed on male albino (BALB/
c mice, 4–5 weeks of age, weighing 25–30 g), purchased
from National Institute of Health (NIH), Islamabad,
Pakistan. All behavioral assays were carried out in pathogen-
free environment of laboratory of Pharmacology, Department
of Pharmacy, QAU, Islamabad, Pakistan. Seven
animals were housed per cage in controlled temperature
and humidity, with free access to food and water. All experiments
were performed between 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
During the current study, fresh/separate set of animals
were procured for each model (acetic acid, formalin, carrageenan
and CFA) and used once as per institutional ethical
guidelines.
Experimental groups and treatment protocols
The animals were randomly arranged into various
groups and each group consists of 6–7 animals. The vehicle
control received only normal saline with 2% DMSO
and no other treatment or inducer was given. The negative
control group received either acetic acid, formalin,
Carrageenan or CFA and no other treatment was administered.
The positive control either received Piroxicam
(in case of formalin and acetic acid-induced models),
while dexamethasone was administered in case of the
Carrageenan and CFA-induced inflammatory models.
The treatment control received the poncirin at three different
doses such as 5 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg and 30 mg/kg in
case of formalin, acetic acid and Carrageenan-induced
models, while only 30 mg/kg dose was administered to
only CFA-induced models. The inclusion and exclusion
criteria was followed as reported previously [16]. The
animals were anesthetized with the Xylazine + ketamine
injection (16 mg + 60 mg, i.p) to avoid distress to the
mice (to make them unconscious and reduce the painful
feeling associated with the euthanasia) and then CO2
chamber was used to euthanize the mice. The
institutional ethical committee regulated the overall
process of euthanasia. Prior to the disposal, the animal
death was confirmed by observing the movement, heartbeat,
respiration and eye reflex.
Randomization, blinding and sample size selection
The animals were assigned to various groups randomly
as reported previously [16]. Similarly, to avoid experimental
biasness double blindness was maintained during
the whole experiment as mentioned [16]. The sample
size (n = 6–7) was selected according to the previously
established protocols [16–19]. At the end of the experiments
the mice were euthanized using CO2 chamber.
Acetic acid-induced visceral pain model
Acetic acid-induced writhing test was performed in mice
as described previously [20]. The acetic acid-induced
pain model simulate the visceral pain model and initiated
by the release of inflammatory mediators, which
trigger the sensitization of the sensitization of nociceptors
[20, 21]. Briefly, acetic acid (0.8% v/v, 10 ml/kg) was
injected into peritoneal cavity of the mice. Mice were
then placed in large glass cylinder (10 cm diameter) and
writhing response was measured i.e. number of writhes
occurring between 0 and 30 min after acetic acid injection.
Drugs were administered by i.p route 40 min prior
to acetic acid induction, control group was treated with
vehicle (2% DMSO in 300 μl saline, i.p), positive control
was treated with piroxicam (5 mg/kg, i.p) and the
treatment group received poncirin (5 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg
or 30 mg/kg, i.p).
Formalin-induced tonic pain model
Paw licking was induced by intraplantar injection of formalin
as described previously with some modification
[22]. Before the initiation of formalin-induction, the
mice were transferred to the formalin testing boxes and
observed for 30 min. Following the induction of the formalin-
induced nociception, animals were further
observed for 30 min and the total time taken was 60 min
as reported previously with necessary modification [23].
Mice were observed for first 10 min (early phase) and
from 10 to 30 min (late phase) and total time spent in
licking the injected paw was calculated for both phases.
The mice were administered drugs through i.p. route 40
min prior to formalin induction. Control group was
treated with vehicle (2% DMSO in 300 μl saline, i.p) and
positive control was treated with piroxicam (5 mg/kg),
while treatment group received poncirin (5 mg/kg, 15
mg/kg or 30 mg/kg, i.p).
Carrageenan-induced acute inflammatory pain model
The anti-inflammatory potential of the poncirin
against the Carrageenan-induced inflammatory model
was explored [24]. The animals were randomly
divided into various groups as described above. The
Carrageenan-induced inflammation was established by
injecting 1% carrageenan solution into the right hind
paw as reported [24].
Assessment of mechanical hyperalgesia in carrageenaninduced
inflammatory pain
The mechanical hyperalgesia test was performed by
using Randall Selitto (Digital Paw Pressure Randall
Selitto Meter, IITC Life Science Inc. Wood land Hills,
CA) according to the method described previously
[24–26]. Animals were pretreated with poncirin (30
mg/kg) or vehicle (2% DMSO in 300 μl saline, i.p) or
dexamethasone (5 mg/kg) 1 h before the injection of
carrageenan (100 μg/paw). The anti-hyperalgesic
response of poncirin was recorded 4 h after the carrageenan
injection.
Assessment of mechanical allodynia in carrageenantreated
mice
In order to evaluate the anti-allodynic effects of poncirin
in acute inflammatory pain model was noted 4 h after
carrageenan injection (100 μg /paw). One day before the
experiment, baseline withdrawal threshold was determined
for all animals. On the day of the experiment,
animals were treated with poncirin (30 mg/kg) or
vehicle (2% DMSO in 300 μl saline, i.p) or
dexamethasone (5 mg/kg) 1 h before the injection of
carrageenan. Mechanical allodynia was measured in
all the treated groups using previously described
protocol [27, 28].
Assessment of thermal hyperalgesia in carrageenantreated
mice
Spontaneous nociception to heat stimuli was measured
according to previously described methods [29]. Mice
were placed in quiet room 30 min before starting the test
and were observed for the signs of the nociception
including licking of the hind paws. The response latency
was considered as nociceptive behavior with a cut off
time of 35 s, in order to avoid any tissue damage
Paw edema test in carrageenan-treated mice
Paw edema was measured in carrageenan-induced
inflammatory pain model according to the methods
previously described [26, 28]. Briefly, paw thickness was
measured by using a dial thickness gauge (No. 2046F,
Mitutoyo, Kawasaki, Japan) one day before and after
carrageenan (100 μg/paw) administration for all the
treated groups.
CFA-induced chronic inflammatory pain model
For the evaluation of anti-hyperalgesic activity of poncirin
in chronic inflammatory pain model, CFA-induced
pain model was employed [28, 30]. For the evaluation of
the effect of poncirin on acute inflammation and pain,
readings were taken at 2, 4 and 6 h post CFA injection.
While to investigate the effect of chronic treatment of
poncirin on mechanical and thermal sensitivity, mice
were treated with poncirin once a day for the period of
6 days. However, the dose of poncirin was skipped at day
5 in order to check any tolerance effects (to see whether
the effect of the drug remains persistent or it should be
administered daily to achieve the response) as described
previously [28].
Assessment of mechanical hyperalgesia and allodynia
induced by CFA
To evaluate mechanical hyperalgesia induced by CFA,
mice were treated with poncirin (30 mg/kg), vehicle (2%
DMSO in 300 μl saline, i.p) or dexamethasone (5 mg/kg)
by intra peritoneal route 40 min before the injection of
CFA (20 μl/paw). One day before the experiment,
baseline withdrawal threshold was determined for all animals.
For the evaluation of acute effects of poncirin on
pain profile, readings were taken at 2, 4 and 6 h post
CFA injection. Mechanical hyperalgesia was measured
by Randall Selitto (Digital Paw Pressure Randall Selitto
Meter, IITC Life Science Inc. Wood land Hills, CA),
while mechanical allodynia was measured using von Frey
hair filament.
Assessment of thermal hyperalgesia induced by CFA
Hotplate test was carried out in mice model of CFA
induced inflammatory pain as described previously
[29]. One day before the experiment, baseline withdrawal
threshold was determined for all animals.
Readings were taken at 2, 4 and 6 h post CFA injection
in order to evaluate the effect of poncirin in the
acute phase, while readings were taken for 6 consecutive
days for the chronic study. The dose of the poncirin
was skipped at day 5 to assess the tolerance
effect as reported previously [28].
Assessment of cold allodynia in CFA-treated mice-cold
acetone test
Cold acetone test was carried out in mice model of
CFA-induced inflammatory pain as described previously
[31, 32]. One day before the experiment, baseline
withdrawal threshold was determined for all animals.
Mice were placed in glass cylinders, and the noxious
cold stimulus was applied in form of brief spray of acetone
to the ventral surface of the right hind paw. The
nociceptive response, which included licking or biting,
was measured for 25 s as mentioned earlier [28].
Muscle strength and motor activity
The muscle strength of mice was determined by using
weights test and Kondziela’s inverted screen tests, in
order to assess the effect of poncirin on motor activity
of mice [33]. In Kondziela’s screen test, each mouse was
placed in the center of wire mesh screen and the screen
was inverted, which was held 40–50 cm above the padded
surface. Time taken by mice to hold the inverted
screen was recorded using a digital stopwatch and score
was assigned according to the protocol described elsewhere
[33]. Weight test was performed for measuring
muscle strength according to the protocol described
previously [33].
Biochemical assays
Serum nitrite determination
Griess reagents was used to determine the serum nitric
oxide (NO) as reported previously [34, 35]. The blood
was centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 10 min following collection
of the blood directly from the cardiac puncture and
NO was determined as described [34, 35].
Extraction of mRNA and q-RT-PCR
At day 6 of the CFA administration the animals were
anesthetized with Xylazine + ketamine (16 mg + 60 mg,
i.p) to remove the paw tissue. Following removal of paw
tissue, the animals were euthanized in the CO2 chamber
[36]. Mice paw were used for the extraction of total
RNA using Trizol Reagent according to manufacturer
instructions (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) as described previously [28]. Briefly, q-RTPCR
analysis for various target genes (TNF-α, IL-1β,
IL-6, Nrf2, HO-1, SOD2, VEGF, β-actin) mRNA was
performed using Applied Biosystems (AB) detection
instruments and software as described previously [28].
The forward and revere primers used are listed in the
Table 1.
Renal and liver toxicity
Biochemical tests were performed using serum samples
for assessment of RFTs and LFTs (Renal function tests
and liver function tests) at day 6 of the CFA
administration. Serum Aspartate Aminotransferase
(AST), Alanine Aminotransferase (ALT) and creatinine
concentration were determined as indicators of liver and
kidney functions respectively [37, 38].
Histopathological and X-ray examination of inflamed paws
To observe the effect of daily treatment of poncirin on
mice paw tissue, histopathological and radiological analysis
of the paw tissues were performed [21]. At day 6 of
the CFA administration the animals were anesthetized
with Xylazine + ketamine (16 mg/kg + 60 mg/kg, i.p) and
were euthanized in the CO2 chamber as mentioned [21].
After removal, each paw was washed using saline and
then fixed in 10% formalin solution, dehydrated and
embedded in paraffin according to the methods described
previously [21]. Paw tissue blocks sections were
made of 4 μm thickness, stained with hematoxylin-eosin
and observed by microscopy (40×) as per reported
protocols [21]. Similarly, the X-ray analysis (Philips 612
machine 40 kW for 0.01 s) was performed as to assess
the soft tissue swelling and bone erosion as described
previously [21].
Statistical analysis
All results are expressed as mean ± SEM. The differences
between the control and normal groups were tested by
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by
Student’s t-test using SPSS (version 10.0, Chicago, IL). A
value of p < 0.05 was chosen as the criterion for statistical
significance. The graphs were plotted using Sigma
plot version 12.0, Chicago, USA.
Results
Poncirin inhibits abdominal constriction induced by
acetic acid
In the first set of experiments, the anti-nociceptive effect
of poncirin was assessed in acetic acid-induced visceral
pain (Fig. 1), which has been employed widely for the
assessment of anti-inflammatory or analgesic properties
of new compounds [39]. Intraperitoneal administration
of poncirin 40 min prior to the acetic acid
administration considerably (p < 0.05) reduced the
number of abdominal writhing movements as compared
to vehicle-treated group (Fig. 1).
Poncirin reduces formalin-induced paw licking in both
phases
The anti-nociceptive effect of poncirin was also confirmed
by using formalin test, which produces a biphasic
response, each phase represents distinct types of pain
[40]. The first phase, named as nociceptive phase, is a
result of direct stimulation of nociceptors and is mediated
centrally, while the second phase is an inflammatory
phase, caused by the local release of hyperalgesic
and inflammatory mediators [40]. Formalin injection
produced biphasic paw licking response with the first
phase ranged from 0 to 10 min, while the second phase
ranged from 10 to 30 min. Administration of poncirin
40 min prior to formalin-induction significantly reduced
the paw licking response dose dependently in both early
phase (Fig. 2a) and late phase (Fig. 2b) respectively, however,
the dose of 30 mg/kg showed maximum response
(p < 0.05). The positive control treated with piroxicam
(5 mg/kg) also showed the significant anti-nociceptive
effect in both phases.
Poncirin inhibits carrageenan-induced mechanical and
thermal hyperalgesia
The compound poncirin was tested in three different
doses (5 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg or 30 mg/kg, i.p) in first two
set of experiments and 30 mg/kg dose of poncirin produced
significant analgesic responses when compared
with negative control groups, therefore, poncirin (30
mg/kg) was used in subsequent experiments. Next, the
anti-nociceptive effect of poncirin (30mg/kg, i.p) was
assessed in carrageenan-induced acute inflammatory
pain model. Poncirin noticeably inhibited (p < 0.05) carrageenan-
induced mechanical (Fig. 3a) and thermal
(Fig. 3b) hyperalgesia at given dose after 4 h of carrageenan
injection. In vehicle-treated group marked increase
in pain sensitivity was observed in mechanical
(Fig. 3a) and thermal hyperalgesia (Fig. 3b). Whereas
the dexamethasone used as positive control also inhibited
mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia (Fig. 3).
Poncirin inhibits carrageenan-induced mechanical
allodynia and paw edema
The poncirin treatment significantly inhibited carrageenaninduced
mechanical allodynia, while the maximum
increase in pain threshold (p < 0.05) was noticed with
escalated dose i.e. 30mg/kg (Fig. 3c). The positive
control (dexamethasone 5 mg/kg, i.p) also exhibited
significant reduction in allodynic responses compared,
however, the negative control group showed
decreased in pain threshold and hypersensitivity to
the allodynic stimulus. Similarly, the poncirin administration
markedly reversed the carrageenan-induced
paw swelling compared to the negative control group
(treated with carrageenan only) (Fig. 3d). Furthermore,
the positive control group also significantly
inhibited the carrageenan-induced paw edema in mice
(Fig. 3d).
Poncirin inhibits CFA-induced mechanical hyperalgesia
and allodynia
Next, the modulatory effect of poncirin was evaluated in
mechanical hyperalgesia and allodynia. In order to investigate
the effects of poncirin in CFA-induced mechanical
hyperalgesia, animals were treated with poncirin (30 mg/
kg, i.p) 40 min prior to CFA injection. Poncirin significantly
increased pain thresholds in both mechanical
hyperalgesia test and allodynia at 2, 4 and 6 h after CFA
injection, showing the promising activity of poncirin in
acute case. Dexamethasone also significantly increased
the pain threshold as compared to negative control
(Fig. 4).
In order to investigate the chronic anti-inflammatory
and analgesic effects of poncirin on mechanical hyperalgesia
and allodynia, animals were treated daily for 6
days skipping day 5 after CFA injection. Poncirin (30
mg/kg, i.p) daily treatment significantly increased pain
thresholds throughout treatment period compared with
negative control (Fig. 4c and d) indicating the effectiveness
of poncirin in chronic inflammatory pain model.
The dose of the poncirin was skipped at day 5 to observe
the tolerance effect (whether the anti-inflammatory effect
of the poncirin remains persistent while skipping
the dose or it should be administered daily to produce
its effect) as described previously [28]. However, the poncirin
treatment did not exhibited any tolerance effect and
the mechanical hyperalgesia and allodynia was reestablished
when the dose was skipped at day 5 (Fig. 4c & d).
Inhibition of thermal hyperalgesia and cold allodynia by
poncirin in CFA-induced pain model
In order to investigate the effects of poncirin in CFA-induced
thermal hyperalgesia and cold allodynia, animals
were treated with poncirin (30 mg/kg, i.p) 40 min prior to
CFA injection. Poncirin significantly inhibited acute
thermal hyperalgesia (Fig. 5a) at 2, 4 and 6 h after CFA injection,
showing the promising activity of poncirin. Dexamethasone
treated group also significantly increased the
pain threshold as compared to negative control. For longterm
effects of poncirin on thermal hyperalgesia, animals
were treated daily for 6 days after CFA injection, skipping
day 5 for evaluation of tolerance effect (whether the antiinflammatory
effect of the poncirin remains persistent
while skipping the dose or it should be administered daily
to produce its effect) of the drug on thermal hyperalgesia
as reported previously [28]. Poncirin (30 mg/kg, i.p) daily
treatment significantly increased pain thresholds (Fig. 5b)
indicating the effectiveness of poncirin in chronic inflammatory
pain model.
allodynia (Fig. 5c) at 4 and 6 h after CFA injection. For
long-term effects of poncirin on cold allodynia, animals
were treated daily for 6 days after CFA injection. Poncirin
(30 mg/kg, i.p) daily treatment significantly increased
pain thresholds on day 4 and 6 compared with
negative control, indicating the effectiveness of poncirin
in chronic inflammatory pain model (Fig. 5c).
Poncirin inhibited CFA-induced paw edema
Poncirin inhibited paw edema induced by CFA in both
acute and chronic inflammation models. Administration
of poncirin significantly reduced the paw thickness at 2,
4 and 6 h after CFA-induced acute edema (Fig. 6a). For
the evaluation of long-term effects of poncirin in CFAinduced
paw edema, poncirin (30 mg/kg) treatment for
6 days showed significant inhibition of paw edema
compared to CFA treated group (Fig. 6b). Similarly, the
positive control (dexamethasone 5 mg/kg) also significantly
attenuated the acute paw edema 2, 4 and 6 h after
CFA administration, while the daily administration of
dexamethasone (5 mg/kg) for 6 days also markedly
attenuated the CFA-induced paw edema compared to
the negative control (Fig. 6b).
Poncirin doesn’t have any effect on the motor activity
of mice
Poncirin chronic administration does not effected the
motor function of the mice, which was evaluated by
Weights test and Kondziela’s screen tests utilized as a
screening tool in preliminary drug research for evaluation
of motor function (Fig. 7a and b) [33, 41]. Motor
function was altered in the CFA-treated group while
both poncirin and dexamethasone did not alter the
muscle strength both after acute and long-term administration
of drugs.
Body weight assessment
Each group of mice were weighted before the disease
induction with CFA. Similarly, the weight of mice were
also recorded at day 6 of the CFA administration at the
end of the experiment as shown (Additional file 1).
Poncirin reduced the production of NO in plasma after
CFA induction
The inhibitory effect of poncirin on NO production
in plasma was analyzed on day 6 of the CFA administration
using Griess reagent method as described
previously [28]. The CFA administration markedly
increased the production of NO in mice plasma at
day 6 of the administration. The poncirin (30mg/kg)
treatment significantly attenuated the NO (almost
80%) production compared to the negative control
(only CFA treated group) (Fig. 8). Similarly, the dexamethasone-
treated group also showed obvious
decrease in NO production (approximately 83%
decrease was noted in NO production) (Fig. 8).
Poncirin inhibits CFA-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines
production
To examine the effect of poncirin (30 mg/kg) on the
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in CFAtreated
paw, qRT- PCR was performed. qRT-PCR results
showed increased expressions of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and
VEGF mRNA in CFA-induced mice paw tissue (Fig. 9a,
b, c and d). Whereas, poncirin treatment strikingly
inhibited the mRNA expression levels of pro-algesic and
inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and
VEGF (Fig. 9).
Poncirin increased the expression levels of Nrf2, HO-1,
and SOD2 in CFA-induced inflammatory pain model
qRT-PCR was also used to investigate the effect of
poncirin treatment on expression levels of the phase II
antioxidant enzymes (HO-1 and SOD2). Nrf2 activates
antioxidant response element (ARE) that in turns is
responsible for the expression of phase II antioxidant
enzymes [42]. The mRNA expression levels of SOD2
(approximately 79% increase was noticed) and HO-1
(more than 5 times) was increased in poncirin treated
group as compared to CFA treated group (Fig. 10b and c).
Poncirin treatment up-regulated Nrf2 (100% increase)
expression level considerably (Fig. 10a).
Poncirin doesn’t cause hepatic or renal damage
Mice were treated daily with poncirin (30mg/kg, i.p) or
dexamethasone (5mg/kg, i.p) or vehicle for 6 days after induction
of inflammatory pain. The treatment with poncirin
and dexamethasone did not alter the hepatic and renal
functions (Table 2), thus signifies that poncirin administration
did not produce any toxicity against these vital organs.
Poncirin inhibited infiltration of inflammatory cells and
soft tissue swelling after CFA induction
Histopathological analysis of tibiotarsal joints of right
hind paw showed a significant infiltration of immune
cells and synovial hyperplasia in CFA treated group,
while poncirin treated group showed a reduction of immune
cells infiltration and synovial hyperplasia (Fig. 11b).
The radiographic examination of the soft tissue showed
marked reduction in soft tissue swelling of the right hind
paw in those animals who were treated with the poncirin,
however, the animals challenged with CFA only
showed noticeable soft tissue swelling and bony erosion
(Fig. 11a).
Discussion
Inflammatory pain is a common chief complaint associated
with many disease conditions including irritable
bowel syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis
[2]. The inflammation mediated pain trigger the induction
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and activates several
signaling pathways such as NF-κB, MAPKs etc. Currently,
several therapeutic approaches are employed to
treat the inflammatory pain such as NSAIDs and opioids
[43]. The chronic use of NSAIDs such as aspirin can
cause the GIT ulceration, while the prolonged use of
opioids is related with the development of tolerance, dependence
and respiratory depression [44–47]. All these
challenges necessitate the development and discovery
new molecules, which are safe, effective and associated
with less side effects profile. Since decades, medicinal
plants have been used for therapeutic purposes, as they
are effective and safe and offer a good source of new
chemical entity [44–47]. Poncirin is flavanone derivative
obtained from dried immature fruits of Poncirus trifoliata,
which was used to treat inflammation and asthma in ancient
times [44–47]. Recent studies on poncirin have also
confirmed its anticancer and anti-inflammatory activity
[14]. In the current study, it was demonstrated that systemic
administration of poncirin in various inflammatory
pain models successfully alleviated pain associated with inflammation.
The anti-hyperalgesic effects of poncirin in
inflammatory pain can be attributed to suppression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines including TNF-α, IL-1β and
IL-6, enhancing the expression of antioxidant genes and
enzymes (Nrf2, HO-1 and SOD2) respectively. Therefore,
the present study highlights the analgesic potential of
poncirin together with its safety since the systemic administration
of poncirin did not present any renal, hepatic or
motor side effects.
Acetic acid-induced abdominal writhing is a simple
method for novel drugs screening in visceral pain [20].
Acetic acid administration causes the activation of
peritoneal macrophages and mast cells which leads to
local release cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-1β and
other mediators like eicosanoids and sympathomimetic
amines [38]. Since poncirin administration inhibited
acetic acid-induced writhing markedly, it is likely that
the anti-nociceptive activity of poncirin might be contributed
due to its inhibitory activity cytokines production.
Similarly, the anti-nociceptive activity of poncirin
was also observed in formalin-induced tonic pain model.
The injection of formalin causes an intense and immediate
increase in impulses transmission from C afferent
fibers and produce a diverse quantifiable behavior as
paw licking by the animal that indicates the intensity of
pain [48]. This test can also be used to determine the effect
of new compounds on central and peripheral nociceptive
pathways as formalin injection causes biphasic
reaction consisting of early neurogenic phase and late inflammatory
phase [49]. The early neurogenic phase of
formalin injection last from 0 to 10 min and is caused by
the release of neurotransmitters such bradykinin and
serotonin as well as molecules released from residents
cells causing the activation of transient receptor potential
ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) on the surface of nociceptive
fibers [50]. The late inflammatory phase of formalin test
lasts from 10 to 30 min and occurs because of release of
inflammatory cytokines including TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6
and prostaglandins after administration of inflammatory
stimuli like formalin [51]. Poncirin inhibited both paw
licking and total time spent in paw licking in both
phases of formalin injection. Interestingly, poncirin administration
reduced the total spent in paw licking in
the first phase as compared the positive control, showing
its effect on the central pain pathways. The analgesic
potential of poncirin was also demonstrated in carrageenan-
and CFA-induced acute and chronic inflammatory
pain models. Carrageenan and CFA are algogenic
substances and cause the local release of mediators, such
as prostanoids and cytokines, involved in the inflammatory
signs such as vasodilation, edema, and hyperalgesia
[52, 53]. Importantly, the systemic administration of
poncirin reduced both hyperalgesia and allodynia in both
carrageenan and CFA model with comparable results to
dexamethasone, which is a standard anti-inflammatory
drug, showing the anti-nociceptive potential of poncirin.
Carrageenan- and CFA-induced inflammatory pain are
well-accepted models of acute and chronic pain respectively.
The peripheral injection of algogenic substances
like carrageenan and CFA causes the release of numerous
nociceptive and inflammatory mediators, resulting
in the alteration of synaptic activity by increasing the
primary sensory fibers discharge and causing central
pain sensitization by modifying neuroimmune cells [54].
In present study, systemic administration of flavanone
glycoside poncirin remarkably inhibited the mechanical,
thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical and cold allodynia
induced by carrageenan and CFA in both acute and
chronic inflammation models in mice. Poncirin increased
the pain threshold after 2 h of treatment and
its effects persisted until 6 h in the acute model and
until day 5 in the chronic model. The paw edema induced
by carrageenan and CFA was also significantly
reduced by poncirin. Because TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6,
play a key role in inflammatory hyperalgesia, it may
be suggested that the anti-nociceptive effects of
poncirin are due to its ability to inhibit the release of
inflammatory cytokines [44].
NO is a well-established mediator of inflammation and
its production is related to the degree of inflammation
[55]. The expression of NO is under the influence of
iNOS gene, however, its production is also regulated by
the TNF-α, thus maintain the hyperalgesic state after the
inflammation and pain. The poncirin treatment significantly
reduced the levels of NO compared to the CFAinduced
group.
Inflammation is closely related to sensation of pain [5].
Following the local injection of CFA there is a release of
various inflammatory mediators including TNF-α, IL-1β
and IL-6. NO also contributes to the hyperalgesic state
by indirectly sensitizing the nociceptors through the production
of prostanoids such as PGE2. In addition, these
cytokines increase the synaptic transmission by directly
activating nociceptors [4]. In the present study, poncirin
also significantly reduced the expression of TNF-α, IL-
1β and IL-6 in CFA induced inflammatory pain, suggesting
that suppression of these pro-inflammatory cytokines
contributes to the anti-nociceptive activity of poncirin.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) induces vascular
leakage by enhancing vascular permeability, thus
playing an important role in inflammation [56]. The
expression of inflammatory cytokines is, also induced by
VEGF indicating the role of VEGF in the production of
these hyperalgesic cytokines [56]. The poncirin treatment
significantly reduced the mRNA expression level
of the VEGF compared to the negative control group,
thus, indicating the potent anti-inflammatory role of the
poncirin.
Nrf2 is transcription factor responsible for the induction
antioxidant enzymes including glutathione peroxidase
(GPx), Glutathione S transferase (GST) and HO-1
[42]. Nrf2 have multiple protective actions including
antioxidant activity by induction of antioxidant enzymes,
anti-inflammatory role in many diseases as well as protective
action in wound healing [57, 58]. The protective
anti-inflammatory role of Nrf2 is attributed to inhibition
of expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, iNOS and
COX-2 in early events of inflammation. HO-1 is one of
the major anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective enzymes,
expression of which is controlled by Nrf2 [59].
The HO-1 expression is induced by many inflammatory
stimuli and increased inflammatory state was observed
in mice deficient with HO-1 emphasizing on the important
role of HO-1 in inflammation resolution and hence
decreasing hyperalgesic state [60]. In the current study,
systemic administration of poncirin has shown to significantly
increased the expression of Nrf2 and induction of
HO-1, highlighting its importance in reducing the
inflammatory pain through Nrf2 mediated pathway.
Poncirin treatment also up-regulated the expression of
SOD2 (superoxide dismutase 2) following CFA-induced
inflammatory pain in mice. SOD2 is antioxidant enzyme
belonging to SOD family and plays important role in
body defense as antioxidant enzyme by modulating the
production of inflammatory cytokines [61]. SOD2 high
levels in the body inhibit the phospholipase-2 (PLA2)
overexpression and consequently inhibits the downstream
PGE2 production via NF-κB-dependent pathways [62],
thus, reduces the pain by reducing the inflammation.
To assess the toxic effect of poncirin on liver and
kidney, liver and kidney functions test were performed
using blood plasma. The poncirin treatment exhibits no
toxic effect on the liver and kidney. Similarly, to observe
any possible toxic effect on the animals, muscle strength
and coordination was assessed. The poncirin treatment
was not associated with any toxic effect on the muscle
strength and coordination.
Conclusion
Poncirin significantly reduced abdominal writhing in
acetic acid-induced visceral pain and also showed
remarkable results in both phases of formalin test. In
addition, poncirin administration also significantly
produced anti-allodynic and anti-hyperalgesic effects in
carrageenan- and CFA-induced models. Importantly,
chronic treatment with poncirin in CFA model did not
produce any side effects. Poncirin also reduced the NO
content and pro-inflammatory cytokines expression including
TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 in paw tissue. The
mRNA expression of VEGF was also inhibited by
poncirin, which correlates to reduction in paw edema
and increased pain thresholds in CFA induced inflammatory
pain models. Poncirin also significantly increased
the antioxidant enzymes (HO-1 and SOD2) and transcription
factor (Nrf2), suggesting that protective role of
poncirin as well as multiple targets by which poncirin
modulates pain. Collectively, our data demonstrate the
analgesic potential of poncirin in acute and chronic
inflammatory pain conditions that still need an effective
and safe therapeutic option.