Background
Optimal dosing and timing, as well as the route of
administration and justified use essentially influence the
outcome of antibiotic therapy. The excessive use of antibiotics,
including overuse and inappropriate application
(including using suboptimal doses) of antimicrobial
agents fosters bacterial resistance, recognized as one of
the most urgent global public health threats, and being
the main reason for nosocomial infections [1]. Therefore,
the World Health Organization (WHO) makes
continuous efforts to raise the awareness of healthcare
professionals and patients about proper antibiotic use.
Some aspects of antibiotic interactions have been
extensively studied. It is well known that the coadministration
of several antibiotics with milk products
should be avoided as bivalent ions, i.e. calcium and magnesium
in milk form complexes with these pharmacons,
thereby decreasing their absorption [2]. Although some
food and herb interactions with antibiotics have also
been described, the number of studies focusing on this
issue is limited. For the majority of medicinal herbs it is
still undiscovered whether they alter the pharmacokinetics
of antibiotics.
However, there are reasonable theoretical considerations
that suggest the risk of potential interactions.
Some components of medicinal plants may interfere
with the bioavailability of antibiotics by decreasing their
absorption. The two most important family of compounds
that may potentially affect the pharmacokinetics
of antibiotics include fibres and polyphenols, which most
frequently occur in commonly used plants. These compounds
may affect the absorption of different drugs via
chemical or physical interactions. The effect of fibres
(chemically polysaccharides) is non-specific, hence these
compounds affect the bioavailability of various medicines,
such as digoxin, lovastatin, metformin and penicillins
[3]. Polyphenols are known to react chemically with
amine-containing molecules resulting in precipitation
which may lead to decreased bioavailability [4]. Although
several drug molecules contain amine functionalities,
this potential interaction has not been studied in detail.
This possible interaction may be avoided by consuming
polyphenol-rich food (e.g. fruits) separately from medicines,
however, the risk of taking medicines with drinks
containing polyphenols is neglected. The most popular
drink with a remarkably high polyphenol content is tea,
especially green tea. Tea is the most widely consumed
beverage aside from water, and its consumption is
growing worldwide [5]. Although, globally, black tea is
Although, globally, the most frequently consumed the
most frequently, even in countries where it is the top
type of tea (e.g. Morocco, Turkey, Ireland and the
United Kingdom), green tea consumption shows an increasing
popularity due to a growing consumer interest
toward healthier beverages [6]. Green tea is one of the
most popular beverages in Japan, China, as well as in
some countries in North Africa and the Middle East [7].
Generally, 40–70% of the Japanese population consumesconsume
green tea regularly (at least 1 cup/day) [8, 9].In
Europe is consumed as the top In Europe, green tea is the
most type of tea in Belgium, Denmark and France [10].
The health benefits of green teaThe health benefit of
green tea has been extensively studied: it has proved antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, anticarcinogenic, and antimicrobial
effects [11, 12]. These health promoting effects
are mainly associated with its polyphenol content, that
may constitute up to 30% of the dry leaf weigh [7].
Based on its highly frequenthigh consumption, green
tea is very likely to be consumed with medicines, including
antibiotics. In a recent review [13], the interaction
between green tea and clinically prescribed medications
was summarized as follows: the plasma concentration of
some drugs (e.g. diltiazem, clozapine, tamoxifen) changed
significantly when they were administered concurrently
with green tea/EGCG to male Sprague-Dawley
rats. Nevertheless, the interaction between green tea and
antibiotics has been poorly investigated. The majority of
the available studies have been carried out in vitro, primarily
to explore the potential synergistic pharmacodynamic
interactions [14, 15]. Egyptian scientists found
that even diluted green tea enhanced the bactericidal activity
of several antibiotics against 28 microorganisms in
vitro, and moreover, it increased the susceptibility of
drug-resistant bacteria [16]. Noormandi et al. thoroughly
summarized the synergistic effect of green tea on antibiotic
treatment of urinary tract infections, however,
they emphasized that despite the promising results of in
vitro studies, human and animal studies are needed [17].
Based on the potential antagonistic (inhibition of absorption)
and agonistic (increase of antibacterial activity) interactions,
the overall effect of the concomitant
consumption of green tea and antibiotics seems to be
contradictorycontradictory.
Amoxicillin is one of the most commonly used
antibiotics in primary care, prescribed either alone or in
combination with clavulanic acid, with a remarkable
dominance in inpatient therapy [18, 19]. It is reported
that high-fiber diet reduces the bioavailability of amoxicillin
[20–22], while regular type food intake [21, 23, 24]
does not affect it. Interestingly, while most antibiotics
interact with calcium, and thus the concomitant
consumption of milk and antibiotics is not recommended,
this phenomenon was not observed for amoxicillin
[25, 26]. However, the amoxicillin molecule
contains amine functionalities, thus it might be subject
to interaction with polyphenols.
The interaction between green tea extract and amoxicillin
was studied in vitro only. In one study synergistic
interactions between ampicillin, a β-lactam antibiotic
alike amoxicillin, and green tea against Staphylococcus
aureus were described [15].. Also, in an in vitro study,
Passat found that the water extract of green tea leaves
has synergistic effect on some antibiotics including
amoxicillin, while it has and antagonistic effect on other
antibiotics used against urinary tract E. coli isolates [27].
As in vivo or toxicokinetic studies are still missing in
the literature, thet aim of our research was to study this
potentially relevant interaction, i.e. the effect of green
tea on the absorption of amoxicillin, in an in vivo experiment
on rats, as a preliminary step for a suggested
human study. To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the first in vivo toxicokinetic investigation of this issue
in vivo.
Methods
Experimental substances
Amoxicillin trihydrate (product number: 31586) and
potassium clavulanate (product number: 33454) were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Green tea (China-Chun
Mee) was obtained from Hungary (Latin Negyed Ltd.,
Hungary). All the solvents were of LC-MS grade (VWR,
Hungary).
Determination of polyphenol content
Total polyphenol content, determined as pyrogallol
equivalent, was measured according to the method
described in the European Pharmacopoeia [28]. In a
round-bottomed flask 0.5 g (m1) powdered green tea was
extracted with 150 ml of water in a water-bath for 40
min. After cooling under running water, it was transferred
to a 250 ml volumetric flask and was diluted to
250.0 ml with water. The extract was filtered through a
filter paper of 125mm in diameter. The first 50 ml of
the filtrate was discarded. 5.0 ml of filtrate was diluted to
25.0 ml with water. 2.0 ml of this diluted extract was
transferred to a 10 ml volumetric flask, 1.0 ml of twofold
dilution of Folin-Ciocalteu reagent was added, and
the mixture was diluted to 10.0 ml with a 290 g/l
solution of sodium carbonate. After 30 min absorbance
at 760 nm (A1) was measured. For a standard solution
0.0500 g (m2) of pyrogallol was dissolved in water immediately
before use, and diluted to 100.0 ml using the
same solvent. 5.0 ml of this solution was diluted to
100.0 ml with water. 2.0 ml of this diluted pyrogallol
solution was transferred to a 10 ml volumetric flask, 1.0
ml of two-fold dilution of Folin-Ciocalteu reagent was
added, and the mixture was diluted to 10.0 ml with a
290 g/l solution of sodium carbonate. After 30 min
absorbance at 760 nm (A2) was measured. For the
calculation of total polyphenols as pyrogallol equivalent
(PGE, %), the next formula was used:
62:5  A1  m2
A2  m1
Test animals and animal care
24 male SPF Wistar rats, weighing 276–300 g at the
beginning of the study, were used in the experiment
(purchased from Toxi-Coop Zrt., Hungary). After 5 days
of acclimatization the rats were divided into two wellbalanced
groups according to body weight (antibiotic
only group (AM) and antibiotic plus green tea group
(AMG), 12 animals/group). The number of animals per
group was calculated to maximize the number of blood
sampling occasions while minimizing the number of animals
used for blood sampling per occasion. As environmental
enrichment, unbleached, clean paper tubes were
provided for the rats. Three rats per cage were placed on
dust-free wood shavings as bedding material. Animals
were housed under standard climatic conditions (22–
24 °C, 30–70% relative humidity, 12 h light/dark cycle
with light starting at 6:00 a.m.) with free access to tap
water and restricted access to certified rodent pellet.
During the whole procedure, the regulations of the
Hungarian Act No. XXVIII of 1998 on the protection
and care of animals were strictly followed. Every procedure
(handling, treatment, anaesthesia) executed in this
experiment was approved by the Committee on Ethics
of Animal Experiments of the University of Szeged and
the Directorate of Food Safety and Animal Health Care,
Government Agency of Csongrád County (Permit number:
XXI./151/2013.). All efforts were made to minimize
animal suffering.
Administration of the antibiotic and green tea
The OECD Guidelines No. 417 [29] and No. 423 [30]
were followed during the experiment. Dose selection
was based on Ishizaki [31] and Woodnutt [32] and was
adjusted to bioanalytical detection rate in the samples.
The suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (7:1
w/w; dose: 100 mg amoxicillin/kg b.w.) was administered
per os in single 1 ml/kg b.w. dose. The suspensions were
prepared using either distilled water (AM group) or
green tea infusion (AMG group). The suspensions were
prepared freshly, no earlier than an hour before treatment,
and were homogenized with vortex right before
administration. Green tea infusion was prepared using
15 g of drug (green tea leaves) and 100 ml of boiling
water, and after 5 min of maceration the extract was filtered
on a tea-strainer. The room temperature filtrate
was used for the preparation of the antibiotic suspension
applied in the AMG group.
Access to rodent chow was restricted to approximately
10 g for a 16-h-period preceding treatment to follow the
advice of the OECD Guideline No. 423. Treatment
modelled human medication intake. Right before the
treatment, the body weights of the animals were
measured individually in order to precisely calculate the
amount of suspension to be given. The oral administration
of AM or AMG took place outside the cage,
executed by a round-ended gastric tube. Six animals
were treated daily in the mornings, consecutively, with
5-min delays.
Blood sampling
The number of occasions for blood sampling were
determined according to the pharmacokinetics of the
test substance [32, 33]. Altogether, blood samples were
taken six times: 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, and 240 min after
the administration of AM/AMG. Considering the limited
amount and occasions of blood sampling executable per
animal (8 times at a maximum [34]), only 3 samples per
animal were taken during the six-hour investigation
time. To make sure that we obtain enough blood samples
for the pharmacokinetic measurements, two animals
were used for the total kinetic measurement. Accordingly,
a total of twelve rats were used to obtain six data
for each time point of the kinetics. The sampling protocol
is given in Table 1.
Before each blood sampling the animals had been
warmed with an infrared lamp for thirty minutes in
order to dilate the tail veins to ease blood sampling. At
the first sampling occasion, the firmly but securely
restrained rat was placed on a warm pad, and a Vasofix
Certo 24 G ¾ (0,7 × 19 mm) intravenous catheter was
placed in one of the lateral tail veins. To prevent the dislocation
of the sampling needle a mild aether anaesthesia
was provided under a ventilation hood to relax the
animal when it was essential, by placing a small tube
with a cotton bud containing 0.2 ml aether to the
nostril of the animal for a couple of seconds with
careful supervision. A minimum of 0.2ml of blood
samples were collected in a plastic tube, followed by
injecting 0.12 ml of heparin into the catheter and
finally closing and fixing it to the tail using an adhesive
tape [34]. At each following sampling occasion, a
couple of blood drops were let out of the catheter before
taking blood. In-between the sampling occasions
the rats were awoke. The need for anaesthesia during
sampling was negligible. Administration and sampling
volumes are shown in Table 2.
After the sampling period the animals were overanaesthetized
(euthanized) with isoflurane inhalation.
A precision vaporizer with induction chamber and
waste gas scavenger was used. An isoflurane concentration
of over 5% in 100% oxygen was slowly
achieved and continued until one minute after breathing
stopped.
Quantification of amoxicillin in plasma samples
During blood sample processing the serum was
separated from the clotted fraction by centrifugation
(2700 G, 10 min). 50 μl of each centrifuged plasma sample
was pipetted into 250 μl MeOH on a 0.5 mL 96-well
Costar plate and cooled to 4 °C for 1 h. Samples were
centrifuged (2000 rcf) for 30 min at 8 °C. 50 μl supernatant
was taken and evaporated. Calibration standards
were prepared and injected directly into the LC-MS/MS
apparatus. The concentration of amoxicillin and clavulanic
acid was measured using an Agilent 1290 HPLC
coupled to an Agilent 6470A Triple Quadrupole Mass
Spectrometer equipped with an RP column (Luna 3 μ
C8(2) 100 Å 50 × 2 mm; Phenomenex 00B-4251-B0).
Isocratic elution was applied (85% of 0.1% HCOOH
aqueous solution; 15% of 0.1% HCOOH in acetonitrile),
the flow rate was 0.5 ml/min and column temperature
was set to 40 °C.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive and summary statistics were calculated. All
results are presented as means ± standard error of the
mean (SEM). The area under the amoxicillin plasma
concentration-time curves (AUC0–240) were calculated.
The plasma concentrations and AUC curves for amoxicillin
in the AM and AMG groups were compared using
paired Student’s t-test. A p < 0.05 was considered as significant.
All calculations were performed with the
GraphPad software (GraphPad Prism v. 8.0.1).
Results
Total polyphenol content of green tea was 12.31 ± 0.41%
PGE. The plasma concentration of amoxicillin was monitored
by LC-MS/MS measurements in 30–60-min-intervals
for 240 min. Changes of amoxicillin level are
shown in Fig. 1. A significant between-group difference
in the plasma concentrations of amoxicillin was
observed at 60 min only, while at other time points the
difference between the groups did not reach the level of
statistical significance. However, the highest plasma level
of amoxicillin was significantly lower in the AMG group,
which suggests an interaction between green tea polyphenols
and the antibiotic.
Comparing the AUC0–240 for the two treatment
groups (AM and AMG, N = 6 both) a slight decrease in
amoxicillin absorption was observed in the AMG group,
however, the difference did not reach statistical significance
(Fig. 2).
Discussion
The aim of our study was to assess the presumable
interaction between a frequently used antibiotic (the
combination of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid) and
green tea infusion, in a setting mimicking the intake of
the medicine with green tea.
The investigated tea was analytically characterized and
was proved to be rich in polyphenols [35]. Based on literature,
in vitro experiments demonstrate that catechins,
the main polyphenolic compounds of green tea, do
influence the antimicrobial activity of amoxicillin, and the
in vitro antibacterial effect of amoxicillin against Helicobacter
pylori is significantly enhanced by the presence of
epigallocatechin gallate [36]. Similarly, the synergistic
effect of catechins and amoxicillin against Escherichia coli
is also reported [17]. However, these in vitro findings have
no relevance for the clinical efficacy of amoxicillin, since
polyphenols have very low bioavailability, thus, in fact, the
gastrointestinal tract is the space of potential interactions
between these compounds and amoxicillin. An opposite
effect was also observed in mice infected with methicillinresistant
Staphylococcus aureus: in an in vivo experiment
green tea extract was found to weaken the effect of amoxicillin
after enteral administration (gastric perfusion) [37].
Our results confirm this finding, and offer a possible
explanation for green tea ameliorating the antibacterial
efficacy of amoxicillin treatment.
Not only green tea infusion, but also concentrated
food supplements may contain high doses of catechins
(up to 1000 mg [38])). As these supplements are likely to
be taken concomitantly with medications, the occurrence
of an interaction between polyphenols/catechins
and amoxicillin has relevance in real-life settings.
Although the AUC of amoxicillin did not decrease
significantly during the observation period in our in vivo
experiment, the concomitant administration of green tea
induced a significant reduction in the peak plasma concentration
of the antibiotic [37]. Despite the limitation
of the study (small but reasonable sample size), our
findings support the findings of a previously published
animal experiment, and draw attention to the possibility
of a pharmacokinetic interaction between green tea and
amoxicillin upon human application. Further studies are
needed to explore this interaction regarding per os
human therapeutic use.
Conclusions
Due to its high polyphenol content green tea may interact
with the absorption of amine-containing molecules, including
antibiotics. This is the first report on the in vivo
assessment of the interaction between a widely used antibiotic,
amoxicillin, and green tea. Although the concomitant
consumption of green tea did not alter the AUC of
the antibiotic significantly within the observation period,
the decrease in the peak plasma concentration of amoxicillin
refers to an interaction of potential clinical relevance,
worth being studied in human settings.