Background
In toxicological, entomological and environmental studies,
doses of toxicants that kill a defined proportion of
organisms, e.g., the median lethal dose (LD50) which kills
50% of the population, are typically used as indicators of
acute toxicity. Comparing the activities of different toxicants
in a specific population or determining the relative
susceptibilities of different populations to a single toxicant
are common research goals. The relative potency,
which assumes that the regression lines of the two toxicants
being compared are parallel, provides a convenient
comparison of the toxicities of two toxicants [1].
However, in practice, many regression lines are not
parallel, particularly those derived from bioassays of toxicants
with different modes of action, or from
same-action toxicants administered to populations with
different resistance levels. The 95% confidence limits
(CLs) of a lethal dose ratio can be calculated by estimating
the slopes and intercepts of two probit regression
lines and constructing their variance and covariance
matrices. The 95% CLs of this ratio indicate whether the
lethal doses of the two toxicants are statistically different
from one another [2]. Polo-Plus software, developed by
Robertson et al. [3], separately analyzes the data for each
substance using probit or logit models based on the joint
probability of all observations and calculates lethal dose
ratios and their CLs at different significance levels. IBM
SPSS provides solution to calculate the lethal doses with
95% CLs based on probit or logit models, and also the
relative median potency (RMP) assuming that the two
regression lines are parallel [4].
In this study, we calculated lethal doses and 95% CLs
of toxicants at different significance levels, as well as the
lethal dose ratio and its 95% CLs for two toxicants, from
probit-log(dose) regression models constructed using the
maximum likelihood method in Microsoft Excel. The effectiveness
of this method was compared with that of
Polo-Plus and IBM SPSS.
Methods
Construction of probit-log(dose) regression models for a
single toxicant or population
For a population treated with serial doses (i) of a toxicant,
in which n subjects were treated and r subjects exhibited
a characteristic response to each dose, the
empirical proportion (p*) of responders was given by
where i = 1 to k and k indicated the number of toxicant
doses.
If the characteristic response occurred in the control
group (natural response) with proportion C, the proportions
of responders were corrected using the Abbott
equation for each treatment dose [5]:
The corrected proportion (pi) was then converted to a
probit value (yi) [1]:
which was calculated as yi = NORM.S.INV(pi) in Excel.
A provisional regression line between yi and the logarithm
of the dose (xi) was established:
yi
¼ α0 þ β0xi: ð4Þ
In the regression equation, i = 1 to m, where m is the
number of toxicant doses at which the corrected proportion
was not equal to 1 or 0. The intercept (α0) and
slope (β0) could be calculated by the least-squares procedure
and were retrieved using the INTERCEPT(yi, xi)
and SLOPE(yi, xi) functions, respectively, in Excel.
We then calculated the expected probits (Y) for all
dose sets, included those where the corrected proportion
was 1 or 0:
Yi ¼ α0 þ β0xi: ð5Þ
In Eq. (5), i = 1 to k.
We next calculated the expected response proportion
(Pi) for each dose set [1].
Pi ¼ ΦðYiÞ  ð1−CÞ þ C; ð6Þ
where Φ(Yi) returned the cumulative probability of the
standard normal distribution corresponding to (Yi), obtainable
using the NORM.S.DIST (Yi) function in Excel,
and C was the natural response proportion, if one
existed, in Eq. (2).
An optimized set of expected probits was then derived
from the linear regression equation of working probits
weighted on xi, with each yi being assigned a weight,
niwi, where wi was the weighting coefficient. 
where C was the natural response proportion in Eq. (2).
The slope β of the working probit-log10(dose) regression
equation was
The χ2 statistic of the probit regression equation was [1]
The significance level p of the χ2 statistic was calculated
as the right-tailed probability of the chi-squared
distribution (CHISQ.DIST.RT) with k – 2 degrees of
freedom (d.f.).
A significant χ2 statistic (p < 0.05) might indicate either
that the population did not respond independently or
that the fitted probit-log(dose) regression line did not
adequately describe the dose-response relationship in
the test samples.
To get an optimal fit of the probit-log10(dose) regression,
we substituted α and β for α0 and β0 and repeated
the calculations of Eq. (5) to Eq. (15) until a stable χ2 appeared,
indicating convergence. This procedure was a
maximum likelihood (ML) method [1].
The significance of the slope was assessed using the z
test [7],
Z ¼ β
σðβÞ
ð16Þ
If the absolute z-value was less than 1.96, the regression
slope was not significant and the data were excluded
from further analysis. Similarly, we might test the
significance of the intercept (α).
The heterogeneity factor h of the regression equation
was calculated to adjust for large χ2. h was defined as [1]
h ¼ χ2
k−2
: ð17Þ
If h < 1, the model provided a good fit to the data.
Otherwise, standardized residuals were plotted to identify
outliers or other possible causes of poorness of fit
[8]. Each residual defined the difference between the observed
ri and the expected response number (niPi) for
each dose. The residuals were standardized by dividing
them by their standard errors,
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
niPið1−PiÞ
p
. For models
providing a good fit, the standardized residuals fell
mostly between −2 and 2 [8]. Standardized residuals distributed
randomly showed no systematic patterns or tendencies
toward positive or negative sign.
Calculation of the lethal doses of toxicants or populations
and their 95% CLs
In this step, we first calculated the logarithms of the
doses (θπ) at which levels of interest (π) gave the expected
response proportion:
θπ ¼ yπ−α
β
ð18Þ
where yπ was the πth percentile of the probit distribution
curve calculated in Excel using NORM.S.INV(π) for the
probit distribution. For example, if π = 10, 50, 90 and 99,
yπ was calculated as − 1.282, 0, 1.282 and 2.326.
The πth lethal dose was then calculated as
LDπ ¼ 10θπ : ð19Þ
The standard error of θπ, σ(θπ), was given by [1]
t0.05, k − 2 returned the two-tailed inverse of the
Student’s t-distribution at α = 0.05 with d.f. = k - 2
[T.INV.2 T(0.05, k-2)].
The g value could be calculated to adjust if the confidence
limits were valid. The g value was given as [9]:

If p (χ2) was less than 0.15, t = 1.96 and h* = 1; otherwise,
h* = h and t = t0.05, k − 2 [4]. If g exceeded 1, the CLs
for the LDπ did not have practical importance [1].
The above steps were repeated to determine all parameters
for the second toxicant for the same population, or
the same toxicant in the second population.
Comparison of lethal dose ratios of two toxicants or
populations
If there were l toxicants or populations in the experiment,
then we compared the LDπ values of the first (as a
reference) to those of others. We first calculated the difference
between the log(doses) yielding the expected response
proportions (πth percentile) for toxicants or
populations 1 and j (j = 2 to l), θπ1j = θπ1 - θπj. Its standard
error was given by [2]

The ratio of the two lethal doses was then given as
Ratioð1jÞ ¼ 10θπ1−θπj ; ð24Þ
and the 95% CLs were
10θπ1 j1:96σ θπ1 j ð Þ
: ð25Þ
If the 95% CLs of this ratio excluded 1.0, the lethal
doses of the two toxicants or populations were significantly
different; otherwise, there was no evidence to reject
the null hypothesis of equal LDs [2].
Test for parallelism of the two regression equations
Although the above procedures did not assume equal
slopes of the two regression lines, the specific LDπ level
used depended on the parallelism of the regression lines.
To examine parallelism of the two regression lines, we
used the z-test [10]:
z ¼
β1−βj


ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
σ β1
ð Þ2 þσ βj
 	2
r : ð26Þ
If the absolute z-value exceeded 1.96, the two regressions
were non-parallel; otherwise, they were parallel.
Case studies
The above procedures might be executed on an Excel
(version 2010 or higher) spreadsheet (provided as an
Additional file 1). To compare the results of the ML
procedure in Excel with those of Polo-Plus and SPSS, we
extracted bioassay data from the literature: (1) chrysanthemum
aphids dosed with Rotenone, Deguelin, and a
mixture of these two substances [11], (2) three populations,
Fairfax, Pixley and Schaefer, of the pest bug
“Wicked Witch of the West” dosed with deltamethrin
[12], and (3) two populations, BugRes and BugLab, of
Godfather larvae dosed with pyrethroid [2] (Table 1).
Results
Slopes, intercepts and significance testing of probitlog(
dose) models fitted to the example data
When we implemented the ML procedure to solve
the probit-log(dose) equations for the three sample
data in Excel, for the datasets in which there was no
natural response (e.g., Rotenone, Deguelin, Mixture,
Fairfax and Schaefer), the slope (β) and intercept (α)
estimates of the converged probit-log(dose) regression
were identical to those calculated using
Polo-Plus and SPSS (with two methods, SPSS1 and
SPSS2, to include the natural response proportion, C,
by inputting the value of C and calculating it from
the data, respectively) (Table 2). The standard errors
of both β and α, calculated by Eq. (13) and Eq. (14),
were close but not identical to those calculated using
Polo-Plus and SPSS (Table 2). When the data sets included
natural responses (e.g., Pixley, BugRes and
BugLab), β and α, as well as their standard errors,
were close to those produced by Polo-plus and SPSS.
The results of our method and Polo-Plus were closer
to those calculated using SPSS1 method than those
calculated using SPSS2 method (Table 2, Bold items).
The probit-log(dose) regression model assumes a
linear relationship between the logarithm of serial
doses and the probit of the response proportions.
When z-tests (this study and SPSS) or the t-ratios
(Polo-Plus) were used to evaluate the significance of
the regressions, all z values and t-ratios for both β
and α estimates calculated using all four methods
exceeded 1.96 (Table 2), indicating that all regression
parameters were significant. If the z-value for the
slope was less than 1.96, the regression model would
be insignificant and the dataset should be excluded
from further analysis.
Goodness-of-fits of the probit-log(dose) regressions
While z-tests evaluated whether a linear relationship
existed between the probits and the log(dose), χ2 tests
are usually used to test the goodness-of-fit of the
log(dose)-probit regression model. For datasets that
did not include natural responses, the χ2 and h values
calculated in this study were identical to those calculated
using Polo-Plus and SPSS (Table 3). When the
datasets included natural responses, the χ2 and h
values were close to those produced by Polo-plus and
SPSS. Again, the results of our method and Polo-Plus
were closer to those calculated using SPSS1 method
than those calculated using SPSS2 method (Table 3,
Bold items).
For some datasets, χ2 was not significant but h was
greater than 1 (Table 3). When standardized residuals
were plotted against log(doses), one or more outliers
were observed (outside the bounds of −2 to 2) in the
Schaefer and BugLab data. For the BugLab data especially,
the standardized residuals were not distributed
randomly and showed a tendency toward positive sign
(Fig. 1), indicating that this data should be fitted
using other models [13].
LD10, LD50, LD90 and LD99 estimates with 95% CLs
We further compared the LDπs and their 95% CLs
calculated using these four methods. For datasets that
did not include natural responses, the LDπs calculated
in this study were identical to those calculated using
Polo-Plus and SPSS, and the 95% CLs of LDπs calculated
using our method were close but not identical
to those produced by Polo-Plus and SPSS (Table 4).
For datasets that included natural responses, the LDπs
and their 95% CLs were close but not identical to
those calculated using Polo-plus and SPSS. The results
of our method and Polo-plus were closer to
those calculated using SPSS1 method than those calculated
using SPSS2 method (Table 4, Bold items).
Comparison of lethal dose ratios between two samples
For datasets that did not include natural responses,
the LDπ ratios calculated using our method were
identical to those calculated using Polo-Plus and their
95% CLs were also close. For datasets that included
natural responses, LDπ ratios and their 95% CLs calculated
using our method were similar to those calculated
using Polo-Plus (Table 5, Bold items). The LD50
ratios and their 95% CLs calculated using our method
were closer to those calculated using Polo-Plus than
to the relative median potency (RMP) calculated using
SPSS (Table 5).
When judged by whether the 95% CLs of lethal ratios
included 1.0, all methods reached the same conclusions
for toxicity differences between two samples (Table 5).
Comparisons of two regression slopes
Parallelism between paired regression equations was examined
using z-tests. The conclusions of our method for
the five regression pairs were identical to those arrived
at by Polo-Plus and SPSS, which used χ2 tests (Table 6).
Discussion
Many methods have been developed to calculate the lethal
or effective doses of toxicants and their confidence limits.
Probit analysis, developed by Bliss [14] and improved by
Finney [11], is one such commonly-used method. To calculate
the parameters of the probit-log(dose) regression,
Finney suggested fitting the regression line by eye as precisely
as possible and obtaining parameters, such as slopes
and intercepts, of the provisional regression line at the
first stage. Thereafter, one calculates the working probits
Y, and repeats this process with the new set of Y values;
when the iterations converge, this gives a precise estimate
of the linear regression parameters [1]. In this study, we
calculated slopes and intercepts for the provisional regression
line by the least-squares procedure, and calculated
working probits and performed the iteration procedure
(ML) using the popular software program, Microsoft
Excel. We obtained similar results to those obtained using
Polo-Plus and SPSS.
Several software packages, such as Polo-Plus and
SPSS, might be used to calculate the lethal doses and
95% CLs at different significance levels, and even test
the equality of the lethal doses. Such professional
statistical programs are difficult to handle for common
toxicologists and environmental ecologists, and are easily
abused. Excel in the Microsoft Office Package is the most
popular statistical program around the globe. As to the
Excel spreadsheet developed in this study, the users are
easily to trace the procedure which is used to solve the regression
equations, and calculate the CLs of a lethal dose
and also the lethal dose ratios. They may further redevelop
it easily according to their request.
χ2 values were used as indicators of the goodness-of-fit
of the probit-log(dose) regressions as the iteration proceeded.
The equations
could also be applied [1]. When there were no natural
responses in the datasets, these two equations,
along with Eq. (15), gave the same results when the
iterations converged, and these results were identical
to those produced by Polo-Plus and SPSS. When the
datasets included natural responses, Eq. (27) always
gave the smallest χ2 value, Eq. (28) always gave the
largest value, while Eq. (15) gave an intermediate
value which was closer to the output of Polo-Plus
and SPSS (data not shown). During iteration for some
datasets, the χ2 values produced from all these three
equations might increase [1]. Most regression models
converged after several iterations, and we reported
the results after 20 iterations, as this was the default
maximum used by SPSS.
Strictly speaking, the 95% CLs of LDπ were the values
of x for which the boundaries of the fiducial band
attained the relevant value of yπ. The exact CLs of θπ
could be calculated by constructing the variance matrices
of the slope (var(β)) and intercept (var(α)) and their
covariance (cov(α,β)) matrices as follow [1, 9]:
It has been theorized that, in practice, the method for determining
95% CLs of LDπ most often performed sufficiently
good based on a trustworthy value for the variance
of θπ as Eq. (20) [1, 15]. It was suggested that 95% CLs of
LDπ could be calculated using the formula 10θπ1:96σðθπÞ
[15]. The results of this equation were close to those calculated
using Eq. (29) when the dose number (k) was large
(e.g., close to 10), while the CLs were much narrow than
those calculated exactly using Eq. (29) when k was small. By
contrast, the results given by Eq. (21) were nearer to those
calculated exactly at different levels of k. The 95% CLs of
LDπ calculated using Polo-Plus were often identical to those
calculated using SPSS when there was no natural response,
with some exceptions (e.g., the Mixture and Fairfax data;
Table 4, italic brackets, although the g values were not large
for both of these cases).
While it is common to find estimates of LDs obtained
from probit analyses in the toxicology literature, it is less
common to find a hypothesis test procedure to determine
whether estimated differences between LDs are statistically
significant [16]. Relative potency has been frequently used [1,
4], but this method assumes the regression lines being compared
are parallel. When the regression lines were parallel,
the LDs and their 95% CLs for two toxicants calculated from
the two datasets simultaneously were similar to those calculated
from the datasets separately. However, when the regression
lines were not parallel, the LDs and their 95% CLs
calculated from the two datasets simultaneously were quite
different from those calculated from the datasets separately.
In cases where the data are suggestive of a trend toward
significant differences between LD50s, the use of
non-overlapping CLs for LD50 values has frequently
been proposed as a criterion for assessing significance,
while use of this criterion is thought to be conservative
[17, 18]. An alternative method involves calculating the
variances of θπ using the delta-method:
var θπ ð Þ¼ 1
β2 varðαÞ þ 2θπ covðα; βÞ þ θπ
2 varðβÞ

 
; ð30Þ
calculating the ratio of the LDs as in Eq. (24), then calculating
the 95% CLs of the ratio as in Eq. (25) [2]. If the
95% CLs of the ratio include 1.0, the LDs of the two
samples are not significantly different. We followed this
procedure in this study, but we calculated the standard
error of θπ as in Eq.(20) by the maximum likelihood procedure.
We obtained 95% CLs of the LD ratio similar to
those obtained using Polo-Plus.
Biologically, the slope of a probit or logit regression line
represents the change in the proportion of responders per
unit change in dose. Toxicological evidence suggested that
the slope of a dose–response regression line reflected host
enzyme activity [19]. Thus, non-parallel lines might
indicate different modes of action of the two toxicants. Parallelism
between regression pairs was essential for determining
the level at which to compare the effects of two
toxicants. Generally, there were three main categories of
parallelism: (i) the two regression lines were statistically
parallel (e.g., Fairfax vs Pixley; Fig. 2a); (ii) the two regression
lines were not statistically parallel but did not cross
within the dominant region (20–80%) of the response proportions
(e.g., Rotenone vs Deguelin; Fig. 2b); and (iii) the
two regression lines crossed around the median lethal dose
(e.g., BugRes vs BugLab; Fig. 2c). In the first case, reporting
the LD50s of the two toxicants and their ratios was sufficient.
In the second case, one should report both LD50s
and LD90s (and/or LD10s) and their ratios. In the third
case, reporting the ratios of LD10s, LD50s, LD90s is meaningless,
but the significance of difference between the two
slopes should be valid.
Conclusions
We successfully developed a method to calculate the lethal
doses of a toxicant at different significance levels,
and compare lethal dose ratios using probit-log(dose) regression
by the ML procedure implemented in Microsoft
Excel. Lethal doses calculated using this method at different
significance levels, as well as lethal dose ratios
with their 95% CLs, were identical or close to those calculated
using Polo-Plus and SPSS. When judged by
whether the 95% CLs of the lethal ratios included 1.0, all
methods reached the same conclusions regarding toxicity
differences between two samples.