Background
The distal femur and the proximal tibia are common
sites for primary and metastatic bone tumor [1]. Amputation
was the traditional surgical treatment for musculoskeletal
sarcomas of the extremities, with the aim of
saving the patients’ life. With the simultaneous improvement
on the understanding of the biology and staging of
tumors, reconstructive techniques, and effective adjuvant
chemotherapy, however, limb salvage surgery has replaced
the amputation as the predominated treatment
choice for more than 90% of patients with a primary malignancy
on the knee [2–4].
Because of the unique biological inherent properties of
the tumor, the complex anatomic features of the knee
and problems associated with extensor reconstruction,
tumors arising around the knee pose a unique set of
challenges in the management of soft tissues and the
restoration of limb length and joint kinetics. The options
for reconstruction after resection of a tumor around the
knee joint include implantation of a prosthesis, osteoarticular
allograft, allograft-prosthesis composite, recycled
autologous bone graft, arthrodesis with intercalary bone
grafting or conversion to a rotationplasty [5]. Among
these methods, tumor prosthesis offers the advantages of
convenience, early mobilization, and weight bearing
capability, and it allows the early introduction of postoperative
adjuvant therapy. Furthermore, there are no
differences in survival rates between limb-salvage and
ablative surgery [6–8].
Although advances in materials and implant design
have occurred over the past three decades, complications
and failures of these devices remain high compared to
other arthroplasty procedures [9–11]. Prosthesis-related
complications, including infection, aseptic loosening,
dislocation, recurrence of the tumor, joint stiffness or
contracture, instability of components, and implant
mechanical weaknesses, remain an unresolved problem
which necessitate a revision or even an amputational
surgery [12–14]. High rate of prosthesis-related failure
indicates that tumor endoprostheses need to be further
studied, and improvements in surgical technique and
component design are required. To guide the treatments
selection and decision making, it may be crucial to clarify
the prognostic factors that significantly predict the
survival of prosthesis used for reconstructing the knee
operated for tumors. Until now few studies have
analyzed the prognostic effect of patients’ and operationrelated
characteristics.
The nomogram is a type of easy-to-use predicting
model, which transforms traditional statistical predictive
models into visualized probability estimates tailored to
each patient. Using this model, one could be provided
with continuous survival probabilities at several time
points that predicted for an individual patient. What is
more, the nomogram could be further transformed into
a webpage based predicting widget, easily providing a
predicted Kaplan-Meier survival curve, and survival rate
at each time point.
Thus, the purpose of this study was (1) to evaluate the
clinical and functional outcomes of patients who underwent
a limb salvage surgery for tumors around the knee,
(2) to identify prognostic factors significantly associated
with implant failure, (3) and to develop a validated
nomogram model as well as a webpage based predicting
tool.
Methods
This study was conducted according to the Transparent
Reporting of a Multivariable Prediction Model for Individual
Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD) statement [15],
and reported according to the Strengthening the Reporting
of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE)
Statement (Available in Additional file 1).
Patients inclusion
In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and upon
the attained ethical approval from the hospital ethics
committee, information of 297 consecutive patients with
neoplastic disease around the knee who were treated
with tumor resection and subsequent endoprosthetic
reconstruction between April 1995 and August 2018 in
two individual research centers were retrospectively
reviewed for potential eligibility.
Patients would be included following the inclusion
criteria: (1) age ≥ 14 years at the time of surgery; (2) bone
tumors located around the knee; (3) limb-salvage or ablative
surgery. The initial diagnosis was made based on
pre-operative radiographs (X ray, magnetic resonance
imaging [MRI] or computed tomography), and consequently
confirmed by core needle biopsy or by open
biopsy and pathological examination. Patients with reconstructed
knee for medical conditions other than bone
incomplete
medical document were excluded.
Surgical treatment
All patients indicative for limb-salvage surgery were
evaluated systemically on the lesion size, preoperative
planning of the level and optimal types of prostheses.
The dimensions of the tumor and boundaries were measured
by a combination of total leg-length radiographs
and cross-sectional imaging, including MRI or 3D
Multi-Slice Computerized Tomography (3D MSCT).
With the completion of imaging materials and histology
diagnosis, patients were categorized to a surgical stage
according to Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS)
classification [16] and received neoadjuvant chemotherapy
on protocol when applicable. After resection of the
tumor, reconstruction was performed using a cemented
metal endoprosthesis (custom/modular). During the
early time of the surgery, custom implants (fixed/hinged)
were used in 88 patients. Modular implants featuring a
rotating hinge mechanism were subsequently implanted
in the remaining 63 patients. The surgical resection and
reconstruction were performed by two senior professors,
whose members of the team were orthopedic surgeons
with extensive experience in the field the knee arthroplasty
procedures, following the generally accepted oncologic
principles of obtaining a wide surgical margin.
Excision was performed through a medial or lateral
parapatellar approach. Frozen section analysis of the
intramedullary canal contents at the resection site was
performed intraoperatively to ensure a negative marrow
margin. An intraoperative radiograph was also performed
to confirm that the fine line force of the knee
was obtained for all the patients. We then performed a
soft tissue reconstruction for each individual to achieve
muscular coverage of the implants and to restore function
of the knee.
Post-operative management mainly focused on
prophylaxis of incision infection and application of
antithrombotics and analgesics. Intravenous antibiotic
prophylaxis was maintained until the wound drains were
removed. Mobilization commenced on the second day
postoperatively with the assistance of a walker with the
purpose of preventing thrombogenesis or development
of a infection in the urinary systems.
Post-operative rehabilitation protocol
In order to obtain the maximum function of the knee
postoperatively, detailed procedures were described as
follows. Firstly, immediate weight bearing assisted with
the hinged brace around the knee for all patients was
permitted due to the stability of the cemented implants
and the stability of reconstructed knee. A continuous
passive motion (CPM) apparatus was used under
professional rehabilitation therapist’s guidance and
supervision on the first day post-operatively and continued
until discharge. Extra attention was paid for patients
with reconstructions of the extensor mechanism, whose
motion was commenced from − 5° to 10° extension to
30° to 45° flexion and gradually increased to greater than
90° flexion before discharge. When rehabilitation was
executed, patients were administrated appropriate anodyne,
which allowed them an indolent restoration.
Recorded variables
The patients were required to be interviewed every 3
weeks for the first 3 months after surgery, then on a
quarterly basis for 3 years, semiannually for an additional
2 years, and then annually. The medical records,
radiographs and pathologic records, operation details,
information about adjuvant oncological therapies, and
oncologic outcomes were reviewed. We recorded the
following variables as the potential prognostic factors:
age at operation, sex, body mass index (BMI), tumor
types (divided into borderline tumor, malignant primary
tumor, and metastatic bone tumor), operation related
complications within 6 months, adjuvant chemotherapy/
radiotherapy, pathological fracture, primary/ revision
reconstruction, anatomical location (proximal tibia or
distal femur), site of knee (left or right), bleeding
volume, operation time, bone transplantation, prosthesis
type (custom or modular), prosthesis motion mode
(rotational or fixed), length of prosthetic stem, diameter
of prosthetic stem, material of prosthesis (titanium or
vatallium), and length of resection.
The outcome variable was prosthesis survival, which
was defined as the time interval between operation and
prosthesis failure (any cause that required replacement
of the components of the prosthesis).
Statistical analysis
The included patients were randomly divided into training
sample and validation sample with a ratio of 7:3. The
training sample was used for model establishing and internal
validation, while the validation sample was used
for external validation. The continuous variables, including
the age, BMI, length of prosthetic stem, diameter of
prosthetic stem, length of osteotomy, operation time,
and bleeding volume, were transformed into dichotomous
variable using the cutoff point detected with the
method of running log rank test [17, 18]. The distribution
of the patients according to each prognostic factor
was described as mean ± SD or percentage. Kaplan-
Meier survival curve was used to describe the overall patients’
survival and prosthetic survival, in training and
validation samples.
Univariate analysis using COX proportional hazards
model was performed to initially identify the potential
significance of each prognostic variable on predicting
the prosthetic survival. All of the variables demonstrated
to be significantly or marginally significantly (p < 0.15)
associated with prosthetic survival were included in the
multivariable COX analysis. Kaplan-Meier survival
curves were generated for all prognostic factors involved
in multivariable analysis. Hazard ratio (HR) and confidence
interval (95%CI) were selected as the effect size
for both univariate and multivariate COX model. A
forest plot was generated to display the result of multivariate
analysis.
Basing on the significant variables screened by multivariate
COX model, a novel nomogram was plotted, to
graphically provide continuous survival rates at several
time points and the median survival time of prosthesis.
C-index and calibration curve were used to evaluate the
discrimination ability and accuracy of the nomogram
respectively. Finally, after fitting of a new COX model
using the variables involved in the graphical nomogram,
a webpage-based dynamic nomogram, which could provide
predicted survival curve and survival rate at any
time point as wanted, was established.
All analyses have been performed with program of R
language (Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria). The univariable and multivariable COX models
were fitted using the R package “survival”. The graphical
nomogram and the online dynamic nomogram were
generated with the packages “rms” and “DynNom”. Level
of statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.
Results
Patients’ baseline characteristics
A total of 203 patients (156 divided into the training
sample and 47 divide into the validation sample) were
eligible for final inclusion according to the inclusion and
exclusion criteria. The baseline characteristics is shown
in the Table 1. Among these patients, there were 99
males (63.46%) and 53 (36.54%) females, and 24 male
(51.06%) and 23 female in the training and validation
samples, respectively. The mean age was 35.31 ± 17.54
and 31.09 ± 16.17 years in the training and validation
samples at the time of surgery. The distal femur (n = 99,
63.46%) was more common than proximal tibia (n = 57,
36.54%) concerning the involved anatomical location.
The distribution of the tumor histology is presented in
Fig. 1, showing that malignant primary tumor (osteosarcoma,
72; malignant fibrous histiotoma, 9; chondrosarcoma,
6; leiomyosarcoma, 3; synoviosarcoma, 2) was the
predominated tumor type, followed by borderline tumor
(giant cell tumor of bone, 53; fibrous histiotoma, 3) and
malignant metastatic tumor.
Within 6 months post-operatively, a total of 26
(16.67%) and 7 (14.89%) patients were encountered with
operation related complications, in the training and
validation groups. The major complications leading to
implant failure were aseptic loosening in 26 out of 20
patients (20/132, 15.1%), followed by superficial or periprosthetic
infection (16), local recurrence or metastases
or both (12), periprosthetic or prosthetic fracture (7),
wound healing disorders (4), joint instability or flexion
contracture in two (2), dislocation of the prosthesis in
one patients (3). Four patients developed nonprosthesisrelated
complications include peroneal nerve palsy (2),
others (3). Local relapse arose in 16 (10.26%) patients
and 5 (10.64%) patients during the follow-up.
The Kaplan-Meier survival curves for the patients’
overall survival and prosthesis survival are shown in
Fig. 2. The overall patients’ survival at 12, 60, and 120
months were 94.0, 90.8 and 83.0%, and 95.7, 92.8 and
83.9% in training and validation groups, respectively.
The prosthesis survival at 12, 60, 120, and 180 months
were 96.7, 85.8, 76.9 and 44.0%, and 95.7, 82.9, 67.5 and
45.0% in training and validation groups, respectively.
Results of univariate and multivariate COX analyses
Figure 3 shows the results of running log-rank test for
the continuous predictors, presenting the optimal cut-off
points to convert these factors into categorical variables.
The results of univariate COX analysis are shown in
Table 2, and the Kaplan-Meier survival curves for the
significant and marginally significant (p < 0.15) prognostic
factors are presented in Fig. 4. As a result, anatomical
location at distal femur (HR = 0.412, 95%CI: 0.180 ~ 0.945,
P = 0.036), fixed prosthetic motion mode (HR = 2.336,
95%CI: 1.134 ~ 4.812, P = 0.021), and length of resection
(> = 10.4 cm; HR = 8.959, 95%CI: 3.767 ~ 21.310, P < 0.001)
were significantly associated with increased implant failure,
while BMI (HR = 2.555, 95%CI: 0.715 ~ 9.135, P = 0.149),
operation related complications (HR = 1.877, 95%CI: 0.918
~ 3.840, P = 0.085), custom/ modular prosthesis (HR =
2.244, 95%CI: 0.957 ~ 5.257, P = 0.063), and length of prosthetic
stem (HR = 0.578, 95%CI: 0.287 ~ 1.165, P = 0.125)
were demonstrated to be marginally associated with the
survival of implant.
The forest plot in Fig. 5 shows the effect sizes of
multivariate analysis, presenting that anatomical location
(HR = 0.42, 95%CI: 0.20 ~ 0.89, P = 0.024), length of prosthetic
stem (HR = 0.44, 95%CI: 0.19 ~ 0.99, P = 0.048) and
length of bone resection (HR = 11.08, 95%CI: 3.34 ~ 36.78,
P < 0.001) remained to be statistically significant prognostic
factors for prosthetic survival.
Establishing and validation of nomogram model
Basing on the significant prognostic factors screened by
multivariate COX model, a graphical predicting nomogram
model was developed, to calculate the predicted
prosthetic survival probabilities at 1, 5, and 10 years
post-operatively, as well as the median survival time
(Fig. 6).
The C-indexes were 0.717 (95%CI: 0.497 ~ 0.937) and
0.726 (95%CI: 0.244 ~ 1.208) for the training and validation
samples respectively, demonstrating that the newly
established nomogram possesses favorable discrimination
ability. The calibration curves at 12, 60 and 120
months for the two samples are displayed in Fig. 7. Generally,
favorable consistencies between the predicted and
actual survival were presented, indicating satisfactory accuracy
of the novel predicting model.
To facilitate the usage of our novel predicting model, a
web link (https://hellonihao.shinyapps.io/PangCG_
DynNomapp/) was generated to automatically calculate
the prosthetic survival online for each individual patient.
The predicted survival curve, forest plot presenting survival
probability, and numeric summary table would be
output, after selecting of the patients’ characteristics and
clicking on the button “Predict”. The survival probability
at any time point could be obtained by dragging the sliderbar
“time”.
Case presentation
Figure 8 and Fig. 9 show a case of patient who was operated
for bone tumor locates at distal femur and reconstructed
with a prosthesis that was more than 14.4 cm on
length of stem, and more than 10.4 cm of bone was
resected during tumorectomy. Using the graphical nomogram,
only approximate survival rates could be read on
the plot by drawing a vertical line through the total point.
While, through the webpage-based dynamic nomogram,
the detailed prosthetic survival probabilities at 12, 60 and
120 months could be automatically calculated, which is
shown to be 0.890, 0.305 and 0.068, respectively.
Discussion
Multimodality limb salvage therapy has replaced amputation
as the preferred form of treatment for primary
musculoskeletal tumors primarily owing to improvements
in adjuvant and neo-adjuvant therapy, as well as
advances in imaging and diagnostic modalities [2–4].
After the resection of bone and soft tissue tumors, reconstruction
of the resulting defects was challenging because
of the unique anatomic features of the knee.
Limb-salvage surgery for malignant bone tumors must
be successful in three different respects, that is, the cure
of oncology, the durability of prostheses and the satisfactory
of the function in the limbs. Following reconstruction
of the operated knee, arising of complications in
implants was not uncommon, and the prosthetic failure
has always been regarded as a major event causing serious
adverse effect on the patients’ overall survival, lower
limb function and the quality of life, for these tumor patients.
Thus, it is necessary to figure out the significant
prognostic factors for prosthetic survival in patients operated
for tumor around the knee. In the current study,
we identified that the anatomical location of tumor,
length of prosthetic stem, and length of bone resection
during operation were significantly associated with the
prosthetic survival. Basing on these factors, we also generated
a graphic nomogram and a web predicting tool,
which could easily applied for predicting survival probabilities
of the implant at several time points.
Until now there are only a few predicting models that
have been developed to help estimate the prosthetic survival
probability, using independent prognostic factors.
In the studies of Zhang et al. [19], they identified the significant
factors associated with the incidence of aseptic
loosening after tumor prosthetic replacement around the
knee, demonstrating that tumor anatomical location
(proximal tibia vs. distal femur), length of prosthetic
stem (< 14 cm vs. > = 14 cm), and prosthetic motion
mode (fixed hinge vs. rotation hinge) were independent
predictors. After that, they established a graphical nomogram
to help predict the risk of aseptic loosening at the
time points of 5 and 10 years. This model, however,
could only provide approximate risks of aseptic loosening
at two points, and the applying of the model is not
convenient as one need to calculate the sub-scores of
the prognostic factors and the total score, and to gain
the predicted survival by drawing vertical line. In the
current study, we also developed a web-page based dynamic
nomogram, to output a continuous survival curve,
a forest plot of predicted survival and a numeric table
online, being easier-to-use for clinicians and patients.
Regarding to the prognostic factors involved in our
novel model, they have been widely analyzed in the previous
researches [5, 20–23]. The anatomical location of
the tumor at proximal tibia has been demonstrated to be
associated with increased risk of implant failure compared
to the tumor at distal femur in many former studies
[5, 21–23]. In the study of Pala et al. [20], they
reported that the failure rates of distal femoral and proximal
tibia replacements were 26.7 and 36.7%, but the difference
was non-significant between two groups. Hu
et al. [5] also reported that the anatomical site of tumor
was associated with the implant survival of tumor
prosthesis around knee. Zhang et al. [21] investigated
the prognosis value of site of the implant, and they reported
a slight difference on the 5-year prosthetic survival
(86.1% at distal femur and 66.9% at proximal tibia,
p = 0.09). Guo et al. [22] identified the independent risk
factors for implant failure in patients operated for tumor
around the knee, and the result of multivariate COX
analysis presented that the prosthesis implanted at the
proximal tibia was associated with increased failure risk,
when compared to that of the distal femur. Mazaleyrat
et al. [23] reported that the 5-year and 10-year survival
rates of implant were 84 and 70% for tumor located at
distal femur, while 74 and 43% for tumor located at
proximal tibia, being significantly different between the
two groups by log-rank test (p = 0.02). Our result about
the prognostic effect of anatomical location of tumor
was in accordance with these previous researches. It
could be speculated that the poor soft tissue coverage,
difficulties with anchoring the patellar tendon and possible
injuries to the neurovascular system are the most
likely causes for this difference.
Length of prosthetic stem was another important
predictor for the implant failure, in several published articles
[19, 24, 25]. Bergin et al. [24] evaluated the
influences of the diameter of prosthetic stem and length
ratio of bone:stem on the incidence of aseptic loosening
in distal femoral endoprostheses, and they found that
patients with stable implants had significantly larger
stem sizes and lower bone:stem ratios than those with
loose implants. Zhang et al. [19] established a predicting
nomogram for aseptic loosening after tumor prosthetic
replacement around the knee, and they identified that
the length of the prosthetic stem was independent prognostic
factor, being included in their novel prediction
model. This suggests that longer stem of the endoprostheses
may have a mechanical advantage by obtain
more osteointergration between the bone and the endoprosthesis,
to prevent the early failures.
Resection length during tumorectomy was also recognized
as an independent prognostic factor for prosthetic
survival in former studies [5, 22, 24, 26, 27]. Guo et al.
[22] found that a resection length of 14 cm or more was
significant negative prognostic factor for endopristhetic
replacement for primary tumors around the knee. Hu
et al. [5] reviewed the published articles about application
of artificial prosthesis reconstruction techniques in
malignant tumors around the knee joint, showing that
the longer the neoplastic bone resected, the worse the
prosthetic survival rate is. Wu et al. [26] identified the
prognostic effect of several factors, including the patient
age, surgical stage, design of implant (custom vs. modular),
stem diameter, and resection length, through multivariate
COX analysis, demonstrating that design of
prosthesis and length of resection were significantly associated
with prosthetic survival. Kawai et al. [27] reported
82 cases of artificial prosthesis reconstruction
after resection of distal femur malignant bone tumors.
The prosthetic survival rate of the group in whom < 40%
of the distal femur length was resected was considerably
higher than that of the group with resection lengthmore
than 40%, according to multivariate analysis. In our
study, we divided the patients into two group by the cutoff
point detected with running log-rank test, and found
that patients with more than 10.4 cm of resection length
was associated with increased implant failure. The influence
of the extent of bone resections on the development
of implant failure may be contributed by the
increased torque production out of the line of prosthesis
and/or impairment of quadriceps contraction. Changes
in biomechanical stresses after extensive resections of
bone and adjacent muscles probably are the reasons for
the increased failure incidence of these implants.
This study, nevertheless, is of several limitations.
Firstly, this study was designed as a retrospective cohort
study, causing inevitable risk of bias on collection of the
data. Thus, some more prospective and long-term
cohort studies or randomized controlled trials should be
conducted to clarified the prognostic effect of the predicting
factors identified in this study. Secondly, as only
a few patients were provided with uncemented prostheses
in our institutions, it was impossible to take full
assessment on the prognostic effect of the fixation
method for the endoprostheses. Thus, we excluded patients
reconstructed by implants without cement fixation
to minimize the risk of bias caused by fixation methods.
Thirdly, the patients used for external validation was
sampled from the same cohort as the training sample
used for model developing. Hence, further external validation
using sample from different clinical centers or
even different countries is necessary. Finally, it is difficult
to collect large sample size in this topic due to the low
frequency of tumor resection and endoprosthetic reconstruction
for tumor around knee. Thus, to ensure the
statistical power in the regression analysis and model developing,
most participants were put in the training sample,
causing the relative small size of validation sample.
Conclusions
The anatomical location of the endoprostheses, length of
the prosthetic stem and the length of the bone resection
were demonstrated to be significantly associated with
the risk of implant failure in patients reconstructed for
tumors around the knee. A graphical nomogram and a
user-interactive online dynamic nomogram were developed
to help clinicians and patients easily predict the
survival probabilities of implant at any time point postoperatively.
