Background
Triage, aiming at identifying patients with critical and
time-sensitive conditions, is an integrated process in
managing patients seeking care at emergency departments
(EDs) worldwide. It is crucial in order to achieve
medically safe prioritization [1–3]. However, triage has
been shown to be the most error-prone activity at the
ED. [2, 4, 5] A vast number of triage systems exist, but the
absolute majority lack components for triaging obstetric
patients. Failure to adequately assess women during
pregnancy and the puerperium has repeatedly led to
avoidable maternal morbidity and mortality [6, 7].
Obstetric triage is more complicated and specialised
than general triage, requiring assessment of both
woman and fetus, as well as of labour status [8, 9].
Moreover, obstetric patients’ physiology differs from
that in the non-obstetric population, and obstetric
patients may present with either pregnancy-related
complaints or with symptoms of disorders unrelated
to pregnancy. Depending on the location and the hospital,
pregnant women seeking emergency care are
assessed in EDs, in obstetric triage units or in maternity
(delivery) units.
A small number of obstetric triage systems (OTS)
have been introduced internationally since the early
2010s. These OTSs have adequate interrater reliability
(IRR), assessed in obstetric settings [10–14]. However,
to the best of our knowledge, their implementation in
a general ED setting has not been evaluated. To ensure
that the system is adequate for assessing obstetric
patients, the IRR must be established for both staff that
are trained and untrained in obstetrics. Until 2017,
there was no OTS for assessment of obstetric patients
seeking emergency care in Sweden. Patients have traditionally
been assessed according to “who came first”
or with triage systems that were not adapted to the
physiological changes and spectrum of disease associated
with pregnancy.
The Gothenburg Obstetric Triage System (GOTS),
developed in 2016 and in clinical use since 2017, has
similarities with other OTS such as the Obstetrical
Triage Acuity Scale (OTAS) [12]. The GOTS,
described by Lindroos et al. in 2021 (submitted for
publication), is a five-level triage scale with cut-off levels
for vital signs adapted to the physiological changes
of pregnancy [15]. The GOTS includes 14 chief complaint
algorithms comprising contractions, suspected
rupture of membranes, vaginal bleeding, reduced fetal
movements, suspected hypertensive disorder, neurological
symptoms, abdominal/back pain, trauma, postpartum
haemorrhage, signs of intra- or postpartum
infection, chest pain and/or breathing problems, suspected
thromboembolic disease, hyperemesis and suspected
mastitis. The triage assessment is a construct
based on the chief complaint and vital sign parameters.
If two different acuity levels emerge from the
chief complaint and the vital signs, the patient is allocated
to the higher level. Initial validity research on the
GOTS has shown a substantial ability to identify and
adequately triage patients requiring admittance to hospital
[15]. The GOTS differs from other OTS in that
it has embedded recommendations for initial management,
such as laboratory analyses, as well as brief
information on both obstetric and non-obstetric possible
causes of symptoms. Moreover, it has an attached
documentation form.
The aim of this study was to determine the IRR of the
GOTS in obstetric and non-obstetric emergency care
staff. A comparison with a reference group was also
performed to assess the clinical accuracy and relevance
of the IRR.
Methods
Setting
The study was carried out in 2019 at a tertiary care hospital
in western Sweden with approximately 10,000 deliveries/
year. The hospital has an obstetric ED, annually
facilitating about 14,000 obstetric emergency care visits
between gestational week 18 + 0 and 12 weeks postpartum.
Triage is based on the GOTS and performed by
midwives with experience in antenatal care and delivery.
Obstetric patients with severe circulatory and/or respiratory
failure, or suspicion of stroke with severe neurological
symptoms, are directed to the general ED, according
to hospital routines. At the time of the study, the general
ED facilitated about 55,000 emergency visits annually,
and the Rapid Emergency Triage and Treatment System
(RETTS) was used for triage of patients presenting with
medical and surgical complaints [16].
Study design
The study is an IRR study based on 30 real-life cases,
chosen from a two-month period during 2018. The cases
were consecutively selected to represent all 14 GOTS
chief complaint algorithms and cover all five acuity levels.
Thus, the cases were not representative of the actual
patient spectrum, as only 0,5–1% of patients seeking care
at the obstetric ED are triaged as red, i.e., the highest
acuity level. The real-life cases were converted to paper
cases using the information of the cases available to the
midwife triaging the patient in real-life, extracted from
the associated GOTS documentation form. The information
included a description of symptoms, findings at triage
such as fetal heart rate and bleeding as well as vital
sign parameters. The conversion was performed by LL
and proofread by VS. A reference group was established,
consisting of two midwives and two obstetricians with
experience in obstetrics ranging from seven to 30 years.
A reference triage level, considered to be the true triage
level for each case, was established by discussion until
complete agreement within the consensus group was
reached. All participants as well as the members of the
reference group, were unaware of the triage level of the
previous real-life assessments of the patients. The study
was performed and reported according to the GRAASchecklist
for reporting of studies of reliability and
agreement.
Participants
All midwives and registered nurses (RNs), respectively
performing triage on a daily basis at the hospital’s obstetric
and general ED were invited to participate in the study
(convenience sampling). The midwives used GOTS daily
in clinical routine while the RNs used triage as a working
method but with another similarly structured triage
system, not entailing pregnancy complications, on a daily
basis. Information on the study and an invitation to participate
were distributed at workplace meetings. All staff
members were eligible for participation. All participants
were informed that participation in the study was voluntary
and anonymous. Six midwives and seven RNs gave
informed verbal consent in accordance with the ethics
committee approval. They received salary equivalent to
the time they spent participating in the study (3 h).
Data collection
During 3 h, each participating midwife and RN individually
and anonymously triaged all 30 paper cases. None
of the RNs received prior training in GOTS, with the
purpose to assess whether the system can be safely used
by medically trained staff familiar with triage as working
method but without additional training in obstetrics.
The final triage level and choice of chief complaint
algorithm assigned to the case were documented by the
participants on the GOTS documentation form. The
process was supervised by LL in order to ensure that the
participants did not collaborate in their assessments. The
triaging process was concluded with the opportunity to
discuss the cases freely, raising questions and reflections.
Statistics
The triage assessments were analysed as follows:
1. the IRR for final triage level within the total group of
participants, and within the midwife group and the
RN group, respectively
2. the IRR for the individual midwife and RN assessments,
compared to the reference group assessments,
presented as a mean of all individual assessments
3. the IRR between the real-life clinical assessments,
handled as performed by a separate assessor, compared
to the reference group assessments.
Measurement of agreement, IRR, is presented both
as percentage level of absolute agreement and as a
weighted Kappa value calculated by the intra-class correlation
coefficient (ICC) with 95% confidence intervals,
in order to present the magnitude of difference in
assessments as well as to adjust for the possibility of participants
guessing the same triage level [17]. Kappa values
are interpreted as poor (< 0.5), moderate (0.5–0.75),
good (0.75–0.9) or excellent (> 0.90) [18]. Missing values
(n = 2) were replaced by the median value for the participant
within the same triage level.
Furthermore, an analysis of over- and undertriage,
comparing the triage levels assigned by the individual
participants to the reference group’s triage level, was
performed. The clinically most relevant crossing of the
boundary between triage levels orange – yellow, i.e.,
unstable - stable, was assessed separately and examined
regarding the reason for the undertriage. All data were
analysed using SPSS Statistics, version 27.
Results
Baseline characteristics of the participants are presented
in Table 1. All participants had at least 1 year of professional
experience and all participants except two midwives
had worked with triage for at least 1 year.
A total of 388 final assessments were made by the midwifes
and RNs. There were two missing values, equivalent
to 0.5% of the assessments (Fig. 1, additional file 1). Absolute
agreement was seen in 69.6% of the assessments. The
overall ICC Kappa value for the final triage level was 0.78
in the whole group, classifying the IRR as good. Analysing
the midwives’ and RNs’ final triage level assessments
separately revealed a slightly higher Kappa value for the
midwives than for the RNs (κ =0.82 vs. 0.76, Table 2).
While a minor difference was also observed between
the midwives’ and RNs’ assessments, in comparison with
the reference group, the average IRR for the final triage
level within both groups was classified as good (Table 3).
In addition, the IRR for the final triage levels between the
real-life assessments, handled as performed by a separate
assessor, and the reference group assessments was excellent
(κ = 0.93) (Table 3).
Of the 388 assessments performed by midwifes and
RNs, 82 (21.1%) were undertriaged and 36 (9.3%) were
overtriaged, compared to the reference group’s assessments
(Table 4). The majority of undertriaged cases
(n = 49) were observed at the two highest acuity levels.
Of these, 27 cases crossed the unstable/stable barrier in
the triage system, i.e., between orange (urgent) and yellow
(non-urgent).
Causes for undertriage in the two highest acuity levels
are presented in Fig. 2, additional file 2. The predominant
causes were “not reacting to vital sign parameters”
and “difficulties in assessing patient symptoms due to
the paper case design”.
Of the 21 cases in the “not reacting to vital sign parameters”
group, 12 were due to neglecting elevated blood
pressure, seven were due to neglecting increased heart
rate and two were due to neglecting increased respiratory
rate. It was mainly RNs that neglected elevated
blood pressure (8/12) and all of the neglected cases of
increased heart rate were assessed by midwives. Overtriage
occurred especially in cases presenting with bleeding
and/or pain that had been triaged as stable i.e., yellow to
blue, by the reference group.
The overall Kappa value for agreement in chosen chief
complaint algorithm was 0.75 (see Additional file 3).
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to
explicitly examine the performance of an OTS as applied
by midwives, as well as by RNs without experience in
obstetrics. Our findings suggest that the GOTS has good
IRR and is a reliable tool for triaging obstetric patients
seeking emergency care, regardless of whether assessors
have scarce or extensive experience of triaging and
managing obstetric patients. It is thus applicable for triaging
obstetric patients presenting for emergency care at
obstetric units and at general EDs.
The purpose of triage is to identify patients with timesensitive,
severe conditions and distinguish them from
less urgent patients. The system facilitating these assessments
should be as reliable as possible, enabling reproducibility
of assessments made under similar conditions
[19]. Comparison of reliability of different OTSs is nearly
impossible as there is no golden standard for evaluating
OTSs or agreement for the use of a standard IRR measure
[11–13, 20, 21]. In this study, there were slight differences
in IRR between midwives and RNs. This is to be
expected since the clinical experience of the triage midwife/
RN will inevitably play a role in assessment of the
patient. Indeed, previous research has shown that the triage
process is dependent on both external factors, such
as work environment and internal factors, such as individual
capacity [22–24]. Triage systems facilitate triage
but do not constitute the entire triage process. Hence,
reliable triage systems, such as the GOTS, are even more
crucial in order to avoid variation in assessments, which
in turn decrease the risk of unequal care and of overlooking
severely ill patients.
Of the 388 assessments, 82 (21.1%) and 36 (9.3%) were
under- and overtriaged, respectively. Previous studies
have shown a varying rate of under- and overtriaged
cases (Veit-Rubin et al. 12 and 9.6% respectively and
Moudi et al. 17.1 and 6.1% respectively), and while this
study shows a good IRR of the GOTS, it also reveals a
somewhat higher level of undertriage than reported for
other OTSs [11, 14]. However, Viet-Rubin et al. uses a triage
simulator integrated 30 clinical vignettes and Moudi
et al. uses live double-triage. With these differences in
study design a direct comparison between the different
studies and results is impossible. Highlighting that
IRR is important in evaluating OTSs, the clinical relevance
of coherence in assessments must be taken into
consideration when interpreting the numerical Kappa
value. Under- and overtriage should be avoided due to
the effect on both patient safety and resource allocation.
Undertriage may significantly increase the risk of delayed
adequate evaluation, which in turn delays essential treatment.
Overtriage may increase the risk of misguided
resource allocation to patients with lesser need of urgent
examinations. In addition to establishing a good IRR,
we thus also analysed the frequency of and the reasons
for over- and undertriage. Clinically, the most immediate
and severe triage failure in the GOTS is related to
undertriage of patients while crossing the unstable/stable
barrier i.e., triaging a patient that was assessed as red
or orange by the reference group as yellow or lower. In
this study, this type of undertriage was shown in 15.9%
(27/170) of the cases assessed as red or orange by the reference
group. When analysing these cases, it was evident
that undertriage was predominately caused by two key
factors e.g., limitations of the paper case study design and
failure to apply the system correctly. Several of the undertriaged
assessments occurred in cases with bleeding and/
or abdominal pain. These cases were also overtriaged by
some participants, indicating that these symptoms may
be difficult to assess on paper. These difficulties were also
addressed spontaneously by the participants after completing
all assessments. They pointed out that they would
have been able to assess the amount of bleeding as well as
the level of pain in a clinical setting.
The other main reason for misclassification was not
acknowledging abnormal vital sign parameters. This
highlights two aspects. Firstly, there is a need for continuous
education about the GOTS. Specifically, if a vital
sign parameter indicates a higher acuity level, it is this
level that must be chosen. Secondly, vital sign parameters
may be underestimated and the interpretation of
their significance may vary depending on the assessor’s
background. Previous research has shown that assessing
vital sign parameters in the non-obstetric population
strengthens the ability to adequately triage patients
[25, 26]. However, in obstetrics, it is mainly blood pressure
and temperature that have traditionally been taken
into account when assessing patients. In this study,
although sample size was small, a difference was seen
between the midwives and RNs. Midwives tended not
to acknowledge the significance of an elevated heart rate
while RNs tended not to react to blood pressure exceeding
160/110 mmHg, a blood pressure level that is considered
somewhat elevated in general emergency medicine
but of the utmost significance in obstetrics. Addressing
all vital sign parameters in obstetric emergency care may
challenge assessments previously perceived as correct.
This thus generates a potential problem in trusting the
system and applying it as intended. Further research is
needed to establish whether all vital sign parameters are
essential in triaging obstetric patients. As the physiological
changes occurring during pregnancy enable obstetric
patients to maintain normal vital sign parameters despite
being critically ill [27], there is all the more reason to
react when vital signs actually deteriorate.
Strengths and limitations
Previous research has highlighted the importance of triage
nurses’ having experience in emergency care for
proper implementation of the triage system itself [24,
28]. A strength of this study is assessing the IRR of the
GOTS among participants with experience in emergency
care but with varying experience in obstetrics. Moreover,
assessment by a reference group enabled an analysis of
both over- and undertriage, in order to further assess the
clinical significance of the IRR.
However, the study also has several limitations. As
previously discussed, paper cases create difficulties in
assessing symptoms such as amount of bleeding and
level of pain, as confirmed by the participants. However,
a previous study by Worster et al. established that there
is moderate to high agreement in IRR between real-life
and paper cases [29]. The IRR was reported to be worse
in paper case-based studies, compared to the same system
tested in a live setting. This indicates that sufficient
IRR in a “paper-case setting” corresponds to a sufficient
IRR in a real-life setting [29]. Due to two assessments not
being registered by the assessors there were two missing
values. The assessments were done anonymously and it
was not possible to capture the reason for not assessing
the cases. Nevertheless, these two missing values constitutes
only 0.5% of the assessments.
Strengths of the paper case design are the possibility
to evaluate all chief complaint algorithms as well as all
triage levels and that all participants received the exact
same information for the assessment. The study design
also made it possible to test the assessment of patients
triaged as red (immediate examination needed) and
orange (urgent examination needed)– rare in the clinical
setting but the most important to identify. Furthermore,
the paper cases allowed the system’s IRR to be
tested among both midwives and RNs, as well as coherent
assessment of the patients. Limitations of the paper
case design include the lack of clinical information as discussed
above.
Another limitation is the relatively small sample size,
despite invitations being sent out to all staff members at
the general ED and the obstetric ED. Triaging more cases
would have increased the number of assessments. However,
all study participation must be voluntary and it was
not possible to include more assessors. In addition, it was
not feasible to extend the recruitment period.
Like the absolute majority of triage systems, the GOTS
was developed within the local context of guidelines
and clinical setting, and the generalizability may thus be
limited. The fact that the selection of cases did not correspond
to the actual patient flow in the real-life setting
may have biased the assessors to assess the cases according
to the expected percentage of cases within each level
of acuity. However, the cases were selected consecutively
during a period of 2 months in order to represent all of
the chief complaint algorithm and the five acuity levels in
the GOTS, which was deemed essential.
Conclusions
Our findings suggest that GOTS, the first OTS to be
implemented and studied in a Swedish emergency setting,
is a reliable tool for triaging obstetric patients and
enables a safe and standardised triage process unrelated
to staff’s level of experience in assessing and managing
obstetric patients. Implementation of the GOTS for triage
of obstetric patients in general and obstetric EDs may
decrease the risk of maternal morbidity and mortality by
enabling identification of severely ill obstetric patients.
However, further studies on validity, as well as on patient
and staff satisfaction with the triage process, are needed
to establish GOTS as an OTS.