Background
Fear of childbirth (FOC) is a health issue for a pregnant
woman that is similar to an anxiety disorder or a phobic
fear and involves physical complications, nightmares
and concentration problems [1]. An increasing body of
evidence suggests that FOC can affect a woman’s relationship
with the baby, her partner and her family [2, 3],
and often results in more frequent requests for epidural
analgesia and cesarean section [4–7]. Moreover, FOC is
also related to posttraumatic stress disorder [8, 9] and a
longer duration of labor [7, 10]. FOC is a common psychological
problem for pregnant women. Approximately
20% of gravidas experience FOC, according to existing
studies [11, 12]. A meta-analysis reported a 14% pooled
prevalence of FOC, but with significant heterogeneity
[13]. It is normal for FOC to differ across countries considering
that birth is an omnifarious experience.
Prior studies indicate that FOC is caused by multiple
factors, including obstetric, sociodemographic and psychological
variables. Research on the effects of obstetric
factors on FOC has shown that parity [14], planned
pregnancy [15] and gestational week [11] affect FOC.
However, no connection was found between FOC and
conception type [16, 17]. In terms of sociodemographic
factors, previous studies found that age [18, 19], educational
level [20, 21], income level [19], and employment
status [20, 21] are connected with FOC. Moreover, a lack
of social or spousal support is connected to an increased
probability of FOC [22, 23]. Among psychological issues,
childbirth self-efficacy may be linked to FOC. The higher
the childbirth self-efficacy women reported was, the
lower their level of FOC [24, 25].
It is worth noting that resilience, proposed and developed
by positive psychology and representing one’s
capacity for survival and adjustment after experiencing
serious traumatic events [26], can help people accommodate,
handle or pass through adversity based on a selfregulating
psychological mechanism [27] and recover
from disasters or maintain their psychological health
[28–30]. As FOC is a negative emotional experience, we
speculate that resilience may have an impact on it. Additionally,
research has stated that resilience influences
self-efficacy [31, 32], and self-efficacy has been examined
as a mediator of mental health outcomes [33]. Hence,
we hypothesized that childbirth self-efficacy and resilience
would have a direct effect on FOC and that resilience
would have an indirect effect on FOC via childbirth
self-efficacy.
This is the first study to examine the impact of resilience
on FOC and the relationships among FOC, childbirth
self-efficacy and resilience in pregnant women. In
addition, only two studies conducted by Chinese scholars
have examined the factors affecting FOC but without
discussing the extent to which these variables predict
FOC [20, 34]. Taking all the reasons mentioned above
into consideration, the main objective of this study is to
identify the levels of FOC and evaluate the predictive factors
among pregnant Chinese women and to explore the
interrelationships among FOC, childbirth self-efficacy,
and resilience.
Methods
Design and participants
A cross-sectional survey was conducted in the First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University. The
study was performed in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and was approved by the local Ethics Committee.
Chongqing is a municipality located in southwestern
China and has a population of approximately 31
million. The birth rate at the study hospital is more than
9000 babies per year. Pregnant women who established a
health record (gestational week ≥ 11) and attended routine
prenatal examinations at the obstetrics clinic at the
time of the research period were recruited. The inclusion
criteria were Chinese pregnant women with a singleton
pregnancy who were 18 years old or older, had no pregnancy
complications, and had no previous cesarean section
or psychiatric disorders. The exclusion criteria were
women who had signs of cesarean section or declined to
participate in the survey. Three well-trained researchers
collected the data from August to December 2020 via a
face-to-face survey. After obtaining written informed
consent from participants, the researchers distributed
the anonymous questionnaires and instructed them on
how to fill them out. Excluding 39 respondents because
of incorrect or incomplete responses and refusal, we analyzed
the responses of 646 pregnant women.
Measures
Basic information form
The basic information form included eleven questions
on respondents’ age, education, occupation, marital status,
residence, family per capita monthly income (RMB,
renminbi, Chinese yuan), gestational age, parity, planning
pregnancy, conception type, and spousal support.
Fear of childbirth
Consisting of 16 items, the Childbirth Attitude
Questionnaire(CAQ) was developed to measure FOC
[35]. Responses are given on a four-point Likert scale,
and scores range from 16 to 64, with higher scores indicating
higher FOC. The scale included four domains: fear
of fetal health; fear of losing control during childbirth;
fear of childbirth pain; fear of medical intervention and
the hospital environment. CAQ total scores were categorized
as none (16–27), mild (28–39), moderate (40–51)
and severe (52–64). Wei wand her colleagues translated
the scale into Chinese, and this scale has good reliability
(Cronbach’s α = 0.91) and validity (content validity index
(CVI) = 0.924) [36]. Cronbach’s α was 0.92, and the CVI
was 0.930 in this study. Cronbach’s α coefficient represents
internal consistency reliability, and an α coefficient
≥ 0.70 indicates acceptable reliability [37].
Childbirth self‑efficacy
The short form of 32-item Chinese Childbirth Self-Efficacy
Inventory (CBSEI-C32) was used to measure childbirth
self-efficacy. The Outcome Expectancy Subscale
(OE-16) and Efficacy Expectancy Subscale (EE-16) make
up the CBSEI-C32 [38]. Each item is answered on a tenpoint
Likert scale ranging from 1 to 10. Total scores range
from 32 to 320, and the higher scores are, the higher the
self-efficacy. The Chinese version of the CBSEI-C32 has
high internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = 0.96) and test–
retest reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient = 0.88),
and significant Pearson’s correlations with measures of
general sense of perceived self-efficacy (r = 0.32, P < 0.01)
and anxiety (r = -0.21, P < 0.01) indicate its excellent construct
validity [39]. The Cronbach’s alpha for each subscale
was 0.96 and 0.97, and the CVI was 0.962 in this
study.
Resilience
To measure resilience in pregnant Chinese women, we
used the 10-item Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale
(CD-RISC-10) in this study. Campbell-Sills and Stein
created the original English version of the CD-RISC-10
[40]. Then, the scale was translated into Chinese and
used to measure resilience in Chinese earthquake victims
by Wang and his colleagues [41]. Responses are given
on a four-point Likert scale, ranging from 0(“never”) to
4 (“nearly always”), with higher total scores representing
better levels of resilience. The Chinese CD-RISC-10
has a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.91, and significant Pearson’s
correlations with measures of posttraumatic stress disorder
indicate its satisfactory construct validity (r = -0.53,
P < 0.01) [41]. In this study, the Cronbach’s alpha was
0.91, and the CVI was 0.925.
Statistical analysis
The mean and standard deviation (SD) were used to
describe continuous variables and frequencies with percentages
were used to summarize categorical variables.
We performed an independent t-test and 1-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) to compare the CAQ scores
between different characteristics, and Pearson correlation
analyses were used to test the relationships between
FOC and self-efficacy and resilience. If the above variables
had a P value < 0.05 in a t-test/ANOVA or Pearson
correlation analysis, they were retained in the hierarchical
regression analysis model. Cook’s distances (< 1.0)
were computed to identify influential cases and outliers.
The Cook’s distances varied between 0.0000 and 0.08679
in this study. The Durbin–Watson (DW) statistic was
used to test the independence of error terms and the
sequential correlation of adjacent errors. This statistic
can range from 0 to 4, with a value of 2 indicating that the
residuals are uncorrelated. The DW value was 1.900 in
our study. The variance inflation factor (VIF) was applied
to diagnose the possibility of multicollinearity among
all the explanatory variables. A VIF less than 5 indicates
that there is no serious multicollinearity. All the VIF values
were < 5 in this study. A P value < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant. Data were recorded using EpiData
version 3.1 after checking for completeness, and analyses
were conducted using IBM SPSS Statistics version 25.
We performed structural equation modeling to analyze
the mediation model. A model was established
with FOC as the dependent variable, resilience as the
independent variable, and childbirth self-efficacy as the
mediating variable. Maximum likelihood estimation was
employed as a global test of models. The bootstrapping
method was used to test the significance of the indirect
effect of a mediator. It is believed that an indirect effect
is significant at the 0.05 level if the bias corrected 95%
confidence interval (CI) from 5000 bootstrap samples
does not include 0. Amos 23.0 was used for the modeling.
The structural equation model (SEM) was acceptable
with the following indexes: x2/df < 3; root mean square
error of approximation (RMSEA) < 0.08; goodness of fit
index (GFI) and adjusted goodness of fit index (AGFI)
values > 0.90; comparative fit index (CFI) and normed fit
index (NFI) values > 0.90; and incremental fit index (IFI)
and relative fit index (RFI) values > 0.90 [42].
Results
Description of participants’ basic characteristics and their
correlations with FOC
Table 1 shows the sample’s sociodemographic and obstetric
characteristics and their associations with the CAQ
scores. The age range was 18 to 42 years, with a mean age
of 28.7 (SD = 3.8). Regarding sociodemographic status,
81.9% of the women had a college education and most
participants were employed (82.8%). The clear majority
(98.9%) were married and lived in cities (91.5%). Half of
the women had a family per capita monthly income of
4000–8000 RMB (50.9%), and the majority of the women
had their partner’s full support for their current pregnancy
(85.8%). In terms of the main obstetric information,
the mean gestational age was 29.3 weeks and 82.4%
were nulliparous.
In the univariate analysis of the factors related to the
CAQ scores, seven factors were significantly related to
FOC (P < 0.05): age, education, marital status, gestational
age, parity, pregnancy planning and spousal support.
More detailed information is presented in Table 1.
FOC levels and the correlations among FOC, self‑efficacy,
and resilience
The CAQ, self-efficacy, and resilience scale scores are
shown in Table 2. Among a total of 646 participants,
the prevalence rates of mild, moderate, and severe FOC
were 45.4% (n = 293), 19.5% (n = 126), and 2.2% (n = 14),
respectively. The mean CAQ score was 32.49 ± 8.64.
Table 2 also shows the relationship among FOC, selfefficacy
and resilience. Pearson correlation analyses demonstrated
that the CAQ scores were inversely related to
CBSIE-32 scores, and CD-RISC-10 scores. Specifically,
a positive correlation was found between the CBSIE-32
and CD-RISC-10 scores.
The results of hierarchical regression analysis
regarding predictors of FOC
A three-step hierarchical regression analysis was performed
to identify factors predicting FOC. The independent
variables were entered as follows: step 1
included demographic and obstetric variables such as
age, educational level, marital status, gestational age,
parity, pregnancy planning and spousal support; step 2
included resilience variables; and step 3 included childbirth
self-efficacy variables. The results of the regression
analysis related to the independent variables predicting
FOC are depicted in Table 3.
In the first model, obstetric and sociodemographic variables
significantly explained 18.9% of the variance in FOC
(F = 11.709, P < 0.01). In the second model, the model
significantly explained 49.4% of the variance in FOC
with the inclusion of the CD-RISC-10 score (F = 43.888,
P < 0.01). In the third model, the addition of childbirth
self-efficacy led to an improvement in the model, with
significant changes in R2
of 15.1% (F = 75.289, P < 0.01).
Overall, the final model explained 64.5% of the variance
in FOC and revealed six variables that contributed significantly
to FOC. Childbirth self-efficacy was the strongest
predictor of FOC, followed by resilience. Regarding
sociodemographic variables, advanced age, late pregnancy,
being nulliparous, and poor spousal support were
predictors of a higher degree of FOC.
Mediating effect of childbirth self‑efficacy on the relation
between resilience and FOC
Figure 1 depicts the mediation models of childbirth
self-efficacy and the standardized coefficients for each
variable. The SEM showed significant regression and
correlation paths, with all the path coefficients being
statistically significant at the level of P < 0.05. The fit
indices for the model were acceptable: x2/df = 2.645,
RMSEA = 0.051, GFI = 0.951, AGFI = 0.932, CFI = 0.976,
NFI = 0.962, IFI = 0.976, and RFI = 0.953.
According to the model, FOC was significantly predicted
by resilience and childbirth self-efficacy. The
standardized direct effect value of childbirth self-efficacy
on FOC was -0.58(P < 0.001), and the standardized direct
effect value of resilience on FOC was -0.33 (P < 0.001).
Resilience significantly predicted childbirth self-efficacy,
and the standardized direct effect of resilience on selfefficacy
was 0.65 (P < 0.001). The bootstrapped 95% CI
did not include 0 (-0.438 ~ -0.316, P = 0.000), confirming
that the indirect effect of resilience on FOC through
childbirth self-efficacy was significant. The standardized
indirect effect of resilience on FOC through self-efficacy
was -0.38. The standardized total effect of resilience on
FOC was -0.71. Therefore, indirect effects account for
53.5% of the total effect.
Discussion
The prevalence of FOC
The mean CAQ score in our study was 32.49. Comparing
this mean score with those from other results, it is
slightly higher than that in studies from China that used
the same assessment tool (32.20 and 31.30) [20, 34]. Our
data showed that FOC occurred in 67% of pregnancies,
and 2.2% of participants experienced severe FOC. Several
studies reported the following rates of severe FOC: 5%
in Australia, 5.3% in Ireland, 6.1% in Iran, 8% in Kenya,
20.8% in Turkey and 24.5% in Ethiopia [43–48]. It is difficult
to compare the incidence of FOC across countries
due to differences in the measures and definitions used.
However, one conclusion we can draw is that FOC is a
prevalent psychological problem among pregnant Chinese
women, and most of them were experienced mild or
moderate FOC. It is time for healthcare professionals to
understand, recognize and intervene in FOC.
Demographic and obstetric factors predicting FOC
We performed hierarchical regression analysis to confirm
the correlations of sociodemographic, obstetric,
and other characteristics with FOC. The best-fit
regression model revealed six variables that explained
64.5% of the variance in the CAQ score. Of the sociodemographic
factors, advanced age was found to predict
FOC, in agreement with a previous study from Finland
[19]. This may have something to do with women’s belief
that advanced age makes them unfit to give birth.
However, Laursen et al. [18] demonstrated that young
women < 20 years reported intense FOC in a study from
Denmark. Very young women are worried that they will
not be able to take care of their child appropriately [49].
In addition, poor partner support was correlated with
FOC. Similarly, previous studies showed that receiving
a low level of support from one’s husband increased the
probability of FOC [17, 22, 45]. In Turkey, Çıtak et al.
[50], in contrast to our study, found that spousal support
did not predict FOC. Reproductive health at birth is considered
a woman’s responsibility in Turkey, so the expectation
of partner support is low.
Among the obstetric features, gestational age and parity
are significant predictors of FOC. As the gestational
week increased, a higher level of FOC was more likely
to be reported, consistent with a previous study [51]. As
in other studies [51, 52], multiparas had lower levels of
FOC than primiparas. This is reasonable because multiparas
have more experience and information about
the whole delivery process [53]. However, previous work
by Räisänen et al. stated that multiparous women had a
higher risk of experiencing FOC [19], in which case FOC
was usually related to a previous traumatic or negative
childbirth experience [54, 55].
From the discussion above, we can clearly see that different
studies report conflicting results regarding the
association between the FOC and sociodemographic and
obstetric factors. In the current study, however, the sample
sources are relatively limited in terms of achieving
adequate power to explore the inconsistencies surrounding
this issue, and more specific research is necessary to
examine their association. However, it is of great importance
to design antenatal educational programs targeting
for different demographic and obstetric backgrounds.
Resilience
When we added resilience to the model in the second
step, the model explained 49.4% of the variance in
FOC, indicating that resilience plays a significant role
in predicting FOC, a finding that has not been reported
before. In terms of resilience, an increasing body of evidence
suggests that resilience serves as a protective factor
for psychological health and overall well-being [56,
57]. Although childbirth is a normal and healthy life
experience, pregnant women with FOC may regard it
as a challenge and adversity. Resilience helps individuals
cope with such adversities and difficulties, so pregnant
women with a better level of resilience may manage
their emotions successfully, actively use their own psychological
qualities to cope with the stress of childbirth,
and ultimately reduce fear. In a Chinese study involving
2813 pregnant women, resilience was found to have a
significant independent protective effect on prenatal anxiety/
depression [58].
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to
explore the association between resilience and FOC, providing
a new perspective for developing related interventions.
Health care professionals are advised to focus on
resilience interventions and the formulation and implementation
of programs to enhance resilience. Interventions
including emotional regulation training, cognitive
and behavioral therapy to reframe thoughts and refocus
on positive emotions, and physical health improvement
via exercise, sleep, nutrition, and mindfulness have the
potential to enhance resilience [59–61]. Evidence has
shown that social support or family support can provide
powerful external conditions for the development
of resilience [62, 63]. More specifically, higher support
obtained from social networks can help pregnant
women positively cope with the stressors resulting from
pregnancy and childbirth. Suggested measures include
encouraging husbands or other family members to provide
adequate spiritual and material support for pregnant
women and participate in antenatal courses and providing
group activities such as peer support groups or pregnancy
school to strengthen women’s social interactions.
Childbirth self‑efficacy
The explained variance in FOC increased to 64.5% when
we included self-efficacy in the model in the third step.
It is clear that childbirth self-efficacy plays an important
role in predicting FOC. On the one hand, self-efficacy
reflects personal beliefs about behavior that influence
outcomes [64]. On the other hand, self-efficacy is the
individual’s confidence that they can succeed in performing
that behavior in reality [65]. Women with a low level
of self-efficacy may exaggerate the difficulty of a natural
birth and have lower confidence in their ability to cope
with the birth process. Previous studies have reflected
that low self-efficacy is connected with severe FOC [47,
66]. Therefore, failing to increase their confidence in their
childbirth efficacy may set women up for a distressing
birth experience. Research has demonstrated positive
outcomes from interventions that may be effective in
increasing childbirth confidence, such as pregnancy yoga
[67], mindfulness training [68], and antenatal education
[69]. A New Zealand study reported that skills-based
childbirth preparation contributed to an increase in
mothers’ self-efficacy [70]. The program included breathing
exercises, verbal and nonverbal communication exercises,
tension-reducing exercises, and body exercises as
well as advice about stages, delivery methods, and when
to use certain skills.
Another interesting finding of this study is that we
found a mediating effect of childbirth self-efficacy on
the relationship between resilience and FOC. In other
words, a better level of resilience brought out stronger
self-efficacy, which in turn reduced the CAQ score. The
mediation effect rate was 53.5%, confirming that resilience
indirectly acted on FOC through self-efficacy. The
reason may be that pregnant women with higher resilience
make fuller use of their psychological resources to
arouse and strengthen their mental capacity to accept the
birth event and reevaluate it, and this in turn is beneficial
in giving them greater confidence regarding childbirth,
thus reducing fear. The mediating effect of childbirth selfefficacy
on resilience and FOC found through an SEM
provided new insight into those factors influencing FOC.
This finding showed that preventive interventions aimed
at enhancing resilience and self-efficacy may be conducive
to effectively alleviating pregnant women’s fear.
Conclusions
In sum, we found a high prevalence of FOC among pregnant
women in China. Health care professionals should
attach importance to FOC and address this issue thoroughly.
Age, gestational age, parity, spousal support,
resilience and childbirth self-efficacy are predictors of
FOC. The findings help us to identify the characteristics
of patients with FOC and to formulate corresponding
countermeasures. Another point to note is that interventions
focusing on enhancing resilience and self-efficacy
may alleviate FOC. To provide favorable external conditions
for the development of resilience, it is necessary for
antenatal care providers to offer timely support to pregnant
women through psychological counseling and create
peer support groups that allow women to share their
fears, experiences and stories and techniques for coping
with labor pain. In addition, health care professionals
should attach importance to cultivating women’s childbirth
self-efficacy via various channels, such as strengthening
prenatal education, offering pregnancy yoga
courses, and organizing companion-integrated childbirth
preparation [24].
Strengths and limitations
This study has several strengths. First, it has shed light
on the relation between resilience and FOC, as there
are no relevant studies on this topic. Second, we used
an SEM and found a mediating effect of childbirth selfefficacy
on the relationship between resilience and FOC,
which may provide valuable information for health care
professionals.
Regarding limitations, first, this study was conducted
in a university-affiliated hospital in a large urban area,
which may not allow the current results to represent all
pregnant Chinese women. Further research should focus
on women in rural and remote communities. Second,
because this study was cross-sectional, conclusions about
the causal relation between FOC and related factors
could not be derived. Thus, future prospective studies are
needed.