Background
Pregnancy is characterized by various changes, including
hormonal changes, different personal expectations and a
new coordination of the professional and social environment,
often accompanied by financial or health concerns
[1–3]. Depending on the circumstances, the degree of
support from the environment and many other (individual)
factors, these changes can lead to intense emotional
states and stress [4]. A negative maternal emotional state
or maternal stress over a longer period of time not only
affects mental health of the becoming mother but can
interfere with the development of the offspring: Several
studies have shown adverse effects of intense negative
maternal emotional states, ranging from prenatal distress
to peripartum mental disorders, on fetal and infant development
[5–8]. More specifically, adverse effects on the
physiological, metabolic and neuronal development of the
fetus have been reported [9–11]. The fetal autonomic nervous
system reacts and adapts rapidly to environmental
changes: Higher fetal heart rate variability and lower fetal
heart rate are indicators for fetal well-being. Accordingly,
several studies have shown that increased maternal depressive
or stress symptoms lead to changes in fetal cardiovascular
activity [12–14]. Furthermore, recent studies
reported a relation between maternal stress and the offspring’s
physiological stress reactivity and cortisol levels
[15–18]. Altered maternal cortisol levels due to high and
chronic stress have been hypothesized to be related to the
development of emotional and behavioral psychopathology
across the child’s lifespan, potentially also affecting
cognitive performance and brain volume [19–21]. In
addition, maternal diurnal cortisol was related to the newborn’s
stress reactivity and thus to the development of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, as measured by a
neonatal heel-stick measurement [22].
To avoid or compensate possible adverse effects
caused by maternal stress, preventive measures such as
relaxation techniques have become increasingly important.
So far, most studies indicate that maternal relaxation
during pregnancy can reduce maternal stress and
improve maternal wellbeing [23, 24]. In pregnant
women, a significant number of studies have shown that
relaxation strategies not only positively influence the
maternal autonomic nervous system but also reduce
symptoms of maternal anxiety and depression [25–29].
For instance, DiPietro and colleagues [28] administered
18-min of guided imagery and music for relaxation during
the third trimester of pregnancy. Significant changes
in maternal heart rate (HR) and skin conductance level
(SCL) were shown. A questionnaire-based study by
Nwebube and colleagues [26] detected lower anxiety and
depressive symptoms in pregnant women receiving relaxation
music for twelve weeks of their pregnancy compared
to a control group. Following a prenatal music
intervention for relaxation, a significant decrease in maternal
systolic and diastolic blood pressure, heart rate
[30] and uterine contractions [31] was reported. Moreover,
relaxation may have a positive effect on the perception
of maternal pain during labor [32]. Over the last
decade, several studies have reported significant effects
of different relaxation types on fetal and neonatal development
[33, 34]. The study by DiPietro and colleagues
[28], for example, reported a reduced fetal heart rate and
increased fetal heart rate variability. In summary, a positive
influence of different relaxation techniques on
mothers’ well-being as well as fetal and neonatal development,
can be assumed.
Previous studies investigating the influence of relaxation
techniques on maternal and fetal well-being used
different types of relaxation methods (active/passive,
body-based, mental-based) with different duration and
frequency (regular, single, weekly). Since physical relaxation
techniques may not be suitable for every woman
during pregnancy, the need for evidence-based mental
techniques that can be used regardless of a woman’s
physical condition has increased. To our knowledge,
none of the previous studies directly compared different
mental-based active/passive relaxation interventions in
pregnant women. We categorized guided imagery as active
relaxation on the basis of the instructions given and
listening to music as a passive form of relaxation. Therefore,
the present study focuses on the question which
type of mental-based active or passive relaxation technique
leads to greater relaxation during pregnancy.
Three commonly used mental-based relaxation
forms, music (listening to music), a guided imagery
(following a guided imagery without body-based instructions)
and minimal relaxation (resting, i.e., sitting
quietly), are compared with regard to their effectiveness
on maternal physiological, and psychological parameters
of stress during the third trimester of
pregnancy. In our study, guided imagery was categorized
as active relaxation on the basis of the instructions
given while listening to music was categorized
as a passive form of relaxation.
The following hypotheses were defined:
(1) We anticipated that acute relaxation, with either
music, guided imagery or resting, leads to a decrease in
physiological stress levels, i.e., decreased maternal heart
rate and SCL.
(2) We expected the effects of the three interventions
to differ, with a significantly stronger effect on physiological
parameters during the relaxation for guided imagery
(active relaxation) than music or during resting
(passive relaxation).
(3) The subjective effects of the three relaxation conditions,
which were also of interest to us, were assumed to
decrease after the intervention.
In an exploratory analysis, we also investigated
whether gestational age (GA) influenced any of the stress
ratings assessed.
Methods
This cross-sectional study was conducted between February
2018 and September 2019. The Ethics committee
of the Medical Faculty of the University of Tuebingen,
Germany, approved the study (748/2017BO1). Informed
consent of all participants was obtained prior to the start
of the measurements.
Participants
Pregnant healthy women were recruited by electronic
communication. Eligibility was restricted to women over
18 years of age, German speaking, singleton, uncomplicated
pregnancy during the 30th and 40th week of gestation.
Exclusion criteria were hearing impairments,
diagnosed mental disorders (self-report) or drug/nicotine
consumption during pregnancy (self-report). Once initial
information about the study had been provided, a single
visit was scheduled between 30th and 40th week of gestation.
A total of 38 women were enrolled. Three out of
38 women stated that they were vegetarian or vegan and
one woman stated that she had celiac disease. With regard
to any previous experience with relaxation, four
women reported that they had not previously used strict
routine activities to encourage relaxation. Of those who
did, the most commonly reported techniques were yoga
and meditation, exercising, daytime naps or reading.
Three women stated that they also liked to listen to
music to help them relax. On average, participants were
30.9 years old, in their 34th week of gestation, and 72%
were expecting their first child. Nine out of 38 women
participated in another measurement in our center only
shortly before the reported study. These participants had
rested for 30 min but without any specific intervention.
Two-thirds of the women had a college or a higher education/
university degree. Participants were informed
about the course of the study and gave their written informed
consent prior to participation.
Design and procedure
The participants were alternately assigned to the music
group, the guided imagery group or the resting group
shortly before the measurement commenced. We scheduled
a 1 h-visit between 8 am and 2 pm. On each participant’s
arrival, the in-house midwife checked fetal vitality
with a pinard horn. All women were asked to fill out a
questionnaire (Profile of Mood States, POMS) to assess
their current mood [35]. They also rated their current
stress level on a visual analogue scale (VAS) ranging
from 0 (not stressed at all) to 10 (highly stressed). The
women filled out both paper-pencil questionnaires at
our center before and after the intervention.
The relaxation intervention took place for each woman
individually and personally. It started once the woman
had been positioned in a semi-recumbent comfortable
armchair in a noise-reduced room. During the intervention,
the light in the room was dimmed. The electrodermal
activity- and heart rate monitor was positioned out
of view of the participants. Women were asked whether
the room temperature was comfortable, or whether or
not they were cold and whether they felt generally comfortable.
In all three groups, we began with a test measurement
for three minutes to ensure that the electrodes
were in working order. Afterwards, ten minutes of baseline
data were collected, during which we gave instructions
to remain quietly seated, breathe calmly and avoid
any movements. Subsequently, headphones were given
to the women (also in the resting group to ensure comparability
between conditions) and the intervention was
initiated (only for music group and guided imagery
group) for the next 10 min. The music (“Find Your Inner
Peace”, Rostar) was designed specifically for relaxation,
using certain tempos for inducing a calm state but no
vocals. The guided imagery text was designed for use
during pregnancy by a midwife on the basis of her own
professional experience and adapted specifically for this
study. To avoid conscious active physical tension, which
might cause artifacts in the data, the guided-imagery
contained no body-related instructions. For the resting
condition, the women were requested to remain seated
quietly without moving and to breathe normally. Following
the relaxation period, a 10-min interval served as a
recovery measurement (i.e., no specific relaxation intervention).
During the entire procedure, our in-house midwife
and the study assistant remained in the room with
the woman. Once the measurement was complete, the
study assistant removed the electrodes and headphones.
Afterwards, all women rated their stress level again on
the POMS and VAS and indicated how they had experienced
the intervention. After their participation, they received
a link for additional questionnaires via email
assessing chronic stress and pregnancy-related distress
(see details below). They completed these questionnaires
at home, one to 5 days after their appointment at our
center. We used the software Unipark (www.unipark.de)
for the computer-based questionnaires. Since it has
turned out that putting on headphones causes an interruption
in our data, for data analysis we only took into
account those segments after the beginning of the intervention
(relaxation) phase (T1) until the end of the recovery
phase (T4; see Fig. 1). The total time of the
relaxation phase and the recovery phase was thus 20
min. For the analysis of the maternal physiological activity,
we used baseline correction by subtracting the mean
of the first five minutes at the beginning (T0) without
any intervention from the data measured during the
period from T1 to T4.
Testing was discontinued for two participants due to
technical issues and discomfort of the women. The data
analysis is therefore based on the remaining 36 participants.
We included the following questionnaires for the
analysis:
Prenatal distress questionnaire (PDQ) – Pregnancy-related
distress
The Prenatal Distress Questionnaire (PDQ) uses 12
items to assess pregnancy-related and birth related concerns
[36]. The questionnaire includes five response categories
(from 0 = never to 4 = always). PDQ scores
ranged from 0 to 48. The Cronbach’s alpha for the overall
PDQ score was consistently reported to lie between
0.80 and 0.81 [37] and test–retest reliability has been reported
to be r = 0.75 [38]. The PDQ has been found to
have good convergent validity, since it is significantly
correlated with general stress measures (State Trait Anxiety
Inventory – State Scale, Life Event Stress and Perceived
Stress Scale) [37].
Trier inventory of chronic stress (TICS) – chronic stress
For the assessment of chronic stress, we used the Trier
Inventory of Chronic Stress (TICS) questionnaire [39].
This questionnaire is based on an interaction-related
stress concept [40] according to which stress arises in
and through the active confrontation of a person with
the demands of their environment. The questionnaire
includes 57 items form 9 different subscales: Work overload,
social overload, pressure to succeed, dissatisfaction
with work, excessive demands at work, lack of social
recognition, social tensions, social isolation and
chronic concerns. Participants answered using a 5-
point Likert scale response format (0 = never to 4 = always).
In addition, its screening scale for chronic
stress (SSCS), which uses 12 items to record chronic
stress in a non-specific and global manner, was used
for the analysis. An evaluation period of the last
3 months is required. The internal consistencies
(Cronbach’s alpha) of the scales range from .84 to .91
(M = .87). The Rasch reliabilities range from .78 to .89
(M= .83). The procedure has good profile reliability
(.72). Numerous results on construct validity (factor
analyses, correlations with stress questionnaires, personality
traits, partnership behavior, social support,
sleep quality, physical and psychological complaints,
cortisol release) are available for the TICS. Furthermore,
the TICS profiles of different study groups endorse
for the validity of the procedure [39].
Profile of mood states (POMS)- current mood
In the present study, the German short form of the
POMS with 35 items and 7-point Likert scale response
format (0 = not at all to 6 = very strong) was
used [35]. The 35 items form the scales of depression/
anxiety, fatigue, vigor and hostility. In the POMS,
the participants were asked to evaluate their state of
mood over the last 24 h. The POMS appears to be an
internally consistent instrument and the Cronbach’s
Alpha ranged from 0.89 to 0.95. There are indications
of convergent validity of POMS-scales with two questions:
1. Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt down,
depressed, or helpless? and 2. Over the past 2 weeks,
have you felt little interest or pleasure in doing
things? [35].
Maternal physiological response
Maternal electrodermal and cardiovascular activity were
recorded with a four-channel data acquisition and analysis
device (MP36R Research System, BIOPAC (USA)).
Data were recorded at a sampling rate of 2000 Hz. The
electrocardiogram (ECG) was recorded from three disposable
electrodes (EL503, Biopac Systems, Inc., CA)
which were placed on the forearms of the participants.
Data quantification was processed offline using Matlab
R2018a (The MathWorks, Natick, MA). ECG data
underwent R-peak detection (in house software), manual
editing for artifacts and inter-beat interval computation.
The time-domain parameters included root mean square
of successive differences (RMSSD) and the heart rate
(beats per minutes (bpm)). Electrodermal activity (quantified
by SCL) was measured by administering a constant
0.5 Volt root-mean square 35 Hz AC excitation signal
and detecting the current flow. SCL was monitored from
two disposable pre-gelled electrodes (EL507, Biopac Systems,
Inc., CA). These were placed on the distal phalanxes
of the index and middle finger of the nondominant
hand. Electrodes were fixed in position with
adhesive tape. Before the measurement, all women took
off their shoes to avoid any sudden spikes in the SCL
trace due to rubber-soled shoes [41]. Women were
instructed to sit quietly and reduce any movement. SCL
was scaled from 0 to 25 microsiemens. Data quantification
continued offline using Biopac software (Acqknowledge5
(CA, USA)). Artifacts were substituted with linear
interpolation based on the values at the left and right
edges if necessary and with a median smoothing with 50
samples to delete movement artifacts [42]. All values
were baseline corrected for the analysis and the
complete data set was divided into 5-min sections, via
which the mean value was then calculated.
Data analysis
All statistical analyses described below were performed
using the software program SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics
26), alpha levels were set to p < .05.
Data preparation of all dependent variables included
tests for normality, homogeneity of variances and examination
of outliers. Where not normally distributed, variables
were subjected to transformation by natural
logarithm and adding a constant, or were ranked prior
to the application of the statistical procedures.
Outliers were removed if values were more than three
standard deviations from the mean value. Excluding
these individual data points lead to a sample size of
seven to twelve subjects per group (for details see
Table 2). As some women were participating in another
measurement before the current study and thus were
probably more at ease in the clinical environment, we
included this variable as covariate in all analyses.
Additionally, we also included maternal chronic stress in
our analyses because different chronic stress levels can
have an impact on maternal baseline values.
Group differences in all dependent variables (maternal
heart rate, maternal skin conductance level and subjective
stress) were evaluated using mixed-effects ANCOVAs
with the between-subjects factor group (music,
guided imagery, resting) and the within-subject factor
time (T1-T4) and the two covariates ‘participating in another
measurement before at our center’ and ‘chronic
stress’. To analyze effects of time within relaxation phase
and recovery phase separately, we used a repeated measures
ANCOVA (rmANCOVA). We used Bonferroni or
Dunnett T3 correction for post-hoc analysis. In case of
non-normal distribution of the data, Wilcoxon signedrank
test were applied.
State and trait questionnaires were analyzed by the
standard evaluation procedure for every questionnaire
(POMS, PDQ and TICS) and all data were analyzed
using MANCOVAs with group and/or time as factors
(POMS, TICS, VAS).
Before and after the measurement, we asked all participants
to use a VAS to indicate how stressed they felt at
that particular point in time. To analyze the VAS, we
measured the distance from 0 to the set mark in cm to
gain the pre (before the measurement) and post values
(after the measurement).
Explorative analysis of differences in VAS between GA
groups (Group 1 (30–34 GA) and Group 2 (35–40 GA)):
For the mean delta value included in the analysis, we
subtracted the pre-value from the post-value for each
woman separately. An ANCOVA was used to determine
the differences between GA groups. The dependent variable
was the mean of VAS delta to describe changes in
subjective stress pre vs. post intervention.
Results
No significant differences were detected between groups
in fetal characteristics (e.g. sex, for descriptions see
Table 1). To determine group differences, we performed
a MANOVA with factor group (music group, guided imagery
group, resting group) and total score of TICS and
PDQ, maternal age and GA. While maternal age and GA
did not differ between the groups, F (2, 33)=2.424, p =
.122; F (2, 33)=2.875, p = .071, the total score total of
chronic stress (screening scale of chronic stress (SSCS))
and ‘participating in another measurement before’ differed
significantly, F (2, 33)=3.808, p = .033, ηp
2 = .187; F
(2, 33)=6.556, p = .004, ηp
2 = .291. Bonferroni post-hoc
test revealed a significant difference in SSCS between
the music group and the guided imagery group (see
Fig. 2). Pregnancy-related distress (PDQ) did not differ
significantly between groups, F (2, 33)=1.221, p = .308
(see Fig. 3). Group characteristics are presented in Table 1.
Maternal cardiovascular response to relaxation
procedures
Variables describing maternal cardiovascular activity are
presented in Table 2.
Maternal heart rate
A MANCOVA with factors group (music, guided imagery,
resting) and time (T1 to T4) revealed no significant
main effects for time, F(3,94) = 0.109, p = .955, or
group, F(2,94) = .317, p = .729, and no significant interaction
between group and time, F(6,94) = 1.007, p = .426.
Maternal heart rate variability
For heart rate variability, we used the root mean square
of successive differences (RMSSD). A MANCOVA with
factors group (music, guided imagery, resting) and time
(T1 to T4) revealed no significant main effects of time,
F(3,94) = 2.143, p = .100, or group, F(2,94) = 0.624, p =
.538, and no significant interaction between group and
time, F(6,94) = 1.339, p = .248.
Relaxation vs. recovery phase To further determine
whether a relaxation effect sets in during the recovery
phase, we analyzed whether there is a difference between
the relaxation (delta of mean T1-T2) and the recovery
(delta of mean T3-T4) phase in maternal parameters.
A MANCOVA with factors group (music, guided imagery,
resting) and change of time (delta) revealed neither
a significant main effect of group, F(2,56) = 0.824,
p = .444, nor time, F(1,56) = 2.181, p = .145, or group-bytime
interaction, F(2,56) = .626, p = .538, for maternal
heart rate. Similarly no significant main effect of group,
F(2,56) = .377, p = .688, or time, F(1,56) = .815, p = .371,
or group-by-time interaction, F(2,56) = .245, p = .784,
was found for maternal RMSSD.
Maternal electrodermal response to relaxation procedures
We assumed a significant relaxation effect over time
within each group, with decreasing SCL values, and differences
in the size of this effect between groups in maternal
SCL. Maternal SCL data is presented in Table 3.
A MANCOVA with factors group (music, guided imagery,
resting) and time (T1 to T4) revealed a significant
main effect of time, F(3,94) = 18.011, p = .001, ηp
2 = .365,
but no group effect, F(2,94) = .075, p = .928. The interaction
between group and time was not significant,
F(6,94) = 1.192, p = .317. For secondary analysis and to
determine time effect for each group separately, a repeated
measures ANCOVA with a Greenhouse-Geisser
correction revealed no significant main effects of time
within the music group, F (3, 21)=1.250, p = .301, the
guided imagery group, F (3, 24)=.122, p = .836, and the
resting group, F (3, 30)=0.152, p = .771, separately.
Hence, no significant relaxation effect over time could
be determined.
Relaxation vs. recovery phase A MANCOVA with factors
group (music, guided imagery, resting) and change
over time (delta) revealed no significant main effect of
group, F(2,56) = 2.856, p = .066, but a significant main
effect of time, F(1,56) = 21.935, p = .001, ηp
2 = .281, in
maternal SCL. The interaction between group and time
was not significant, F(2,56) = .490,p = .615. A Wilcoxon
signed-rank test revealed a significant difference between
relaxation and recovery phase in SCL within every
group. For women in the music group, the relaxation effect
decreased significantly in the recovery phase compared
to the relaxation phase, z = − 2.666, p = .008, r =
0.61, same for women in the guided imagery group, z=
− 2.191, p = .028, r = 0.58, and resting group, z=− 2.981,
p = .003, r = 0.61. To explore potential group difference
in the long-term impact of the relaxation intervention
during the recovery phase, delta SCL values of the recovery
phase only, were subjected to a MANCOVA with
the factor group (music, guided imagery, resting). The
analysis revealed no significant difference between the
groups, F (2, 27)=1.700, p = .202. The values in the recovery
phase therefore did not differ significantly between
interventions.
Maternal subjective response to relaxation procedures
On the basis of our third hypothesis, we assumed that
there would be a decrease in stress levels in all groups
independent of the type of relaxation administered. The
MANCOVA with group as between-subject factor
(music, guided imagery, resting) showed no significant
main effect of group on delta of mean levels of the VAS
for subjective stress (Post-Pre), F (2, 31)=.583, p = .564.
Albeit we did not observe a significant group effect on
VAS levels, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test determined a
significant time effect within groups for the VAS (pre vs.
post). Maternal stress levels were significantly reduced in
the music group, z=− 2.936, p = .003, r = 0.84, in the
guided imagery group, z=− 2.934, p = .003, r = 0.84, and
in the resting group, z=− 3.059, p = .002, r = 0.88.
A MANCOVA with group as between-subject factor
(music, guided imagery, resting) showed no significant effect
in delta of mean POMS (Pre-Post) levels for each
subscale, F (2, 31)=.952, p = .397 (depression/anxiety), F
(2, 31)=2.366, p = .111 (fatigue), F (2, 31)=2.222, p = .125
(vigor), F (2, 31)=1.831, p = .177 (hostility).
With regard to the POMS, a rmANCOVA with group
as factor showed no significant interaction effect for all
four subscales, depression/anxiety: F (1, 33)=2.178, p =
.129; fatigue: F (1, 33)=1.826, p = .177; vigor: F (1, 33)=
1.074, p = .353 and hostility: F (1, 33)=2.035, p = .147.
However, we found significant main effects of time for
depression/anxiety, fatigue and hostility in each group.
In particular, the improvement in depression/anxiety
was shown for the resting and music group but not for
the guided imagery group. For statistical details, see
Table 4.
In addition, we were interested in whether the effects
we found for the VAS were dependent of GA:
In an exploratory approach, we divided women into
two groups on the basis of their GA (Group 1: 30th–
34th gestational week, N = 21; Group 2: 35th–40th gestational
week, N = 15). The difference in the pre-rating
values of VAS between the groups was not statistically
significant, F (1, 34)=1.318, p = .259. Numerically,
women with higher GA (Group 2) had lower values in
the pre-rating, meaning that they might have been
somewhat less stressed (Mean (SD) Group 1: 2.33 (1.59);
Group 2: 1.79 (1.72)) beforehand.
As an explorative approach, an ANOVA showed a significant
difference between GA groups in mean VAS
delta, F (1, 34)=4.971, p = .032, ηp
2 = .128, i.e., women
with higher GA had less change in VAS levels (delta
mean: 1.02) compared to women with lower GA (delta
mean: 1.23). Thus, women earlier in the third trimester
(30th–34th gestational week) appear to be able to relax
more easily compared to women with higher GA.
However, when we included chronic stress and ‘participating
in another measurement before at our center’ as
covariates, this effect was no longer significant, F (1,
32)=2.113, p = .156.
Discussion
This study aimed to investigate the effect of three different
types of relaxation interventions on subjective and
physiological stress-related parameters in the last trimester
of pregnancy. We observed that maternal physiological
measures (HR, SCL) showed a decrease
independent of the type of intervention, albeit not to a
significant extent.
Notably, we observed a significant difference for all
groups in the change of SCL between the relaxation and
the recovery phase independent of intervention. Thus,
relaxation effects are still ongoing during the recovery
phase, but are less intense than in the relaxation phase.
Furthermore, our study shows a significant improvement
in women’s subjective stress levels and mood independent
of intervention, with slight differences in subscales
between interventions.
In our study GA was associated with subjective stress
ratings, indicating that women in later stages of pregnancy
(35th–40th gestational week) did profit less from
relaxation than women in the earlier weeks of gestation
(30th–34th gestational week).
However, we did not find any significant differences
between active (guided imagery group) and passive
(music group, resting group) mental-based interventions.
The fact that no significant differences were observed
between the interventions indicates that quiet, comfortable
sitting can, in certain situations, be just as effective as
an active mental-based relaxation technique in the short
term, on both objective and subjective relaxation parameters.
Moreover, the significant differences between relaxation
and recovery phase emphasize that duration of
relaxation might play a role. We showed that, during a 20-
min relaxation and recovery period, the relaxation effect
increased over time. These results are consistent with previous
studies which described an ongoing decrease in maternal
physiological parameters following relaxation
interventions in pregnant women [30, 43].
In our study, we used different relaxation techniques,
but explicitly considered each technique separately to
determine possible differences in effectiveness between
acute active and acute passive relaxation techniques. For
maternal heart rate, we found an increase for the guided
imagery group despite the fact that women rated the
guided imagery as relaxing. This may be due to the active
relaxation stimulation. However, when comparing
all participants, we did not find significant differences
between the groups. This is in line with a study by Teixera
and colleagues [25] who showed a greater general
decrease in maternal heart rate following combined active
and passive relaxation for 58 women between 28th
and -34th weeks of gestation. A study by Urech and colleagues
[44] reported significant differences between
mental-based active (guided imagery), body-based active
(progressive muscle relaxation) and passive (quiet sitting)
relaxation intervention in 39 healthy pregnant
women on the basis of subjective ratings and cardiovascular
activity.
To our knowledge, this study is the first of its kind
showing a significant decrease in SCL from relaxation to
recovery after a short acute relaxation intervention in
pregnant women. The direction of this effect is not in
line with a study by DiPietro and colleagues [28], who
reported a difference in SCL between the relaxation and
recovery phase, showing an increase in the latter. However,
in their study a combined relaxation intervention
of progressive muscle relaxation, audio-recorded guided
imagery and self-selected music was used. The baseline
measurement, the following stimulation intervention and
the post-relaxation phase each lasted 18 min. In addition,
41% of the participants were given a 18-min pre-baseline
(rest). It should be noted that in the study of DiPietro
and colleagues, relaxation and recovery was interrupted
when the lights were turned on and different questions
were answered. This might explain why they reported a
significant increase in SCL from baseline to relaxation
and from relaxation to recovery. Additionally, DiPietro
and colleagues showed positive effects on subscales such
as physiological tension, physical assessment and cognitive
tension which are in line with our results.
In general, our results show that an acute relaxation
intervention during pregnancy without disturbance for
10 min can still lead to relaxation when followed by a recovery
phase (also lasting for 10 min). All types of interventions
used were effective in generating a subjective
feeling of relaxation as indicated by a significant decrease
in subjective stress ratings post- compared to prerelaxation
intervention. Our results indicate overall lower
subjective stress symptoms after relaxation induction and
a decrease in depressive and anxiety symptoms, and are
therefore in line with the literature [25, 26, 44–46].
Notably, in this study we included the maternal chronic
stress level as covariate since participants in the three intervention
groups had significantly different chronic stress
levels, which can be a driving factor in stress perception.
As pointed out above, stress during pregnancy can
have serious consequences for the mother and the child.
Clinical interest in the prevention of stress and depression
during and after pregnancy is therefore high. The
results of this study may be a starting point in helping to
find a particularly suitable intervention for pregnant
women and to develop brief but effective relaxation programs
for practical use.
Limitations
There are several limitations to this study. All participating
women were at our center for the first time, but some
women participated in another independent measurement
before and thus were therefore already familiar with the environment,
and were presumably calmer, which could have
possibly affected our parameters. By including a variable
entitled ‘participated in another measurement’ as covariate
in our group comparisons we tried to control for this difference.
With regard to the differences in GAs, it must be
noted that when we adjusted for our covariates, the results
did not remain significant. This may confirm our assumption
that women who were in the center longer before the
measurement were calmer and thus rated to be less
stressed on the pre-rating of the VAS. Of the nine women
who had already participated in a study before our measurement,
N= 7 were in the older GA group and N= 2 in
the younger GA group. This might explain why women in
older GA group felt less stressed at the beginning. Furthermore,
almost all participating women had a high school
diploma or higher education, which can be seen as a proxy
for a higher socio-economic status. Previous studies have
shown that women with a lower socio-economic status
have a higher stress level per se. This could be due to financial
problems, work overload, lack of family support etc. [2,
47–49]. Further studies should therefore include participants
with more diverse socio-economic statuses.
On the basis of a study by Doberenz and colleagues
[50, 51], SCL and heart rates are known to be lower in
sleep than when awake. During the measurement, five
women fell asleep (Music: N = 2; Guided Imagery: N = 2,
Resting: N = 1), which can lead to a different baseline in
SCL and thus to a less significant decrease in SCL compared
to women who remained awake for the whole
intervention. In addition, we asked all women before
each measurement if the room temperature was comfortable,
but we did not check this with a thermometer
in the room. Nevertheless, we can assume that the
temperature was constantly warm over the course of the
study (approximately between 22 and 25 degrees (Celsius)).
However, since SCL are directly related to environmental
temperature, this must be listed under limiting
factors of the study. Additionally, we did not follow up
the women in later periods of pregnancy to realize if
acute relaxation can affect their stress.
Conclusion
The results of this study suggest that prenatal acute relaxation,
even if applied only once, can be a useful nonpharmacological
tool to provide a higher state of maternal
well-being during pregnancy. Improving maternal
wellbeing and reducing stress in this way might mitigate
potential negative effects of maternal stress on the fetus.
Despite its limitations, this study was the first of its
kind to show that, independent of acute active or acute
passive relaxation, a relaxation intervention (music,
guided imagery, resting) can affect a reduction in maternal
stress symptoms in the third trimester of pregnancy.
Interestingly, it seemed that the subjective psychological
relaxation effect tends to decrease with GA. Notably,
the results of this study show that there are
differences between perceived subjective relaxation and
the underlying physiological correlates. Despite some
women rating the guided imagery as very relaxing, maternal
heart rate increased over time in this group.
Further research is clearly required to specify methods
of relaxation during pregnancy. Follow-up studies will
therefore be necessary, in particular to investigate the
long-term effects of relaxation techniques on subjective
and physiological stress levels on both the mother and
the unborn child.