Background
Different levels and types of genetic variation exist in the
human genome, ranging from single nucleotide mutations
to structural or numerical chromosome abnormalities.
One or more genetic variations may exist in an
individual, and some genetic variations cause severe congenital
malformations or death. In addition to triploid
and numerical chromosome abnormalities, pathogenic
chromosome microdeletion/duplication also leads to
poor fetal prognosis. For example, Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome
mostly results in developmental retardation, unusual
faces and structural abnormalities, and Miller-
Dieker syndrome can be complicated by pachygyria;
22q11.21 microdeletion syndrome often has various degrees
of cardiac malformations [1–6]. If pathogenic
chromosome microdeletion/duplication can be diagnosed
prenatally, the births of children with such severe
congenital defects can be avoided.
However, the target diseases of traditional maternal
serum screening are limited to common aneuploidies.
Fetal ultrasound scanning is mainly used to monitor
fetal growth and development, and to find structural
fetal abnormalities and soft markers. Noninvasive prenatal
testing (NIPT) using maternal plasma cell-free fetal
DNA has made prenatal screening for pathogenic
chromosome microdeletion/ duplication possible.
Traditional cytogenetic karyotyping has been used as
the gold standard diagnosis of chromosome abnormalities
for decades. However, it is time-consuming and
labor-intensive, largely dependent on cell culture, and
has a low chromosome resolution of 5 ~ 10 Mb. In recent
years, the application of high-resolution chromosome
micro-array analysis (CMA), which can detect
abnormal chromosome number, micro-deletions/duplication,
uniparental disomy, has revolutionized the testing
methodology of prenatal diagnosis. It has been
suggested in some studies that CMA can be solely used
instead of cytogenetic karyotyping in prenatal diagnosis
laboratories with limited human resources [7]. Nextgeneration
sequencing (NGS) now offers an alternative
methodology to CMA, named copy number variation sequencing
(CNV-Seq) with a resolution of 0.2 Mb for the
detection of clinically significant chromosomal abnormalities.
CNV-Seq has uniform sequencing coverage and
relatively low price and has been gradually used in prenatal
diagnosis [8]. However, more studies are required
to further verify the efficiency of CNV-Seq in prenatal
diagnosis.
Traditional karyotyping has characteristics of low-cost
and covering the whole genome, including abnormal
chromosome number and structural variation of specific
regions, such as euchromatic and heterochromosomal
regions. It highly depends on the experience of technicians
to recognize these regions using different banding
techniques under the microscope, which provide information
about the frequency and location of these variations.
Due to the morphologic similarity between
chromosomes, karyotyping is difficult to accurately distinguish
subtle structural variations. Genome copy number
variation (CNVs) refers to structural variations of
DNA sequence of more than 0.2 Mb. Karyotyping by
conventional chromosome banding technology cannot
distinguish these subtle variations. Compared with
karyotyping, CNV-Seq which based on next-generation
sequencing technology and comparative genomics has
high resolution, high throughput, and simple laboratory
operations. However, CNV-Seq also has limitations such
as short read lengths and not covering the whole genome,
and it cannot detect balanced translocations, polymorphism,
marker chromosomes, and other genetic
variations out of the detection range, and it cannot accurately
detect polyploidy and low-proportion chromosome
mosaic. Karyotyping and CNV-Seq are two
different technologies, and the combination of them in
prenatal diagnosis may make up for each other’s shortcomings
and verifie each other’s results to improve the
accuracy of prenatal diagnosis. Therefore, in this study,
we comparatively analyzed the difference between cytogenetic
karyotyping and CNV-Seq for the same fetal
samples, evaluated the value of adding CNV-Seq in traditional
prenatal diagnosis, analyzed the performances of
maternal age, maternal serum screening, NIPT and fetal
ultrasound scanning for the screening of pathogenic fetal
CNV and investigated whether combined application of
these prenatal screening methods could improve the
sensitivity and specificity for fetal pathogenic CNV.
Methods
Study patients
All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant
guidelines and regulations. The proposal of this
study had been approved by the Ethics Committee of Institutional
Research Board (IRB), First People’s Hospital
of Yunnan Province before this study was conducted.
The study patients were 9452 singleton pregnant women
who received invasive prenatal diagnosis after informed
consent forms were signed, including allowance of data
management and consent for manuscript publication, in
the First People’s Hospital of Yunnan Province, China,
from January 2018 to December 2019. Among the study
patients, 3582 (37.9%) women were served by our hospital
for their prenatal care, and 5870 (62.1%) were
transferred from the other hospitals because we are the
provincial prenatal diagnosis center. The maternal age
calculated by the expected date of confinement was 31
(27–36) years. The gestational age at prenatal diagnosis
was 20 (19–21) weeks. Invasive prenatal diagnosis
consisted of 8855 amniocentesis (93.7%), 552 cordocentesis
(5.8%) and 44 chorion villus sampling (0.5%).
Prenatal screening
Four types of prenatal screenings were involved in this
study: (1) combined screening in 11 ~ 13+ 6 weeks that
comprised of fetal NT measurement + maternal serum
screening using pregnancy associated plasma protein-A
(PAPP-A), placental growth factor (PLGF) and free human
chorionic gonadotropin beta unit (fβ-HCG), with
or without NIPT; (2) maternal serum screening in 16 ~
20+ 6 weeks using alpha fetoprotein (AFP), fβ-HCG and
unconjugated estriol (uE3), with or without NIPT; (3)
NIPT only if gestational weeks at screening ≥21 weeks,
and (4) all study patients had fetal ultrasound scanning
in our department. The cases with high risk of Down
Syndrome (DS), high risk of Edwards Syndrome (ES), or
high risk of both by maternal serum screening were all
classified as high-risk cases. Fetal ultrasound scanning
was classified into five grades based on the severity of
abnormalities: grade 0: without abnormal findings; grade
1: fetuses with subtly ultrasound abnormalities other
than grade 2, e.g. gallbladder was not detected; grade 2:
soft markers that were closely associated with chromosome
aneuploidy, such as thickened nuchal fold (NF),
nuchal translucency (NT) ≥ 3.0 mm, absence and/or dysplasia
of nasal bone, mild to moderate ventriculomegaly,
aberrant subclavian arteries, fetal growth restriction
(FGR), short limb bones length, micrognathia, and
acromphalus; grade 3: mild to moderate structural fetal
malformations; grade 4: severe structural fetal malformations
or lethal abnormalities. Maternal age ≥ 35 years at
the expected date of confinement was defined as advanced
maternal age.
Invasive prenatal diagnosis
Three types of surgeries for invasive prenatal diagnosis
were used in this study. Amniocentesis: Twenty mL of
amniotic fluid was collected by aspiration for cell culture
and cytogenetic karyotyping, and 5 mL for CNV-Seq. If
amniotic fluid was contaminated by maternal blood, adherent
amniocytes after cell culture were used for CNVSeq.
Cordocentesis: Five mL of amniotic fluid was collected
at first for CNV-Seq, and then 1.5 mL of cord
blood for cell culture and cytogenetic karyotyping, and
0.5 mL of cord blood for hemoglobin electrophoresis to
exclude maternal blood contamination. In prenatal diagnosis,
the standard method to exclude maternal blood
contamination should be linkage analysis of DNA polymorphism.
We had used the method of STR polymorphism
linkage analysis. In recent years, we used
hemoglobin electrophoresis instead because STR polymorphism
linkage analysis was much more timeconsuming
and labor-intensive. Chorion villus sampling:
a small amount of villous tissue was sampled for CNVSeq
directly. Before 2019, we were inexperienced in villus
cell culture techniques. Therefore, the cases received
chorion villus sampling were those with severe fetal
structural abnormalities. No villus cell culture was applied
for those cases, and only CNVs was provided.
Laboratory testing
Cell culture and cytogenetic karyotyping
Amniotic fluid and umbilical blood samples were set up
for cell culture following the standard protocols.
Chromosome preparations were G-banded using
trypsin-Giemsa staining for cytogenetic karyotyping after
a series of standard protocols including colchicine treatment,
hypotonic treatment, fixation and centrifugation.
Karyotypes were diagnosed according to the international
system for human cytogenetic nomenclature
(ISCN, 2009) [9, 10]. The classification and abbreviations
of abnormal karyotypes in this study were as follow: DS,
ES, Patau syndrome (PS), super female syndrome (XXX),
super male syndrome (XYY), Klinefelter syndrome
(XXY), Turner syndrome (Turner), abnormal sex
chromosome number mosaic (Sex A Mosaic), autosomal
aneuploid mosaic (Auto A Mosaic), possibly balanced
mutual translocation (Translocation), chromosome polymorphism
(Polymorphism), triploid, chromosome fragment
duplication/deletion, subtle structural variations
such as inv. (21), inv. (4), dup (21), inv. (Y), inv. (1), inv.
(5), inv. (12), inv. (8), inv. (19), inv. (Y), inv. (10), inv.
(16). A total of 52 cases had only CNV-Seq results, but
no karyotyping results. Among them, 44 cases who received
chorion villus sampling, since our center cannot
provide villus cell culture during that time; 8 cases encountered
amniotic fluid cell culture failure. The maximum
and minimum gestational weeks of amniotic fluid
cell culture failure were 31 and 20 weeks, respectively. It
should be noted that none of the 52 cases with missing
results were used in the data analysis of this study.
CNV-Seq and result interpretation
Nextseq 550AR platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA) was
used for DNA sequencing, with an average sequencing
depth of 0.08×, following the Q30 sequencing quality
standard. The amount of fetal DNA used for CNV-Seq
was 10 ~ 50 ng for each prenatal sample. AnnoroadPD
software (Annoroad Gene Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing,
China) was applied to analyze the sequencing data referring
to the human reference genome GRCh37/hg19. The
identified fetal CNV were interpreted [11] and classified
into five categories: pathogenic (P-), likely pathogenic
(LP-), uncertain significance (VUS-), likely benign (LB-)
and benign (B-), according to the standards and guidelines
that were jointly developed by the American College
of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), the
Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) and the
College of American Pathologists (CAP) in 2015. To
conveniently show the CNV-Seq results, we used “P-
“as abbreviation for pathogenic chromosome microdeletion/
duplication, “None” for no copy number variation
found, “auto A” for autosomal aneuploidy, “sex
A” for abnormal sex chromosomes number, “auto
AM” for autosomal aneuploidy mosaic, and “sex AM”
for abnormal sex chromosomes number mosaic. Cytogenetic
karyotyping was the diagnostic method for
numerical and structural chromosome abnormalities,
and high-throughput sequencing for CNV. For LPand
VUS-, family (parents and fetuses) CNV-Seq
tests, fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) or
multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) were
used for further verification.
Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed statistically using IBM SPSS
Statistics (version 22.0, IBM Corp., Armonk, NY,
USA). Continuous variables (for example, age and
gestational weeks at prenatal diagnosis) were
expressed as “median [lower quartile, upper quartile]”,
and analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis one-way
analysis of variance. Categorical variables are represented
by “n (%)” and analyzed using Chi-square test
for two-way disordered R × C table. Calculation for
sensitivity and specificity: sensitivity = true positive /
(true positive + false negative) *100%; specificity =
true negative / (true negative + false positive) *100%.
Paired chi-square test was used to test the difference
between CNV-Seq and various prenatal screening
methods and prenatal diagnosis results (P< 0.01 was
considered statistically significant). Missing items
were not applied in data analysis.
Results
Basic characteristics of study patients
Basic information of 9452 cases of prenatal diagnosis
was listed and statistically analyzed in Table 1. Among
study patients, 9452 (100%) had received one to two
times of fetal ultrasonography in our center, 5688
(60.2%) had maternal serum screening, 1409 (14.9%) had
NIPT, 551 (0.58%) had both NIPT and maternal serum
screening, and 3142 cases (33.2%) were in advanced maternal
age. The results showed that only 1165 (12.3%) of
patients received invasive prenatal diagnosis due to high
risk of NIPT. Other indications for prenatal diagnosis included
advanced maternal age, abnormal fetal ultrasound
scanning, high risk of maternal serum screening,
adverse reproductive history, family history of singlegene
genetic diseases, or others.
Comparison of results between CNV-Seq and cytogenetic
karyotyping
The results of 9452 cases of cytogenetic karyotyping
were listed in Table 2: a total of 704 (7.5%) cases of fetal
chromosome abnormalities, 171 (1.8%) chromosomal
polymorphism, 20 (0.2%) subtle structural variations, 74
(0.7%) mutual translocation (possibly balanced), 52
(0.6%) without karyotyping results, and 8431 (89.2%)
normal karyotypes were detected.
The results of CNV-Seq in Tables 2, 8,354 fetuses with
CNV-Seq findings were included as None, B-, and LB-,
cytogenetic karyotyping showed that except for 2 cases
of triploid, the rest 271 cases of abnormal karyotypes
had good prognosis. A total of 530 cases of fetal aneuploidies
(DS, ES, PS, XXY, XYY) were diagnosed, and
the results of karyotyping and CNV-Seq were consistent.
The details for 60 cases of pathogenic microdeletion/duplication
detected by CNV-Seq were shown in Table 3.
CNV-Seq detected 1 case of chromosomal aneuploidy
and 2 cases of mosaic in fetuses with normal cytogenetic
karyotypes. Furthermore, 2 cases (No.29 and 30) of
pathogenic microdeletion/duplication were detected in 9
fetuses with marker chromosomes, and 1 case (No.38) of
pathogenic microdeletion/duplication were detected in
fetuses with mutual translocations (Seen in Table 4).
Therefore, we may conclude that the combination of the
two methodologies significantly improved the accuracy
of prenatal diagnosis for fetal pathogenic CNV and was
helpful to assess fetal prognosis. Due to its detection
limitations, for example, two cases of triploid by karyotyping
had normal CNV-Seq results, CNV-Seq could not
replace karyotyping at present stage but might be an effective
complement.
Performances of maternal age, maternal serum screening,
NIPT and fetal ultrasound scanning for pathogenic CNVSeq
results and pathogenic karyotypes
The target diseases of maternal serum screening are
common chromosomal aneuploidies. For fetuses with
pathogenic microdeletion/duplication, the prognosis is
mostly poor. NIPT is the ideal prenatal screening
method for pathogenic microdeletion/duplication, but
the cost may limit its clinical use to a certain extent. If
NIPT was unavailable, we wondered whether other
screening methods could recognize pathogenic microdeletion/
duplication. In this study, we retrospectively analyzed
the results of maternal age, maternal serum
screening, NIPT, and fetal ultrasound scanning for
women with pathogenic fetal CNV-Seq results, including
pathogenic microdeletion/duplication and Auto A, Sex
A, Auto AM, Sex AM, as shown in Table 5. NIPT
missed one case of Auto AM (CNV-Seq) and Triploid
(karyotypes), shown in Table 6. In maternal serum
screening, 55.2% of pathogenic microdeletion/
duplication (CNV-Seq) and 42.1% of unbalanced fragment
deletion/duplication (karyotypes) showed high
risks results. As to abnormal ultrasound findings (grades
2–4), there was significant difference between CNV-Seq
of auto A and pathogenic microdeletion/ duplication
(73.6% versus 43.2%, P < 0.001). Regarding to pathogenic
karyotypes, NIPT missed one case of triploid,
whose maternal serum screening and fetal ultrasound
were abnormal. Only 42.2% of severe chromosomal abnormalities
(aneuploidy, unbalanced fragment deletion/duplication, triploidy) were screened out by advanced
maternal age. The detection rate of abnormal fetal
ultrasound findings (grade 2–4) in fetuses with abnormal
karyotypes were DS 69.9%, ES 85.5%, PS
91.7%, unbalanced fragment deletion/duplication
56.8%, triploid 100%, XXX 14.3%, XYY 24.2%, and
XXY 18.1%. We speculated that there might be a
dose-effect between fetal ultrasound abnormalities
and chromosomal diseases, and a difference between
autosomal and sex chromosomal abnormalities.
Therefore, maternal age, maternal serum screening,
fetal ultrasound scanning and NIPT all had certain
predictive values for pathogenic CNV-Seq results
and pathogenic karyotypes (chromosomal aneuploidy,
unbalanced segment deletion/duplication, and
triploid).
As seen in Table 7, for pathogenic fetal CNV-Seq
results, NIPT had the highest sensitivity of 1.00
(0.99–1.00) but lowest specificity of 0.22 (0.18–0.26),
while maternal serum screening had higher sensitivity
of 0.63 (0.57–0.68) and lower specificity of 0.37
(0.35–0.39). The sensitivity and specificity of fetal
ultrasound scanning were 0.69 (0.66–0.72) and 0.59
(0.57–0.60), respectively. Advanced maternal age had
a specificity of 0.68 (0.67–0.70) and a sensitivity of
0.39 (0.35–0.42).
Correlation between fetal CNV-Seq and indications for
prenatal diagnosis
According to the number of indications for prenatal
diagnosis, the 9452 women were divided into four
groups: (1) single indication, (2) positivity for any two or
(3) three or (4) four indications. Indications included
high risk in NIPT, high risk in maternal serum screening,
fetal ultrasound abnormalities (Grade 2–4), advanced
maternal age, and other indications such as
adverse childbearing history except monogenic diseases.
The sensitivity and specificity of different prenatal diagnostic
indications for the screening of pathogenic microdeletion/
microduplication were lists in Table 8. Single
indication had the highest sensitivity and the lowest specificity.
In a similar trend, four indicators had the lowest
sensitivity and the highest specificity. Accordingly, to
achieve the optimal sensitivity and specificity, a prenatal
screening program that combines two methods could be
considered.
Discussion
Combination of cytogenetic karyotyping and CNV-Seq
can prenatally diagnose more fetal pathogenic
microdeletion/duplication and provide comprehensive
prenatal information
In addition to traditional cytogenetic karyotyping, CMA
and CNV-Seq have gradually been used in prenatal diagnosis.
CNV-Seq is worth applying in prenatal diagnosis
due to its lower cost and uniform sequencing coverage.
Fetuses with normal karyotype/chromosome polymorphism
usually have good prognosis, but pathogenic microdeletion/
duplication cannot be excluded. In this study,
among fetuses with normal karyotypes, CNV-Seq diagnosed
60 (0.6%) cases of pathogenic CNV, and fortunately
the births of 44 fetuses with poor prognosis were
avoided. A complex case was also prenatal diagnosed
with CNV-Seq result of 47,XXY and karyotyping result
of 46,XX. SRY gene detection indicated a male gender,
but all 6 loci on AZF gene were missing. Fetal ultrasound
showed male external genitalia. Taking fetal ultrasound
findings together, the fetus might have sexual
reversal and risks of abnormal reproductive system development
in puberty. The parents were fully informed
the advantages, disadvantages and limitations of karyotyping
and CNV-Seq, and to make clear that the two results
cannot be denied by each other but be mutually
complementary. The couple chose to continue the pregnancy.
The boy is now 1.5 years old and is generally
healthy. Follow-up and etiological examination were recommended.
On the other hand, we should make clear
that not all fetuses with structural chromosomal abnormalities
by karyotyping have poor prognosis. For example,
mutual translocation (paternal/maternal/de novo)
with normal CNV-Seq and fetal ultrasound is very much
likely that the fetuses have good prognosis. The combination
of karyotyping and CNV-Seq enables mutual verification
of the results in prenatal diagnosis and helps to
avoid misdiagnosis and provide more information for
comprehensive evaluation of fetal prognosis. However,
the combined application of CNV-Seq and karyotyping
may lead to increased economic burden. It needs further
verification about whether the cost-effectiveness is worth
promoting. We need to choose an appropriate prenatal
diagnosis program based on our own characteristics.
Combined several prenatal screening significantly
improves the specificity but reduces the sensitivity for
fetal pathogenic CNV
Maternal serum screening detects 70 ~ 80% of DS, at a
false positive rate of 5% [12]. It was reported that a small
portion of sex chromosome abnormalities showed abnormal
findings in maternal serum screening [13]. It is
unknown whether maternal serum screening is abnormal
for pathogenic CNV. The findings of this study indicated
that maternal serum screening can detect 55.2% of
fetal pathogenic chromosomal microdeletion/ duplication
in fetuses with normal or abnormal karyotype. The
intrauterine phenotype of fetuses with pathogenic microdeletion/
duplication lacks specificity, so prenatal
ultrasound scanning is difficult to identify. In this study,
fetuses with autosomal aneuploidy had the most severe
ultrasound abnormalities, followed by pathogenic microdeletion/
duplication with a large variability that some fetuses
had completely normal ultrasonography. Fetuses
with abnormal sex chromosome number and structure
and the mosaic had mild ultrasound abnormalities. Fetal
ultrasound scanning had higher sensitivity for autosomal
aneuploidy. However, if other prenatal screening
methods such as NIPT and maternal serum screening
are unavailable at the same time, the ultrasonologist’s
subjective assessments of fetal subtle facial features/
minor heart variations are inadequate for accurate assessment
of fetal prognosis, and the clinical value is
limited. NIPT has been widely used as a first-line prenatal
screening method [14]. It was reported that the
sensitivities of NIPT for Trisomy 21, 18, 13 are 99.1,
98.2 and 100%, respectively [14]. The detection rates of
NIPT for fetal aneuploidy and CNV > 20 Mb were
reported to be 100% [15]. NIPT was an effective method
for prenatal screening of fetal CNV ranging from 1 to
129 Mb, with a sensitivity of 84.2% [16]. The findings of
this study indicated that NIPT was a reliable method for
prenatal screening of fetal pathogenic microdeletion/duplication.
However, NIPT cannot detect fetal polymorphism,
polyploids, balanced translocations and other
fetal structural abnormalities. Therefore, the combination
of maternal age, maternal serum screening, fetal
ultrasound scanning and NIPT had been recommended
for prenatal screening in some studies [17]. Our findings
were partially in agreement with this perspective. For
pathogenic CNV, the sensitivity of single prenatal diagnosis
indication was 0.99 (0.98, 0.99), but the specificity
was 0.10 (0.09, 0.11). When prenatal diagnosis indications
increased from two to four, the sensitivity was decreased
to 0.02 (0.01–0.03) and the specificity increased
to 1.00 (1.00–1.00). According to our data, the combination
of two screening method was possibly to achieve a
maximal summation of sensitivity and specificity. Moreover,
each combined screening program had its own advantages
and limitations, which require comprehensive
consideration by the couples and doctors.
In short, we would recommend that combined at least
two kinds of prenatal screening could be used as the efficient
program if medical resources for prenatal care are
sufficient and the couples are willing to receive the
screening.
Conclusions
Combination of cytogenetic karyotyping and CNV-Seq
significantly improves the detection rate of fetal pathogenic
chromosome microdeletion/duplication. NIPT was
recommended for the screening of pathogenic chromosome
microdeletion/duplication, and NIPT combining
with other screening methods further improved the
screening performance for pathogenic fetal CNV.
