Vitamin D deficiency (VDD) is a major global public
health problem in all age groups, even in developed
countries and regions with adequate ultraviolet radiation.
Exposure to sunlight is the main source of vitamin
D (VD) and factors such as season, time of day, latitude,
skin phototype, sun exposure duration, type of clothing
and the use of sunscreens may influence its synthesis
[1–3]. Brazil, a tropical/subtropical country with elevated
ultraviolet radiation has a very high prevalence of VDD
[4]. VD has many actions in the body including the musculoskeletal
system, calcium homoeostasis and immune
system [5]. Recently, a link between VD and chronic
non-communicable diseases has emerged including insulin
resistance, diabetes and cardiovascular disease [6–8].
These chronic diseases are also commonly associated
with obesity [9].
It is believed that VDD is associated with obesity, and
adipose tissue may be responsible for its lower bioavailability.
Visceral Adipose Tissue (VAT) easily absorbs VD
by chemical affinity. Therefore, volumetric dilution has
been proposed as the main mechanism to elucidate its
low levels in obesity [10–12]. Two large epidemiological
studies have shown that the thickness of VAT correlated
inversely with the serum concentration of 25OHD in the
adult population [11, 13]. Hao et al. found an inversely
association between vitamin level and VAT in Chinese
men [14]. Zhang et al. also reported a significant negative
association between VAT and VDD in men and premenopausal
women but not in post-menopausal women
[15]. Batista et al. found that excess visceral adiposity,
hypertriglyceridemia and high low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels were strong predictors of hypovitaminosis
D [16]. A meta-analysis of randomized clinical
trials reported positive effects of VD supplementation on
fat mass [17].
In pregnant women, VDD is also an important health
problem with a prevalence ranging from 5 to 84 % [12,
18]. Besides, pregnancy is associated with a VAT increased
and it has been linked to insulin resistance and
hyperglycemia [19, 20]. However, we did not find in our
search studies evaluating the association between VDD
and VAT in pregnant women. We aimed to assess the
correlation between VD serum level and VAT during
early pregnancy.
Methods
This cross-sectional study was performed at the Hospital
Dom Malan located in Petrolina (9°S and 40°W),
Pernambuco state, Northeast of Brazil. Hospital Dom
Malan registers about 6 000 births per year. This region
has an average ultraviolet index of 13 during
most of the year.
Pregnant women aged 13–39 years and 8–16 weeks of
gestational age were eligible. Exclusion criteria were twin
pregnancy, diabetes mellitus, previous gestational diabetes
or preeclampsia, fetal malformations, maternal mental disease.
After screening, 190 pregnant women were included.
All participants answered a questionnaire regarding sociodemographic
and clinical information were taken from
the medical record. Weight and height were measured according
to the standardized methodology. Body mass
index (BMI) was calculated by the formula: weight (kg) /
height (m2) and Atalah classification was used [21]. VAT
was measured by ultrasonography performed by a qualified
specialist. A Philips D7 ultrasound device, equipped
with a 3.0 to 7.0 MHz convex transducer, multifrequency
(Bothell, WA/USA), was used. VAT was determined following
the technique described by Armellini [22]: the convex
transducer positioned immediately above the
umbilical scar, the distance in centimeters being measured
between the inner edge of the rectus abdominis muscle, at
the point of its insertion in the alba line, and the anterior
wall of the abdominal aorta.
The 25(OH) D in serum was determined through
chemiluminescence, using the Atellica EVA-Siemens device
(Erlangen/Germany) with a result expressed in
nanograms per Milliliter. Insufficiency and deficiency
values were respectively between 20 and 30 ng/mL and
< 20 ng/mL, according to the values adopted by the
Endocrine Society Practice Guidelines [23].
Statistical analyses
Data were analyzed descriptively through absolute and
percentage frequencies in the categorical variables and
the measures: mean, standard deviation (mean ± SD),
and median to numerical variables. To assess a significant
association between two categorical variables, Pearson’s
chi-square test including the likelihood ratio test
and confidence interval (CI) was used. For the comparison
between categories concerning the numerical variables,
the Mann–Whitney test was used. To assess the
degree of the relationship between two numerical variables,
Spearman’s correlation coefficient and the specific
Student’s t-test for the null correlation hypothesis were
obtained.
The choice of the Mann–Whitney test and Spearman
correlation was due to the absence of normality, which
was verified by the Shapiro–Wilk test. The margin of
error used in deciding the statistical tests was 5 and 95 %
CI. The data were entered into the EXCEL spreadsheet,
and the program used to obtain the statistical calculations
was IMB SPSS in version 25.
Results
190 pregnant women were studied. The mean age was
26 ± 5.76 years and pregnant women were included in
the study with a 12.3 ± 2.5 weeks of gestation. The BMI
ranged from 16.6 to 47.0 kg/m² (25.7 ± 4.9 kg/m²); 57
(30 %) were overweight and 27 (14.2 %) obese. 129
(67.8 %) of pregnant women had vitamin D insuficiency,
i.e., serum value of 25 (OH) D < 30 ng/mL. The thickness
of the VAT varied between 0.9 and 6.1 cm (2.9 ±
0.9 cm). Pregnant women with or without VDD did not
differ in age, gestational age, nutritional status and VAT
(Table 1). The Spearman value correlation between VAT
and 25(OH) D was – 0.057, (P value = 0.435). Table 2
presents Spearman correlation between VAT, 25(OH) D
and age, weight and BMI.
Discussion
In the present study we did not find association between
serum VD values and visceral fat in pregnant women.
For the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that
this association is assessed during pregnancy. Some
studies have described an inverse association between
VDD and visceral fat in non-pregnancy populations [24,
14]. However, among the various physiological changes
that occur during pregnancy, the redistribution of adipose
tissue is one of them. Although not yet properly
studied, it is admitted that an increase in visceral adipose
tissue occurs, but the specific function of visceral adipose
in pregnancy is still unknown. Thus, it seems likely
that visceral adipose tissue has somewhat distinct functions
in pregnancy and our findings cannot be compared
with non-pregnant populations.
Recently, Carreras-Badosa et al. found that maternal
serum VD was inversely associated with visceral fat and
in their offspring at the age of 5–6 years [25]. However,
diet and lifestyle habits were not studied in both
mothers and their children, and this, rather than maternal
VD status could explain the relationship between
lower maternal serum VD and offspring adiposity.
An increased risk of VDD has been described worldwide
in obese individual. The underlying explanations
are not clear. Receptors of VD are expressed in adipose
tissue and 25(OH) D could modulate adipogenesis
through VD receptors-dependent inhibition of specific
components [26]. Other explanation is based on experimental
findings that deficiency of VD can increases lipogenesis
upregulating adipocyte calcium signaling and
improving the secretion of parathyroid hormone [27].
However, the role of VD in adipogenesis or other functions
of VAT during pregnancy is still unknown.
Pregnancy VDD has been described with a prevalence
of 18–84 % [9]. In the present study, the prevalence of
VDD was high (68 %). This value was similar to other
Brazilian studies and higher than that described in countries
such as Spain and United States [28]. Brazil is a
tropical country with continental dimensions and abundant
sunshine. The municipality of Petrolina is located
at approximately − 9°, which favors the synthesis of VD.
However, there is a paradox in countries with low solar
incidence and with a lower frequency of VDD when
compared with countries with higher solar incidence,
certainly because of protection measures that prevent its
synthesis and bioavailability [29].
In the multicenter HAPO study, increased maternal
BMI was associated with lower maternal 25(OH) D
levels [30]. However, BMI is not an accurate measure of
fat tissue, especially during pregnancy. Besides, the
deposition of adipose tissue preferably occurs in two
distinct anatomical places, VAT and subcutaneous
adipose tissue, and BMI does not differentiate them.
We determine VAT through ultrasound and this
method has been shown to be safe, effective, simple
and reproducible [31].
Our study has some limitations. At first, a crosssectional
design was performed and we could not
determine the causal relationship between VD and VAT.
Second, other possible important variables confounding
the VD status, like sun light exposition, dietary habits
and possible seasonal variations in VD, were not evaluated
in our study. However, despite these limitations our
study has strengths. The present study is the first to assess
the correlation of VD with VAT thickness in pregnant
women. A large sample was studied and specific
methods to measure VD and VAT were used.
Conclusions
Our data demonstrated that maternal visceral adiposity
and low concentrations of VD were not associated during
pregnancy. However, as this was the first study to assess
the association between VAT and VD in pregnant
women, further studies are needed to confirm these
findings.