Background
Cesarean delivery is an obstetric operation used to
address dystocia and high-risk pregnancy. Medically
necessary cesarean delivery plays an essential role in
protecting the lives of high-risk pregnant women and
newborns. However, as cesarean delivery is currently
performed more frequently than before, its adverse
effects on mothers and infants have gradually been
revealed. Compared with those who undergo vaginal
delivery, women who have a cesarean delivery are more
prone to febrile diseases [1] and small bowel obstruction
[2], and they have a higher risk of severe acute maternal
morbidity (SAMM) [3], postpartum depression [4], and
postpartum death [5]. Moreover, infants born via
cesarean section might be subjected to subtle physiological
modulation due to hormonal, physiological,
bacterial and medical interventions [3]; they are more
susceptible to respiratory and immune system diseases
[6–9]; and they may even sustain a lasting impact on
their growth and development [10, 11]. Nevertheless,
there remain numerous misunderstandings about cesarean
delivery among pregnant women [12], resulting in a
popular demand for cesarean delivery.
Cesarean delivery on maternal request (CDMR) is also
called cesarean delivery with social factors and cesarean
delivery without medical indications. In 2007, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(ACOG) defined CDMR as a primary cesarean delivery
on maternal request in the absence of any medical or
obstetric indication [13]. CDMR has limited significance
in benefiting maternal and infantile physical health in
contrast to cesarean delivery with medical indications.
Instead, the cesarean delivery itself poses potential risks
to pregnant women and infants when performed without
a medical need. For instance, mothers are more likely to
suffer from short-term ill effects, such as wound infection
[14, 15]. Additionally, children born via CDMR are
at an elevated risk of emotional and behavioral problems
while they are under school age [16]. In addition, CDMR
prolongs hospitalization, leading to a waste of medical
resources and an increase in the hospitalization cost to
pregnant women [17]. Therefore, unnecessary cesarean
delivery in the absence of any medical or obstetric indications
should be strictly avoided.
The high rate of cesarean delivery has always been a
hot issue and has caused international concern [18–20].
The global cesarean delivery rate was 21.1 % in 2015, almost
twofold of that in 2000 [21]. According to a World
Health Organization (WHO) survey in 2010, the average
cesarean delivery rate in nine countries in Asia was
27.3 %, whereas it reached 46.2 % in China [22]. With
the intervention of the Chinese government in terms of
the health institution reformation and other aspects, the
rate of cesarean delivery has shown a downward trend in
recent years [23, 24]. In 2018, the rate of cesarean delivery
in China was 36.7 % [25]. Although lower than
before, this rate is still far higher than the 10-15 % recommended
by the WHO. As the economy is developing,
the indications for cesarean delivery have changed, and
CDMR has made a major contribution to the increase in
the rate of cesarean delivery [21, 26–28]. The population
of CDMR reported internationally accounts for 4.4-17.3 %
of the total cesarean delivery population [22, 29–31],
whereas that number is 25.2-31.4 % in China [22, 26, 32],
which is far higher than the international average level.
With the implementation of the “Two-child Policy” in
China, an increasing number of women plan to have a
second child, especially among older mothers who show a
stronger preference for CDMR than younger mothers
[33, 34]. Globally, how to control the rate of CDMR
in China is still an important issue.
Until now, few reports have analyzed the rate of
cesarean delivery in southwestern China. Among those
that do exist, their publication dates are relatively old.
Only a small number of reports have covered CDMR
and its influencing factors. Our analyses were based on a
longitudinal follow-up observation study conducted in
Chongqing (a municipality in southwestern China) from
2018 to 2019 and are expected to depict the pattern of
the delivery mode of pregnant women after the implementation
of the “Two-child Policy”. Grounded in these
data, we explored the influencing factors for the occurrence
of CDMR in terms of pregnant women, as well as
their families and society, to provide theoretical support
for reducing the rate of unnecessary cesarean delivery
without medical indications.
Methods
Data sources
The data in this study came from the “Study on the
Public Opinion Propagation Model for Generative
Mechanism and Regularity of Cesarean Delivery Behavior”
(Project No. 71,573,027) initiated by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China. This research was carried
out in Chongqing, China, and participants in four hospitals,
two of which were in economically wealthy regions
and two of which were in economically poor regions, were
recruited. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee
of Chongqing Medical University.
Participants
All of the pregnant women who participated in their first
pregnancy examination in one of the abovementioned
four hospitals from January 2018 to September 2018 and
planned to give birth in the hospital were screened.
Participants who met the exclusion criteria (women with
a history of cesarean delivery or with health problems,
such as a mental illness) were excluded, and the remaining
participants who met the inclusion criteria (women with a
singleton pregnancy, gestational age < 15 weeks, signed
informed consent and willingness to make follow-up
arrangements) were included in our study. The demographic
characteristics and prenatal examination information
of the included pregnant women were then obtained.
Study content and measurements
This study is based on the statistics obtained by structured
questionnaires. An additional file presents the
English version of our original Chinese questionnaires
(see Additional file 1). The variables in the questionnaire
were developed on the basis of published reports [33, 35,
36], prenatal examination reports and healthcare reports
of the participants and were jointly evaluated and
modified by public health experts, obstetricians and
psychologists. Three aspects were involved, including
basic information and personal factors, family factors
and social factors. A follow-up survey was conducted in
early pregnancy (< 15 weeks), middle pregnancy (15
weeks-27 weeks and 6 days) and late pregnancy (28
weeks–before delivery). This study mainly used the
follow-up data of the late pregnancy period closest to
the delivery time as the basic situation of the pregnant
women before delivery. After delivery, the delivery
situation was recorded, and the delivery outcome was
obtained.
Basic information and personal factors
The content of the investigation included demographic
characteristics (age, residency, level of education,
occupation and monthly per capita household income),
prenatal examination information (height, weight, history
of pregnancy, previous medical history), personal
behaviors (drinking history, smoking history and exercise
habits) and psychological condition (stress, anxiety and
depression).
The psychological condition was described by standard
scales. Stress was measured by the Pregnancy Pressure
Scale (PPS) compiled by Zhanghui Chen et al. [37]. The
PPS comprises 30 items, and the average score calculated
from the total score of all questions is used to
measure the stress, with 0 for no stress and a score ≥
0.01 for stress. The Cronbach’s α coefficient for PPS in
this study was 0.949, the KMO test statistic was 0.954,
and Bartlett’s spherical test showed statistical significance
(χ2 = 13041.917, P < 0.001).
Anxiety was measured using the Hamilton Anxiety
Scale (HAMA) [37], which contains two dimensions,
mental anxiety and somatic anxiety, with a total of 14
items, and the total score of all of the questions was
calculated. A score of ≤ 7 indicates no anxiety, a score of
8–14 indicates suspected anxiety, and a score of ≥ 15 indicates
anxiety. The Cronbach’s α coefficient of HAMA
in this study was 0.919, the KMO test statistic was 0.942,
and Bartlett’s spherical test showed statistical significance
(χ2 = 5071.247, P < 0.001).
Depression was measured by the Self-rating Depression
Scale (SDS), which calculated a depression severity
index (actual total score/highest possible score for all
entries) [38]. An index of < 0.5 indicates no depression,
and ≥ 0.5 indicates depression. The Cronbach’s α
coefficient for SDS in this study was 0.817, the KMO test
statistic was 0.888, and Bartlett’s spherical test showed
statistical significance (χ2 = 1918.036, P < 0.001).
Family factors
Family factors mainly included the families’ advice on
delivery mode and family care. The family adaptation
partnership growth affection (APGAR) was used to
measure the degree of family care [39]. The APGAR uses
a total score of entries to assess maternal satisfaction
with family functions. A score of 0–3 represents severe
impairment in family functions, a score of 4–6 represents
moderate impairment in family functions, and a
score of 7–10 represents good family functions. The
Cronbach’s α coefficient of APGAR in this study was
0.848, the KMO test statistic was 0.827, and Bartlett’s
spherical test showed statistical significance (χ2 = 1457.359,
P < 0.001).
Social factors
Social factors included social support, doctors’ and
friends’ advice on delivery mode, and the delivery mode
of the surrounding mothers and medical staff service.
Social support was measured by the Social Support
Rating Scale (SSRS) complied by Xiao Water in 1986
[40]. A total score of all entries was calculated, with a
score < 35 for a low level of social support, 35–45 for a
medium level, and > 45 for a high level. Cronbach’s α
coefficient of the SSRS in this study was 0.694, the KMO
test statistic was 0.818, and Bartlett’s spherical test
showed statistical significance (χ2 = 1084.008, p < 0.001).
Statistical analysis
The database was established using EpiData 3.1 software
(EpiData Associations, Odense, Denmark), and real-time
double entry and logical verification of the data were
carried out. Statistical analysis was performed by SAS
9.4 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). In data
processing, some continuous variables (age, family care
score, social support score, pregnancy stress score,
anxiety score and depression score) were converted into
categorical variables. According to the purpose of this
study, women without clinical medical indications during
delivery were analyzed, whereas those with operative
vaginal delivery (OVD) and those with cesarean delivery
with medical indications (in this study, the indications
for cesarean delivery surgery were mainly the first indication).
Except for CDMR, in this study, all indications
were designated medical indications (Table 1), and those
who did not complete the late pregnancy follow-up were
excluded. The χ2 test and Fisher’s exact test were used
to compare the differences in delivery modes among
women with different characteristics and to screen
for initial potential variables. Then, the variables
with P < 0.1 in univariate analysis and/or with significance
from a professional perspective were included
in the multivariate logistic stepwise regression model
to obtain the factors influencing CDMR. A few variables
were missing, and observations with missing
values (all of which were less than 1.5 %) were
excluded from the regression analysis.
Results
Basic information
Selection of participants
A total of 1538 pregnant women from four medical
institutions were recruited for this study. By July 2019,
the delivery outcomes of 1283 pregnant women were
obtained. The factors influencing CDMR were analyzed
by taking 736 women who had no clinical medical indication
during delivery as the study subjects. The selection
of the research subjects is shown in Fig. 1.
Delivery situation and the indications of cesarean delivery
Among the 1283 pregnant women, 815 had a vaginal
delivery (i.e., spontaneous vaginal delivery without a
medical intervention), 6 had an OVD (excluded from the
analysis), and 462 had a cesarean delivery (of which 108
were CDMR), with a cesarean delivery rate of 36.01 %.
“Maternal request” was the primary indication for
cesarean delivery, accounting for 23.38 % (108/462) of
the total number of cesarean deliveries. Additionally, the
overall CDMR rate was 8.42 % (108/1283). In addition,
the top five medical indications were fetal distress, pregnancy
complications, abnormal amniotic fluid, a fetal
position abnormality and cephalopelvic disproportion
(Table 1).
General characteristics
The age of the participants ranged from 16 years to 44
years, and 62.09 % of them were primiparous women.
Among them, 62.50 % lived in urban areas, and 37.36 %
lived in rural areas. The overall level of education was
relatively high, as 40.90 % of the women were highly educated.
Moreover, 40.63 % of them had a monthly per
capita household income between 3,000 and 5,000 RMB.
Women with a family monthly income of more than 5,
000 RMB accounted for 35.05 % of the sample, whereas
those below 3,000 RMB accounted for 24.05 %. Nearly
half of the women (48.78 %) were housewives or
unemployed, and 82.88 % of them exercised during
pregnancy. In addition, most of the pregnant women
(87.50 %) had stress symptoms in late pregnancy, and
the frequencies of anxiety and depression symptoms
were 10.60 and 2.85 %, respectively (Table 2).
Willingness of delivery mode
In late pregnancy, 55.51 % of the women preferred vaginal
delivery, 4.46 % of them preferred cesarean delivery,
and 40.03 % of them did not have a clear choice of delivery
mode (Table 2). Inquiries about the tendency toward
delivery modes were conducted in late pregnancy. Pregnant
women (N = 327) who had no definite willingness
to undergo cesarean delivery or who were willing to have
a cesarean delivery were asked about their motivations
to have a cesarean delivery, whereas those who were
willing to have a vaginal delivery were asked about their
motivations to have a vaginal delivery (data not shown).
Some women might have had multiple motivations to
choose a cesarean delivery at the same time. Most
(55.35 %) women were afraid of vaginal labor pains and
believed that cesarean delivery caused less pain. In
addition, the doctors’ advice, lack of confidence in vaginal
delivery and a belief that cesarean delivery was safer
for children were the main motivations for women to
choose a cesarean delivery (Table 3).
Multivariate analysis of the factors influencing CDMR
In the univariate analysis, parity, willingness to deliver in
late pregnancy, delivery mode of the surrounding
mothers, husbands’ advice on delivery mode, parents’
advice on delivery mode, in-laws’ advice on delivery
mode, friends’ advice on delivery mode, and doctors’
advice on delivery mode were all associated with different
delivery modes (P < 0.05) (Table 2).
A logistic stepwise regression model was used in
the multivariate analysis. The mode of delivery was
taken as the dependent variable (0 = vaginal delivery,
1 = CDMR), whereas variables in the univariate analysis
(P < 0.1) were selected as independent variables.
Combined with information from the literature and
professional knowledge, maternal age and BMI were
included in the model for adjustment [33, 35]. As
shown in Table 4, compared with women under 25
years of age, women over 30 years of age were 4.3
times more likely to have CDMR (OR = 4.292, 95 %
CI: 1.984–9.283). Compared with multiparous women,
primiparous women had a higher risk of CDMR
(OR = 6.792, 95 % CI: 3.230-14.281). Moreover, women
who tended to choose cesarean delivery before birth
were 5.5 times more likely to have CDMR than
women with no clear intention (OR = 5.525, 95 % CI:
2.116–14.431). However, women in frequent contact
with mothers who had undergone vaginal deliveries
had a reduced risk of CDMR (OR = 0.547, 95 % CI:
0.311–0.961). In addition, pregnant women are more
likely to choose cesarean delivery if their doctors recommended
it (OR = 4.071, 95 % CI: 1.007–16.455).
Discussion
Cesarean delivery rate and indications
In this study, the cesarean delivery rate in Chongqing,
China, was 36.01 %. This statistic is consistent with the
national overall cesarean delivery rate provided in the report
on the development of China’s maternal and child
health in 2019 [25], which is still at a high level compared
to the global average [21]. The CDMR rate was
8.42 %, accounting for 23.88 % of the cesarean delivery
population. This finding is similar to the results of some
previous studies [24, 35], which suggested that the rates
of cesarean delivery and CDMR in Chongqing are at the
average level in China. Although the WHO no longer
gives a recommended specific value of the cesarean
delivery rate, it still warns against unnecessary cesarean
delivery [41]. In recent years, China has taken some
measures, such as health education, painless delivery and
the introduction of corresponding policies to reduce the
rate of cesarean delivery [42]. Therefore, the high
cesarean delivery rate may be due to other factors.
This study found that “maternal request” was the most
frequent indication for cesarean delivery, a finding that
is in accordance with those of other studies [21, 26]. In
recent decades, with the development of the social
economy and the continuous improvement of medical
technology, the indications for cesarean delivery have
changed. Additionally, the main indications have changed
from maternal or fetal physiological status to social
psychological factors [27, 28]. At the beginning of its
popularization, cesarean delivery was mainly used to
solve various high-risk pregnancy problems, such as dystocia,
which saved the lives of a large number of highrisk
pregnant women and newborns. However, with the
widespread use of cesarean delivery, some women have
misunderstandings about delivery knowledge and think
that cesarean delivery is the safest method of delivery
[12]. A research report in the United States showed that
nearly half of obstetricians believe that pregnant women
have the right to choose cesarean delivery [43], and
Chinese obstetricians have the same belief [36]. Chongqing
Health Statistics Information Center reported in 2015 that
cesarean delivery was earning preference of younger generations
[44]. This evidence suggests that the public tends to
believe that cesarean delivery is a delivery mode that can be
chosen freely.
Influencing factors
Personal factors
This study found that maternal age and number of deliveries
were associated with the presence of CDMR. Older
women (> 30 years old) had a higher risk of developing
CDMR than younger women (< 25 years old). The same
conclusion was reached in previous international studies
[33, 34]; older women often had no plan for pregnancy
and seldom worried about the risk of vaginal birth after
cesarean section (VBAC) when choosing a delivery
mode. At the same time, with increasing age, women
have a higher risk of pregnancy complications and adverse
pregnancy outcomes [45, 46]. Although the general
definition of older mothers is women over 35 years old,
some researchers have pointed out that the at-risk age
associated with different adverse outcomes varies, and
the risk of some adverse outcomes is still very high
among some women under age 35, even as young as 30
years old [47]. Pregnant women will be more concerned
about the risk of vaginal childbirth if they are in a highrisk
physiological condition.
However, women who have experienced childbirth in
the past have fewer concerns about vaginal delivery. Our
study confirms this view that women who are giving
birth for the first time are more likely to choose cesarean
delivery, even without any medical indications, compared
to women who have previously experienced delivery.
According to a Norwegian study, some primiparous
women planned to have cesarean delivery since they
were teenagers because of their fear of childbirth and a
lack of understanding of fertility [48]. In China, the
“two-child policy” was implemented in 2016, allowing a
couple to have two children. If a woman who is giving
birth for the first time chooses cesarean delivery, a trial
of labor after cesarean delivery (TOLAC) is less likely to
be her preference when giving birth to the second child
[49]. Therefore, the choice of delivery mode for primiparous
women is very important to control the overall
cesarean delivery rate.
In late pregnancy, pregnant women are preparing to
give birth. During this period, most pregnant women
have adapted to the pregnancy process and have a certain
degree of understanding of delivery knowledge.
Interestingly, in our study, nearly half of the women still
had no definite intention relating to the mode of delivery,
and a small number of them preferred cesarean delivery.
Furthermore, the results of the regression analysis
showed that compared to women who had no definite
willingness to deliver using a certain mode, women who
preferred cesarean delivery had a higher probability of a
cesarean delivery during the actual delivery. This suggests
that we need to strengthen the guidance offered to
pregnant women in late pregnancy to provide them with
correct understanding of their delivery knowledge and
mode to reduce the unnecessary cesarean delivery rate
through interventions near the prenatal period.
In addition, when exploring the motivation of pregnant
women in late pregnancy to consider cesarean delivery,
we found that “afraid of vaginal labor pains, think
cesarean delivery is less painful” was the most important
factor. Moreover, nearly one-third of women did not
have confidence in vaginal delivery. Tocophobia is very
common in pregnant women and is one of the important
reasons for CDMR [50–52]. This study also revealed
that some pregnant women think that cesarean delivery
is “safer for children”, “it is safe to the mother and saves
time and effort” and “kids are smarter and healthier”.
These misunderstandings of delivery knowledge are also
important reasons for pregnant women to consider
cesarean delivery. In addition, consistent with some
international studies [53, 54], pregnant women’s concerns
about their own physiological condition, such as
“faster body shape recovery”, “protection of perineal tissue,
does not affect postpartum sexual life”, and “fear of
pregnancy complications such as uterine rupture”, make
them worry about vaginal delivery. Moreover, due to
China’s unique social and cultural influence, some
people in the country connect the birth time of a child
with his or her fortune and want to give birth at a particular
time for an “auspicious” future. We found that
7.65 % of women still considered that selecting a certain
day for delivery as a “good day” was an adequate reason
for a cesarean delivery.
Influence of others
In addition to a pregnant woman’s personal factors,
other people around them also affected their choice of
delivery mode. We found that if the main delivery mode
of the surrounding mothers was vaginal delivery, the
probability of cesarean delivery was reduced by half. The
successful experience of other parturient women’s vaginal
delivery increased their confidence in delivery,
whereas a failure of a trial of labor in other women possibly
made them fear vaginal delivery and choose
cesarean delivery. Regarding the choice of delivery mode
of pregnant women being affected by others, the current
research has mainly focused on families and friends.
There are few reports on the influence of surrounding
mothers on pregnant women. It is suggested that medical
institutions guide active communication among
pregnant women and strengthen their understanding of
correct delivery knowledge among pregnant women in
the process of waiting for labor.
In addition, our study showed that doctors’ advice played
a key role in the choice of delivery mode. Compared with
those who did not recommend cesarean delivery, pregnant
women whose doctors recommended cesarean delivery had
a higher risk of choosing cesarean delivery. We also found
that a doctor recommendation was an important motivation
for pregnant women to consider cesarean delivery.
Previous studies have reported that the cesarean delivery
rate of different doctors within the same institution can
vary up to threefold, but no difference in patient characteristics
or short-term neonatal outcomes has been observed
[55], which shows that doctors’ personal decision making
has a significant impact on the cesarean delivery rate. It has
also been shown in a study in Brazil that doctors’ opinions
have major impacts on the decisions of pregnant women,
especially those made about the delivery mode [56].
At the same time, some pregnant women rely on the
advice of obstetric medical staff and believe that it is
their responsibility to make a decision about the mode
of delivery [57]. However, obstetricians tend to choose
cesarean delivery to avoid lawsuits caused by unexpected
complications during the process of vaginal delivery, and
surgical delivery can simultaneously bring them more income
[58]. A survey of obstetricians showed that those
with lower educational backgrounds and less work experience
who thought that the advantages of cesarean
delivery outweighed the disadvantages had a higher incidence
of CDMR among their patients [36]. Therefore,
we suggest that obstetric medical staff should enhance
their understanding of professional knowledge, adhere to
the indications for cesarean delivery, and give pregnant
women a full opportunity to undergo a trial of labor.
Limitations
This study had several limitations. The participants were
from only one province in China. Furthermore, because
of the exclusion criteria, no women had a history of
cesarean delivery. Therefore, the cesarean delivery rate
in this study is not representative of all Chinese mainland
pregnant women. In addition, the main variables
only captured information about the group and crosssectional
data from late pregnancy, which might not
fully reflect the impact of the entire pregnancy status on
the delivery outcome. Therefore, in a follow-up study,
longitudinal data from multiple follow-up should be
considered for analysis.
Conclusions
CDMR has become the primary indication for cesarean
delivery in Chongqing, China. Additionally, the occurrence
of CDMR is related to the personal factors of
pregnant women (age, parity, willingness of delivery
mode) and is affected by other people (surrounding
mothers, the obstetrician). Society and public media
should respond with proper guidance for the adoption of
cesarean section. Medical institutions should strengthen
the popularization of women’s delivery knowledge during
pregnancy, in particular, to alleviate the fear of vaginal
delivery among older mothers and primiparous women.
Obstetricians should fully understand the medical indications
for cesarean delivery and offer pregnant women a
full opportunity to attempt vaginal delivery. Lastly, it is
recommended that health administrators execute closer
and more strict supervision in terms of the introduction
of cesarean section to avoid unnecessary cesarean delivery.