Background
Treatment of upper urinary tract calculi has changed in
recent years because of development of minimally invasive
techniques such as flexible ureteroscopy (FURS) and
miniaturized percutaneous nephrolithotomy (mini, ultramini
and micro PCNL) [1]. Technological advances in
FURS design (such as improved active tip deflection and
digital image transfer), Laser lithotripsy techniques, advances
in instruments as tipless baskets and ureteral access
sheath (UAS) have resulted in increasing the
utilization of FURS in treatment of renal and upper ureteric
calculi. European Association of Urology (EAU)
Guidelines recommended shock waves lithotripsy (SWL)
and endourological for treatment of renal stones < 2 cm
[2]. AUA guidelines recommended PCNL for treatment
of large renal stones < 2 cm [3]. However, some experienced
authors reported successful and safe use of FURS
for treating larger stone burdens < 2 cm [4, 5].
The large variety of instruments used during FURS offered
increased surgical efficiency, decreased frequency
and severity of complications, and improved cost effectiveness.
Many controversies in FURS indications, techniques
and utilization of available instruments were
addressed in previous surveys [6, 7]. However, the effect
of case volume per year on selection of certain indications,
utilization of specific techniques and preference of
instruments was reported in only one study that involved
only European urologists [7]. High-volume URS
cases per year was proved to result in better outcomes
(such as shorter operative time, better stone free rates,
shorter hospital stay, less need for retreatment, fewer
and less severe complications) when compared with
lower case-volume [8].
This study was conducted to report current worldwide
variation in techniques and clinical practice of FURS among
endourologists of different FURS workload per year.
Methods
Study design
An email invitation was sent to Endourological society
members to answer an anonymous online survey in June
2017. A reminder email was sent after one month. The
survey was conducted through SurveyMonkey® system
and responses were collected over three months. By
accepting the invitation to complete the online survey,
all participants provided their informed consent to take
part in the study. This study design did not require ethical
approval because no patients were included.
Survey
The online questionnaire contained 14 questions (three
questions asked about country, period of doing FURS
and number of FURS per year, two asked about using
FURS for upper ureteral and large renal stones and 9
questions were concerned with clinical practice of FURS
(such as preoperative stenting and urine culture, use of
ureteral access sheath (UAS) and safety guidewire, type
of FURS (fiberoptic or digital), technique of Laser lithotripsy
and fragment retrieval, post-FURS stenting indications
and period).
Participants
Responders were divided into two groups based on
number of cases per year, high-volume surgeon with >
100 case/year and low-volume surgeon < 100 case/year
[6]. FURS technical details and practice were compared
between the two groups.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS V20 software
(USA). All variables were categorical and were
expressed as numbers and percentages. Chi-square test
was used to compare the difference between both groups.
P Value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Participants
The survey was answered by 146 responders of 1204
(12%) Endourological society members from 40 countries.
They represent all continents (50 from North
America, 42 from Europe, 29 from Asia, 16 from South
America and 9 from Africa).
Differences between high and low-volume Endourologists
Table 1 summarized the comparison between both
groups. High-volume surgeons were practicing FURS for
significantly longer periods than low-volume group
(P < 0.001). FURS for intrarenal stones > 20mm was
used by 61.3% of high-volume group versus 28.6% of
low-volume group (P < 0.001). Semi-Rigid ureteroscopy
for upper ureteric stone was more frequently preferred
by low-volume group (82%) in comparison with 68% in
high-volume group (P = 0.044). Stone dusting was preferred
by 63% by low-volume group versus 45% by highvolume
(P = 0.031). Another significant difference was
the period of post-URS stents as more responders in
low-volume group preferred to leave the stent for 6
weeks (P = 0.042).
Similarities between high and low-volume Endourologists
Regardless of the case volume per year, most responders
(96%) used FURS in non-stented ureters, 80% request
preoperative urine culture, 76% were using semirigid
URS for upper ureteric stones and 70% used a basket for
retrieval of stone fragments after disintegration. Two
third of responders routinely uses a safety guidewire and
UAS during FURS (Table 1).
Discussion
The superior results of surgeons with higher volume
URS cases in comparison with others with lower volume
cases was attributed to increasing surgical experience of
the treating team (endourologist, nurses and technicians)
[8]. In the present study, we reported the effect of casevolume
per year on clinical practice and preference of
certain instruments and surgical techniques of FURS.
High-volume responders in the present survey performed
significantly more FURS for renal calculi > 20
mm despite that EAU and American Urological Association
(AUA) guidelines [2, 3] that recommended PCNL
as the first line for this stone size. However, highvolume
endourologists used their experience to reach efficient
outcomes [5, 8]. Moreover, we observed an increase
in the overall preference of FURS for large renal
stones among all responders (42%) in comparison with
the survey conducted by Dauw et al. who reported 11%
[6]. This may be explained by the increased experience
of FURS surgical techniques and advances in Laser lithotripsy
technology.
The second important difference was the preference of
semirigid URS for treatment of upper ureteric calculi. Although
high-volume endourologists used semirigid URS
less frequently than low-volume group (68% vs 82%,
P = 0.044). However, a considerable number of endourologists
in each group preferred semirigid URS for treatment
of upper ureteric stones. This may be attributed to
financial causes in some countries, less experience in using
FURS by some urologists (especially in low-volume group)
or choosing to start with semirigid URS and if stone fragments
escaped to the kidney, FURS can be used to retrieve
them. AUA guidelines recommended that a FURS should
be available when performing URS for proximal ureteric
calculi [3]. Galal et al. and Karadag et al. compared both
techniques for treatment of proximal ureteric calculi and
reported that FURS offered significantly better stone free
rate (P = 0.005) but rigid URS had significantly shorter operative
time (P = 0.005) and both had comparable complication
rates [9, 10].
The third difference in this survey was utilization of
Laser dusting of stones by more endourologists in lowvolume
group (63% vs 45%, P = 0.031). High-volume
endourologists prefer fragmentation and stones retrieval
to achieve immediate stone free status in most patients,
while low-volume surgeons prefer dusting and leaving
gravels for spontaneous passage. Dusting uses low energy,
high-frequency and long pulse duration setting to
fragment stones into fine powder and small fragments
that are left for spontaneous passage [11]. The stone free
rates for fragmentation and basket retrieval were significantly
better than dusting, but operative time was
shorter for dusting [12, 13].
The use of UAS with FURS has been a controversial
issue in urological literature. Advantages of UAS include
ease of multiple passages of the scope, rapid stone extraction,
higher stone free rates, low intrarenal pressure
during prolonged procedures [14, 15]. Other reports
showed no advantages of UAS for stone free rate or operative
time, while the incidence of complications was
higher with UAS [16, 17]. In the present survey, the use
of UAS was practiced by 62 and 69% of responders in
group 1 and 2 respectively (P = 0.516). It is obvious that
about two thirds of endourologists of different levels of
case load believe that the advantages of UAS outweigh
its disadvantages. A similar result was reported from a
large European survey where 70.7% used UAS [7].
When asking about the use of a safety guidewire, 68% of
group 1 and 60% of group 2 indicated that they used it in
all cases. In the past, use of a safety guidewire was highly
advised to allow smooth access to the pelvicalyceal system
and facilitates ureteral stent placement in case of ureteral
or collecting system injury [18]. A study by Western
Endourological stone consortium showed that the risks
for FURS damage were significantly decreased when using
a safety guidewire [19]. Currently; and with increased use
of UAS; there are some reports of FURS without a safety
guidewire [20, 21]. In the present study, it was observed
that 13% of high-volume surgeons did not use a safety
guidewire compared to 6% of the other group. These rates
are more than the reported 1.9% in the previous survey by
Dauw et al. [6] and we think that it is expected to increase
in future.
Another controversial issue is the placement of ureteric
stent either before or after FURS. The present survey
showed that the majority endourologists in both
groups follow the AUA guidelines [3] in omitting ureteral
stent placement prior to FURS. For post-FURS
stenting, the AUA guidelines recommended ureteric
stent placement in certain indications such as ureteral
injury, ureteric stricture, large stone size, incomplete
stone fragmentation, solitary kidney or impaired renal
function [3]. However, in the present survey 58% of
group 1 and 53% of group 2 placed a stent in all cases
after FURS. These rates are comparable to previously reported
64% by Dauw et al. [6] and slightly more than the
44% reported in the European survey [7].
Low response rate (12%) in comparison with 20% in
Dauw et al. survey among Endourology Society members
[6] was the major limitation of the present study. However,
responders represented all regions around the
world. This survey included specific group of urologists
who are interested in endourology as primary subspecialty.
Therefore, the results cannot be extrapolated to
general urologists. On the other hand, this study showed
the differences in clinical practice of FURS among
endourologists of low versus high-case volume. This is
highly valuable to know the current controversies, agreement
or disagreements with international guidelines.
The future implications include conducting randomized
controlled studies to compare the safety and efficacy of
controversial issues involving FURS indications, instruments
and clinical practice.
Conclusions
The use of FURS for treating upper tract calculi has expanded
by high-volume endourologists to include large
renal stones > 20 mm. Low-volume surgeons prefer to
use semi-rigid URS for treatment of upper ureteral
stones, to apply Laser stone dusting and maintain ureteral
stents for longer periods. Ureteral access sheath is
commonly used whatever the case-volume per year.