Background
Adolescent psychotherapy engagement and decisionmaking
capacity
Adolescence is a unique period of transition between
childhood and adulthood, with multidimensional
changes that make adolescents susceptible to mental
health disorders. According to worldwide community
studies, the pooled prevalence of any mental disorder in
adolescents is 13.4%, with prevalence rates ranging between
8.3 and 19.9% [1]. In general, patients have
trusted, personal relationships with their doctors in
patient-focused care models, at the core of which is
shared decision making (SDM). Decision-making competent
adolescents with mental disorders might be likely
to develop good relationships with their therapists,
which, when containing a degree of mutuality, is important
and can positively influence engagement with therapy.
As presented below, this is an important predictor
of youth client retention in therapy. Retention in therapy
is one of the strongest predictors of improved outcomes
among adolescents with mental disorders. Attrition refers
to dropping out of (outpatient) mental health therapy
early, namely, terminating therapy before the
therapist would agree that it is appropriate to do so, thus
leading to an attenuation of therapy outcomes.
A high attrition rate is a problem in the field of child
and adolescent psychiatry. It is noteworthy that there are
high rates of drop-out in mental health settings [2].
“Youth are particularly difficult to engage” [3]. Warnick
et al. stated that ‘attrition in youth outpatient mental
health clinics ranges from 30 to 70% and often occurs
early in treatment’ [4]. The “good” adolescentpsychotherapist
relationship involves a positive and reciprocal
interaction between adolescents and therapists
and is a key component of effective psychotherapy engagement,
especially in the field of child and adolescent
psychiatry [5]. SDM “is increasingly being suggested as
an integral part of mental health provision” [6], especially
in the context of child and adolescent psychiatry
[7, 8]. The SDM process may contribute to creating
optimum collaborative working involvement between
the therapist and adolescent, namely, a “good”, interactive
and effective adolescent-psychotherapist relationship.
An adolescent patient must have decisional
capacity to be an active participant in the SDM process.
SDM is an interactive process that emphasizes the patient’s
values and preferences, in which psychotherapists
and patients work together to make decisions in line
with the principles of person-centred care [8]. Psychotherapists
balance risks and expected outcomes with patient
preferences and values. This process epitomizes
decision-making involvement, where each patient is
given the opportunity to share their opinions with
psychotherapists.
Decision-making capacity in psychiatry
Mental disorder does not necessarily involve a loss of
decision-making competence [9]. It is important to bear
in mind that perfect cognitive functioning is not necessarily
a requirement for decision-making capacity
(DMC) [10]. Nevertheless, perfect cognitive functioning
is not always sufficient to have full DMC. Modern
decision-making theory places considerable emphasis on
values and emotions rather than on cognitive function
when considering one’s DMC [11]. Having developed a
set of core values is a requirement for DMC.
Interestingly, it has been suggested that practical wisdom,
namely, “knowing the right thing to do in the concrete
situation”, might be a reliable criterion for
assessing an individual with mental disorders as
decision-making competent. The ability of such patients
to organize their core values, find a balance between extreme
emotions, and enact their core values and emotions
in what they consider a good and meaningful
personal life has been proposed as the criterion for having
practical wisdom [12]. Note, however, that the criterion
of practical wisdom for DMCs has not yet been
commonly accepted and remains to be further investigated
in the context of DMCs.
Decision-making capacity in adolescence
Adolescence is a culturally defined concept without
clear-cut starting and ending points [13]. Adolescents
should be involved in treatment decisions to the extent
possible [14, 15]. Their decision-making competence
should be assessed on an individual basis. Below, the authors
of this paper discuss this topic in detail.
Studies have demonstrated that a subset of adolescents
aged 14 and older have the capacity to consent to medical
treatments in specific contexts [16, 17]. Adolescents
demonstrate noticeable DMC across a variety of domains
[18]. Legally binding international texts such as
the United Nations Convention on Rights of the Child
(articles 12 and 13) and the Convention on Human
Rights and Biomedicine (article 6) provide that the
voices of children and adolescents should be heard and
given due weight. Indeed, the right of adolescents to be
involved in treatment decisions has been expanded in recent
years [19]. Adolescents’ involvement in medical decisions
is important to them. Decision-making
involvement helps them become better decision-makers
in the future [15] and learn that they are beings of
‘moral worth’ [20].
Regarding adult patients, it is extremely difficult to define
a cut-off point of consent for medical treatment
[21]. That is particularly so in regard to adolescents.
There is no universal agreement on adolescents’
decision-making capacity (DMC). There is no chronological
age of consent for medical treatment [22–24].
The existing consent frameworks do not specify a minimum
age at which an adolescent might be considered
competent to consent to medical treatment [25]. Importantly,
it seems impossible to define a cut-off point of
consent for medical treatment based on neuroscience
[26, 27].
Adolescences’ decision-making competence is determined
by a variety of factors related to adolescents
themselves (i.e., developmental stage, literacy, culture,
experience, health state), their context (i.e., parents that
may be facilitators or barriers to adolescents’ decisionmaking
competence, peers, health professionals and the
relationships between the adolescent and these individuals),
and other situational factors [28, 29]. Importantly,
there is uniqueness and diversity in adolescence. Asymmetry
in the development of various structures in the
adolescent brain is the main factor responsible for making
adolescence a unique developmental period requiring
a tailored response [27]. Furthermore, other authors
highlight the role of factors such as the development of
skills and mature critical thinking; the development of
values, emotions and moral authority; literacy; culture;
previous experiences; the involvement of family; and
family relationships [14, 30–35]. Last, as briefly mentioned
above, adolescents’ decision-making competence
fluctuates. It is argued that ‘decision-making, even of
mature adolescents, may occasionally be flawed’ [36].
Furthermore, there are considerable individual differences
in rates of developmental maturation among adolescents
[5]. Moreover, adolescents are profoundly
influenced by other persons, especially parents, health
professionals and peers [37, 38].
Adolescents’ medical decision-making process is much
more complex than adults’ medical decision-making
process, and this is particularly the case in regard to adolescents
with mental disorders [19].
The aim of this study
Greece was ravaged by financial crisis from 2009 to
2016. The recent economic crisis may have profound
and lasting effects on the mental health of adolescents.
Adolescents’ behavioural health is particularly vulnerable
to conditions of economic hardship [39]. Reiss found
that “socioeconomically disadvantaged children and adolescents
were two to three times more likely to develop
mental health problems” [40]. Child and adolescent psychotherapy
services may contribute to buffering against
these situations. Note, however, that Greek researchers
have reported high rates of non-attendance at psychotherapy
among adolescents in the country. Kontorini
et al. noted that out of 319 children and adolescents
(131 girls and 188 boys) who sought psychotherapeutic
help in the Department of Children and Adolescents’
Therapy (DCAT) of the Institute of Behaviour Research
and Therapy (IBRT) during the last decade (January
2010–May 2020, namely, the decade after the economic
crisis), 42.6% successfully completed it, 20.7% did not attend
and 13.5% dropped out [41].
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, little research
has been conducted to date on factors that may be barriers
to or facilitators of mental health care engagement
among decision-making competent adolescents in
Greece. In the absence of adequate specific empirical
knowledge about this topic, the authors sought to identify
those factors that adolescents with mental disorders
who, in their assessment, showed a reliable level of
DMC regard as facilitators of or barriers to engaging in
psychotherapy. This study, along with another study entitled
“Clinical characteristics of adolescents undergoing
psychotherapy” were parts of a broader research project
exploring the topic of consensual mental health treatment
engagement among adolescents.
Research questions
The overarching question delineating the focus of this
study was the following:
What are the perceived facilitators of and barriers to
psychotherapy engagement among adolescents who
show a reliable level of decision-making capacity?
The secondary research questions were the following:
a) What are the major factors that can profoundly
shape the attitude of adolescents with mental
disorders towards their treatment?
b) What are the factors that determine the consent of
adolescents with mental disorders to their
treatment?
c) What are the factors that determine the treatment
decision making of adolescents with mental
disorders?
Study design
The present work was a prospective qualitative research
study based on in-depth interviews with adolescent outpatients
with psychiatric disorders. This qualitative descriptive
study was conducted from June 2016 to
December 2019 using a conventional content analysis
approach. Moreover, screening activities to determine
participant eligibility were performed following their
consent to continue with the research while protecting
the privacy of potential participants and the confidentiality
of information collected about them. The screening
activity was divided into two stages.
Stages of the study
A. A psychometric evaluation of the adolescent patients
who were willing to participate in this study was conducted
for the primary purpose of applying inclusion
and exclusion criteria to the research sample. This was
the first stage of participant eligibility screening. The
psychometric evaluation was performed after obtaining
informed consent (enrolment) to ensure that participants
were qualified for the study. In addition to eligibility
screening, the psychometric assessment was expected
to help us identify more factors potentially affecting the
patients’ attitude towards their treatment and carry out
a more nuanced and reliable qualitative analysis, namely,
obtain better results from our qualitative data analysis.
B. Clinical assessment was the second stage of participant
eligibility screening. It was assessed whether participants
had adequately developed emotions and a set of
values as well as the abilities to organize their values and
find a balance between extreme emotions.
C. After having undergone the psychometric evaluation,
the members of the research sample participated
in in-depth interviews. The authors conducted in-person
interviews based on a semi-structured interview guide.
Then, an inductive content analysis was conducted.
Participants
Sampling and data collection
In the present study, the authors focused on adolescent
patients’ perceptions and attitudes to identify motivating
factors for outpatient adolescents that may help them
engage with their treatment. Purposive sampling was
used according to the eligibility criteria set out below.
The participants were outpatients attending their
scheduled clinic appointments in the Child and
Adolescents Psychiatry Department, tertiary referral hospital
Hippokratio of Thessaloniki. Potential participants
were approached by the lead researcher (ET) at the
clinic. A broad range of mental disorders were included,
such as depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, dysthymia,
behavioural disorders, anorexia nervosa, panic
disorder, bipolar disorder, and autism spectrum disorder.
All of the participants had been attending psychotherapy
for at least four months, and most of them had been in
psychotherapy for more than six months. None of them
were involuntarily referred by parents or other
caregivers.
Thus, participants who differed in age, gender, educational
background, experience and type of mental disorder
were recruited continuously during the project by
the main researcher (ET). The researchers achieved a
cluster random sample. To gain a deep and comprehensive
understanding of the underlying phenomena that
drive psychiatric adolescents’ attitudes towards their
own treatment, the researchers strove to construct an
overall sample consisting of participants with a wide
range of mental health conditions, namely, corresponding
to a wide range of types of mental disorder, weighed
against a practical wish to recruit the greatest possible
number of participants with each type of mental
disorder.
A total of 52 patients were initially recruited by the
main researcher (ET). While 50 patients agreed to be
interviewed, 2 patients chose not to participate. None of
the patients initially agreed to participate and then changed
their mind and declined participation.
The inclusion criteria
The inclusion criteria for participation in the study were
(1) being an outpatient with mental disorders, (2) being
adolescents less than 18 years, (3) being already engaged
in a therapeutic relationship in our healthcare setting,
and (4) being not involuntarily engaged in this therapeutic
relationship.
The exclusion criteria
The exclusion criteria were designed to create a pool of
assessed-as-decision-competent participants who were
consensually engaged in ongoing treatment for at least
four months at the time of the interview.
The exclusion criteria for participation in the study
were (1) inability to use the Greek language and (2) having
a very low literacy level (determined empirically),
namely, a literacy level below what is needed for effective
interviewing. Adolescents’ decision-making competence
was assessed on an individual basis. To determine
whether the participants had adequate capacity to make
decisions, the researchers examined their cognitive functioning,
emotions, core values, and practical wisdom to
the extent possible. Therefore, the following exclusion
criteria were further included: (3) the lack of an adequately
developed set of values (explored through participant
screening interviews conducted prior to the
qualitative research interviews, as presented below), (4)
very low intelligence or (5) severe depression symptoms
that may have a negative impact on cognitive functions
and decision-making processes. Therefore, patients with
severe disorders in cognitive functioning or severe emotional
(major depressive) disorders were excluded. These
disorders may not only have a profoundly negative impact
on participants’ DMC but also reduce the reliability
and effectiveness of interviews.
Procedures
Informed consent
As participants were under 18, written informed consent
was obtained from a parent and/or legal guardian. In
addition, verbal informed consent was obtained from
adolescent participants. Both parents/legal guardians and
adolescents were told at the start of the study that they
have the right to withdraw from the research at any time
and without giving any reason and without reprisal. Before
each interview, each participant and his or her parent(
s) were given information on the study and informed
that his or her participation was voluntary, placing great
weight on the importance of maintaining confidentiality.
Screening
Screening measures Potential participants were administered
two psychometric scales: A) An intelligence test
(Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, WISC III) [42]
and a self-report measure of depression (Beck Depression
Inventory, BDI II) [43]. The Greek versions of both psychometric
tests were considered reliable since these
questionnaires have been validated in the Greek context
[44, 45]. ET was the researcher who administered the
WISC and BDI psychometric scales to potential participants.
All the requirements of quantitative and qualitative
research were met, and all ethical considerations
were observed.
The procedures of participant screening In applying
inclusion and exclusion criteria to our sample, the researchers
determined a threshold value (cut-off points)
to identify those patients with “very low intelligence” or
“severe depression symptoms”, namely, those who were
not eligible to become participants in the qualitative research.
The cut-off point used for the WISC III was <
54, and the cut-off point used for the BDI II was > 31. If
the total score was less than these threshold values, the
intelligence and depression symptoms were ranked as
“very low” or “severe”, respectively.
Then, in a second step, adolescents whose
intelligence and depression symptoms were not
ranked as “very low” or “severe”, respectively, were
clinically assessed to determine whether they had developed
a set of (not pathogenic) values strictly and
stably over time allied to their narrative identity as
well as whether they had adequate (though not extreme)
emotions. The assessment was not difficult
provided that the adolescents had already been in
therapy for many months, namely, at least four
months, though most had been in therapy six
months. Moreover, the researchers determined
whether they had developed practical wisdom,
namely, whether they were capable of focusing on
“knowing the right thing to do in the concrete situation”
[12]. More precisely, the researchers clinically
assessed whether they had developed a set of core
values and whether they were able to organize their
core values, find a balance between extreme emotions,
and enact their core values and emotions in
what they considered a good and meaningful personal
life [12]. The narrative enabled the researchers
to enter into the being (inner world) of participants
to appreciate these abilities. To determine whether
these (additional) criteria were met, the researchers
conducted participant screening interviews with potential
participants, conducted prior to the qualitative
interviews albeit after the psychometric
assessment. The screening interview guide touched
upon many points to capture all of the aforementioned
dimensions of practical wisdom. For instance,
potential participants were encouraged to talk about
their lives and future plans and comment on their
value-laden and emotion-provoking assumptions regarding
hot social topics, such as racism or homosexuality.
This purpose of this process was to induce
them to find, reflect on and deal with their core
values, express their feelings and manage their emotional
reactions. Many participants made their comments
using emotion-laden words. Furthermore,
nonverbal reactions and interactions were given particular
weight and were analysed. Nonverbal reactions
were often directly connected to verbalized
emotions. In addition, the participant screening interviews
were rapport-building. While the participants
in this study did not lack the capacity for
cognitive reasoning and had adequate values and
emotions, the researchers were of the view that having
practical insight and being able ‘to handle the
situation and live a meaningful life’ might further
underpin their judgement about the DMC of the adolescents
who were considered eligible to participate
in the study. This was because adolescents with
mental disorders are in an extremely grey zone
between competence and incompetence. The researchers
used the ICD-10 to obtain a diagnosis for
mental health disorders.
Interviews
The interview guide reflected the overarching aim of the
study: to investigate any barriers to and facilitators of adolescents’
capacity to decide and give valid consent to
their treatment. The interviews were semi-structured
and started by guide questions such as the following:
What are your views about your treatment? How did
you decide whether you should undergo treatment?
Please describe to me any significant experience you
have had dealing with your problems. Have you ever felt
concerned about your treatment? What do you believe
are the main reasons why you have to comply with the
treatment offered? What is or should be the role of your
therapist and the relationship between you and your
therapist? The interview guide questions were developed
specifically for this study. The questions were tailored to
the participants’ condition, with the possibility of qualifying
probing questions that were not listed in the interview
guide, depending on the course of the interview.
The topics set out in the interview guide included reasons,
feelings, views, experiences and understanding.
The interviews were focused, among other things, on
elucidating the reasons why patients decided to undergo
medical treatment, their comprehension relating to
treatment design and processes, and their experiences of
taking part in the therapeutic alliance with their therapist
and receiving a drug. Moreover, the interviews included
questions about the participants’ experiences and
perceptions of treatment, as well as questions about
their view of social and family relationships, future targets
and goals. Study participants were also asked about
difficulties complying with the treatment offered.
As data analysis commenced while the trial was ongoing,
new topics were highlighted during the initial few
interviews and emerged from the data analysis. In subsequent
interviews, these topics became the subject of additional
questions, which were added to the interview
guide to further confirm the trustworthiness of the research
data.
Participants were encouraged to expand upon issues
they considered most relevant and speak as freely as
possible about them. Participants were encouraged to
elaborate on their initial responses to the questions. The
interviewer made every effort not to interrupt the interviewer
while speaking or to disturb the interviewer while
remaining silent. It should be highlighted that the interviewer
tried her utmost not to ask leading questions.
All interviews were carried out in person by the first
author (ET), a specialist in child and adolescent psychiatry
possessing a Master of Medical Ethics and
experienced in qualitative interviewing. Data were collected
through in-depth individual semi-structured interviews.
Relevant field notes were written before and after
the interviews by the interviewer to help produce a comprehensive
set of insightful findings.
Patients were given the choice of being interviewed either
at their home or at their therapist’s general practice.
Interviews were held at interviewees’ preferred time.
During the interview, only the interviewer and the interviewee
were present, with the exception of a few patients
who were accompanied in the interview by their parents,
who for the most part stayed silent apart from brief input.
This input was not analysed and used for the paper.
The interview language was Greek, and interviews
were conducted between June 2016 and December 2019.
Interviews lasted between 30 and 45 min. The mean
length of the interviews was 35 min. Interviews were
audio recorded and transcribed verbatim by the first author
into written Greek.
Although the researcher had a clinical background,
she assumed the researcher role for the interviews. The
interviewer did not hold any strong views about medical
ethics and remained neutral on issues that were discussed
with the patient. The researcher contacted the
patients and spent time with them beforehand to gain
their trust and ensure trustworthiness in the study. The
interviewer answered any questions that the patients
asked. Reflexive thinking was applied throughout the research
process to reduce unintentional personal bias.
The researcher took great care to make the interviews
feel more like a conversation and less like an interrogation,
especially from the adolescent patients’ perspective.
The number of participants was not set from the beginning.
Data collection ceased only when data saturation
was reached, a point where no additional
information was obtained from further interviews. Data
collection continued until after forty-five interviews. Five
more interviews were also conducted to ensure data
saturation.
Data analysis
The analysis was mainly performed by the first author.
The co-authors contributed to the analysis from their respective
points of view as a bioethicist, clinician, or
psychologist. Authors engaged with one another to limit
research bias.
As the data did not involve particularly large volumes
of text, the researchers placed great weight on the interpretation
of the ‘latent content’ of the texts and on the
subjective understanding of “patterns, themes, and categories
important to asocial reality” [46]. The interviews
were analysed with conventional qualitative content analysis,
as suggested by Graneheim and Lundman [47].
With respect to the aim of the study, the analysis was
focused on identifying the perceptions of adolescent patients
regarding their treatment. In this sense, the analysis
was purposive.
The researchers took great care to ensure the validity
and reliability of the study according to Gibbs [48]. In
addition, the researchers used strategies to minimize reflexivity
throughout the project. For instance, throughout
the content data analysis, the researchers drew upon
our own clinical experiences in a reflexive manner. Furthermore,
credibility was established using prolonged
engagement and maximum variance in participant selection.
Moreover, transferability was achieved via the
provision of a rich description of the data collection,
analysis processes and findings to allow the readers to
match the findings with their contexts. The trustworthiness
of a qualitative research study involves establishing
credibility and transferability as well as dependability,
confirmability and authenticity [49, 50].
As the purpose of the study was not early theory testing,
the researchers used inductive content analysis,
namely, an approach moving from the specific to the
general [51].
After each interview was transcribed word for word, in
the first step, each interview transcript was read through
carefully and repeatedly to obtain a good overall sense of
the whole transcript and an impression of its content
[52]. In the second step, units expressing meaning were
identified in each interview transcript, and units similar
in meaning were coded. The researchers constantly
compared data to ensure that the codes were used consistently
[53]. In the third step, codes similar in meaning
were grouped into subcategories. In the fourth step, subcategories
compared with each other and the latent data
content were condensed into broader categories. The
final categories were refined by all authors by ensuring a
clear difference between categories and subcategories.
The lists of categories were grouped under higher-order
headings. The categories were grouped into prevailing
themes as the final product of the analysis. Disagreements
between the authors that arose during the data
analysis were easily addressed with re-examination of
the data and further discussion.
Data analysis was carried out using NVivo qualitative
data analysis software version 9 released in 2010.
Last, it should be noted that facilitators of and barriers
to psychotherapy engagement that emerged from this
study were ranked as major (strong) and minor (less
strong). Note, however, that there were no clear cut-off
criteria for the clarification of major and minor barriers
or facilitators. Barriers or facilitators that were highly recurrent
or mostly emphasized during the interviews
were classified as major factors. Barriers or facilitators
that were not highly recurrent or mostly emphasized
during the interviews were classified as minor factors.
From this perspective, the potential of the researchers
(with previous experience in qualitative data analysis) to
make accurate judgements about whether a barrier or facilitator
can be classified as major or minor plays a crucial
role.
Ethical considerations
The authors obtained adolescent consent and parental
consent for adolescent participants. If adolescents and
their parents were willing to participate, they were given
adequate information about the design, purpose, nature
and confidentiality of the study, including that participation
was voluntary and that consent could be withdrawn
at any time during the course of the study. Verbal informed
consent to participate was then obtained from
each participant and his or her parent(s) prior to participating
in this study and documented in the recording at
the time of the interviews. Anonymity and confidentiality
were maintained throughout the study. Interview data
were anonymized during transcription. To preserve participants’
anonymity, no names are used in this paper.
The interviews were registered and stored in a strictly
confidential fashion. The study and consent procedure
were approved by the Ethics Committee affiliated with
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Health
Sciences, School of Medicine (Decision Number: 9.302 /
12-07-2017).
Results
Qualitative interview data were collected from a purposive
sample consisting of 50 (assessed as) decisionmaking
competent adolescents who were in ongoing
outpatient psychotherapy. A total of 50 adolescents
(aged 13–18 years, mean = 14.85, SD = 1.67) with psychiatric
disorders participated in the study (see Table 1).
From the interview data analysis emerged a variety of
distinct factors that can be regarded as barriers to and
facilitators of psychotherapy engagement for adolescents
with mental disorders who are decision-making competent.
Below are the six central themes and the subthemes
that emerged from the interview data analysis
[for additional representative quotes, see Additional
File 1]. Note that the facilitators of and barriers
to psychotherapy engagement that emerged from this
study were ranked as major (strong) and minor (less
strong) according to their relative recurrence rate in the
interviews (quantitative criterion) and the emphasis
placed on these interview data by participants (qualitative
criterion).
The adolescents’ attitudes towards therapy
Strong commitment to therapy
In the sample of adolescents examined, almost all participants
were undoubtedly in favour of therapy. They
expressed their strong willingness to undergo it.
The vast majority of participants not only were committed
to therapy but also invested in it to varying degrees.
One participant, while recognizing the beneficial
role of therapy and declaring her commitment to it,
stressed that she would avoid investing in therapy.
“I don’t think of anything special, it’s a new experience
as well, which will help me; it will get somewhere,
but I don’t need to have a special feeling for
it … are you scared of something? fast answer: No”
(participant 8, girl 15 years old, F50)
However, some participants were strongly attached to
treatment, had invested in it, and hence found it difficult
to see reasons to interrupt it. Typical comments
included,
“Nothing would make me stop treatment” (Participant
31, girl 16yo, F50)
Ineffectiveness of therapy as a barrier
Perceived ineffective treatment may be a good reason for
terminating therapy prematurely. The following is one of
the comments illustrating this point:
“… [I’d interrupt the treatment] if it is extremely difficult
to follow it or I didn’t notice any result in some
time” (Participant 4, girl 17yo, F50)
Some participants related the perceived ineffectiveness
of therapy to their therapist. For example, one participant
said,
“… the relationship with the therapist made me continue
… if it didn’t help me [I’d stop treatment]”
(Participant 2, boy 13yo, F51.3)
The crucial role of the adolescent-therapist relationship
It was strikingly apparent in the data analysis that the
adolescent-therapist relationship plays a crucial role in
adolescents’ therapy engagement. This relationship may
be regarded as both a strong barrier (when it is “bad”) or
a strong facilitator (when it is “good”). The adolescenttherapist
relationship appears to be very specific and
essential for achieving adolescents’ treatment engagement
and hence effective treatment. Establishing an
adolescent-therapist relationship perceived as ‘good’ by
adolescents may be a strong facilitator of adolescents’
treatment engagement, whereas a perceived ‘bad’ relationship
with the therapist constitutes a strong barrier to
adolescents’ treatment engagement.
In the beginning of psychotherapy, the adolescent is
initially cautious and curious, expecting that the therapist
will persuade him or her to collaborate. Adolescents
initially set the precondition of “comfort” with their
therapist so as to “succumb” to therapeutic guidance.
Adolescents search for specific characteristics in the
therapist. They require that their therapists have a warm
and friendly demeanour and strive to create a trustful relationship
with their adolescent patients. Trust in the
therapist and in the promise of confidentiality are important
elements for the continuation of the therapeutic
relationship and a prerequisite for adolescents. Personal
liking for the therapist is often an essential condition for
continuing treatment. “If I didn’t like her as much as I
do, I’d be more hesitant to continue treatment”. The
need for confidentiality to prevent social comments is a
required characteristic of their relationship with the
therapist. Adolescents need to feel the specialist is close
to them and a sense of feel confidence, comfort and intimacy
and that the therapist speaks “the same language”
as them so they do not feel alone in their mental illness.
However, adolescents require that the therapist does not
play the role of an expert dictating the life of the adolescent
through a paternalistic model of the doctor-patient
relationship. Shared decision making is desirable. It is indicative
that two participants used the terms “collaborate
[with the therapist]” (participant 33, girl 17yo, F42) and
“[the therapist] is cooperative” (participant 20, girl 18yo,
panic attacks).
The (perceived as) ‘good’ adolescent-therapist relationship
The vast majority of participants in this study did not
describe any actual concerns about their therapist. Participants
who perceived the relationship with their therapist
as ‘good’ stated that their therapist was “very good”
and that they had developed a friendly relationship of
trust with him or her.
A typical comment was:
“Our relationship is good, she is friendly, I can trust
her with many things and talk about my personal
life and I consider her confidential” (Participant 4,
girl 17yo, F50)
Participants reported the following factors as fundamental
to establishing a good relationship with their
therapist: “She understands me”, “She listens to me”
(that is, she puts up with me), “I can speak freely”, “She
offers solutions”, and “I feel comfortable”. These are a
selection of some of the phrases used by participants
who perceive their relationship with their therapist as
good.
Typical comments included:
“I feel an intimacy; she advises how to deal with my
difficulties … I feel her close to me and I trust her”
(Participant 45, girl 13yo, F34)
“My relationship with my therapist is very good …
she is very cooperative … she speaks so nicely and
clearly …” (Participant 18, girl 18yo, bipolar)
The following was a typical comment illustrating the
value of a ‘good’ adolescent-therapist relationship as a
facilitator of engagement in therapy. A participant
stated,
“I think that if the therapist succeeds in creating an
atmosphere of trust and confidence, then it’d be easier
for me to accept the proposed treatment” (Participant
4, girl 17yo, F50)
The (mostly positive) attitudes towards the therapist
The attitudes towards the therapist ranged from mild
reservation to strong attachment. Some participants
strongly associated their steady commitment to therapy
with their good relationship with their therapist. They
reported themselves as being strongly attached to their
treatment because of their therapist.
“I don’t think that something would change about
the decision I make regarding my relationship with
her” (Participant 3, girl 14yo, F39)
Notwithstanding, a few participants expressed that
their attitudes toward the therapist ranged from neutral
to mild reservation, which, however, did not amount to
actual concerns.
Some participants expressed a wait-and-see attitude
towards their therapist. For example, the following comment
was typical.
“I have the judgement to understand if what she
proposes to me will help me or not. It’s too early
… for the time being I haven’t noticed being affected.
I see her positively” (Participant 13, boy
16yo, F40, F51)
Furthermore, some few participants said they had
taken a weak liking to their therapist. Typical comments
included:
“She was nice, nothing special” (Participant 25, boy
13yo, F39; Participant 43, girl 17yo, F32)
The adolescents unilaterally determine what constitutes a
“good relationship” with the therapist
It is noteworthy that many participants unilaterally set
the terms of a “good relationship” with the therapist. Importantly,
several participants reported that being
allowed to set these terms was a precondition for the
continuation of treatment. They appeared to be ready to
unilaterally set out the terms and conditions of their
therapeutic relationship and terminate the therapy if it
opposed their values or their personal beliefs and ideology
or if it contradicted basic parts of their character.
The need to preserve their selves, instead of a radical
change through treatment, seems to be the key point for
adolescents. They appeared ready to interrupt treatment
unilaterally as an equal partner.
The following comments illustrate this point:
“… something I can’t accept or it doesn’t fit my personality
or character” (Participant 39, girl 15yo, F40
– panic attacks)
“I would stop because I was getting frustrated when
we disagreed on something” (Participant 25, girl
13yo, F39)
Surprisingly, while adolescents seek a warm relationship
with their therapist, the therapist bringing his or
her personal experiences into that relationship may have
a tremendous negative impact on adolescents’ treatment
engagement. For example, one participant considered
this a ‘casus belli’ and expressed a cynical view, alleging
that.
“If she starts bringing her personal stuff in the conversation,
that’s a red flag for me” (Participant 14,
girl 14yo, F32)
In addition, it should be noted that some participants
used the terms “good relationship” or “bad relationship”
[with the therapist], “like [the therapist]”, “I feel good” or
“I feel bad” [with the therapist] without providing further
clarification of what they meant by these terms. Moreover,
adolescents desire good communication with the
therapist (Participant 47, girl 16yo, F32) and clarity on
what the therapist says (Participant 5, girl 12.5yo, F45,
F40).
The therapy as a means of pursuing and achieving goals
to improve the adolescents’ well-being
Psychotherapy emerged in the data analysis as being
thought of as a requirement or an effective means of
pursuing and achieving adolescents’ goals. From this
perspective, setting life goals may be a facilitator for adolescents
to engage in their psychotherapy.
The goal of eliminating the symptoms and the negative
consequences of a mental disorder
The vast majority of the participants in our study
seek help to handle their difficulties and get free of
symptoms related to their mental disorder, which in
all likelihood limit and affect their functional activities
of daily living and obstruct the development of
social relationships. A total of 22.4% of the participants
in our study had sleep disorders. Furthermore,
44.9% of the adolescents in our study were affected
by mood disorders, and increased rates of pessimistic
symptoms (36.7%), energy reduction (30.6%), and
concentration difficulties (28.6%) were observed. It is
notable that although the participants in the study
stressed the need to develop social relations and be
accepted by peers, none, even those who were older,
mentioned the creation of romantic relations as a
therapy goal. In a related question during their
evaluation, they expressed their indifference towards
such issues.
Focusing on participants’ personal well-being Some
participants were focused on their personal well-being
(personal aspect of quality of life) and declared that they
pursued the purpose of effectively dealing with their difficulties
and challenges. The following were typical
comments:
“I expect to become better and I’m not afraid of anything”
(Participant 19, boy 16yo, F42); “… I expect it
will relieve me” (Participant 3, girl 14yo, F39); “[ …]
… I want to pursue treatment because I will feel better
for myself” (Participant 45, girl 13yo, F34).
Some other participants placed great weight on their
symptoms, which, in addition, wreak havoc on their social
relationships. A typical comment included:
“The suggested treatment could help me in various
phobias, so as to get over them … if I have issues
with my friends, treatment will help me deal with
them … I’d like to develop friendships” (Participant
21, boy 17yo, F90)
Focusing on participants’ social well-being Other participants
placed considerable emphasis on their social
skills, which were impaired because of their symptoms.
Success in achieving the goal of improving social skills
and social relationships, especially with peers, emerged
as a strong motive for engaging in therapy. For example,
participants stated,
“… I am and make better company with other peers
…” (Participant 24, boy 13yo, F90). “… I believe I’ll
gain some new friends, it’ll help me live more pleasant
moments” (Participant 19, girl 16yo, F42). “I’d
like to improve my social relations … I have few
friends” (Participant 38, boy 17yo, panic attacks,
stress)
The remission of symptoms as a barrier to therapy
engagement Importantly, while the vast majority of participants
clearly acknowledged the benefit they received
and were willing to undergo treatment, many participants
expressed their desire to terminate psychotherapy
prematurely once the symptoms subsided or went away.
One participant expressed the desire to complete the
treatment as quickly as possible. Interestingly, the researchers
found that early remission of the symptoms
may increase the risk of early withdrawal from therapy.
From this perspective, it may be a barrier to therapy engagement.
For example, participants stated,
“I believe I would interrupt treatment if I was reaching
a good, very good point … reached the point I
wanted” (Participant 13, boy, 16yo, F40, F51); “… if I
feel better” (Participant 33, girl, 17yo, F42); “… if I
don’t need it anymore” (Participant 3, girl, 14yo,
F39).
The goal of personal independence
Some participants regarded therapy as a way to become
more independent. For example, participants stated,
“[ …] I expect to be able to decide for myself and not
follow my therapist’s instructions” (Participant 49,
boy 13yo, F42)
“[ …] I think that … I do this … to be gradually better
till I become independent and can find my path
alone … to become able to confront the things that
scare me alone …” (Participant 4, girl 17yo, F50)
The goal of enhancing self-esteem and developing positive
self-image
Some adolescents were motivated to receive treatment
out of their need to increase their self-esteem and improve
their perception of themselves or their lives.
The following comments illustrate this point:
“[ …] I become a better person and I believe I’ll make
the right choices about my life … I’ll have a better
perception of things …” (Participant 9, boy 17yo,
F39)
“[ …] I’m not afraid of anything, I expect to have less
stress and more confidence … a strong character for
my life” (Participant 7, girl 14yo, F42)
The goal of becoming able to achieve personal life goals
The goal of becoming able to achieve their plans in personal
and professional fields was reported as a factor
motivating participants to engage in psychotherapy.
Therapy was regarded by participants as a necessary
condition to accomplish their personal and professional
plans.
Typical comments included:
“… I think that if I hadn’t chosen to be treated, some
future plans would not have been accomplished”
(Participant 9, boy 17yo, F39)
“My plans for the future were mainly the incentive
to accept the proposed treatment” (Participant 4, girl
17yo, F50)
However, the vast majority of participants did not connect
the achievement of future goals with the present
treatment, despite the gravity of their current mental
health condition.
The majority of adolescents identified their schooling
and future career preferences as the main priority. The
goals of leaving the family home, moving abroad for
school and creating their own family express their deeper
need for independence and autonomy.
The goal of confessing to a trustworthy person
Three participants regarded the therapy as a confession.
They were willing to confess their personal distress to a
trustworthy person. For example, participants reflected:
“… I don’t exactly know [the problem], but speaking
helps get it out of you” (Participant 3, girl 14yo, F39)
“… I expect to describe what I’ve been through from
my father … to say what I have inside of me …”
(Participant 41, girl 15yo, F39)
The role of peers (ranging from neutral to mildly
supportive)
The role of peers ranged from ‘not-so-neutral’ to mildly
supportive. While the vast majority of participants had
friends and quite a few of them, most participants chose
not to announce to their friend group their problem and
the fact that they were in treatment. Many participants
distinguished between their close trusted friends and
their not-so-close friends. Close friends may know about
the adolescent’s therapeutic relationship, and they potentially
act supportively with emotions of solidarity, understanding
and motivation. Most participants
mentioned that their attitude towards treatment was not
influenced by their friends. Several participants felt support
(participant 38, boy 17yo, panic attacks, stress; participant
8, girl 15yo, F50; participant 28, girl 15yo,
personality disorder) or were urged towards treatment
by friends (participant 14, girl 14yo, F32), and some even
stated that they pursued treatment to have a good relationship
with their friends.
Typical comments included:
“If I have problems with my friends, treatment will
help me deal with them” (Participant 21, boy 17yo,
F90)
“… it’s such a case, because the relationship I have
with my friends encourages me to try not to be cut
off by them again”. Moreover, the participant clarified
“the relations I have with my friends are generally
good, but there are some friends with whom I
can talk about personal issues. I trust them more
and they encourage me” (Participant 4, girl 17yo,
F50)
However, none of the participants stated that friends
played a crucial role in seeking treatment and engaging
in it.
The role of family (ranging from supportive to active)
The role of family ranged from only mildly supportive to
strongly supportive. All participants stated they had a
good relationship with their family. Very few were
slightly cautious in making this statement. The role of
the family in the treatment continued to be important,
despite the tendency toward independence that characterizes
adolescence.
To a greater or lesser extent, family helped the adolescents
become willing to undergo treatment. While some
adolescents took the initiative to seek therapy, in some
other cases, the initiative was taken by family. However,
none of the participants reported that they felt forced
into psychotherapy. In almost all of the cases, adolescents
were backed by family. The adolescents showed a
positive attitude towards the supportive role of family.
A few participants clearly highlighted their own leading
role in seeking treatment, thus minimizing the supportive
role of the family. Typical comments included,
“I had asked to come” (Participant 14, girl 14yo,
F32)
In some cases, family had the leading role in seeking
treatment.
“Basically, they brought me” (Participant 2, boy
13yo, F51.3)
Note, however, that several participants declared that
family had a supportive role either underpinning the adolescents’
willingness to seek treatment for their mental
problems or urging and persuading the adolescents of
the value of a treatment. For example, participants
stated,
“In a way yes [my parents brought me here], but I
don’t think it’s the main reason” (Participant 8, girl
15yo, F50)
“With discussion, they managed to lead me to talk
to someone” (Participant 46, girl 13yo, F40)
Surprisingly, a participant, highlighting the supportive
role of family, put it best when she said, “… when the
family doesn’t accept it [the treatment], then the child
doesn’t accept it either” (Participant 39, girl 15yo, F40-
panic attacks).
Participants reported as facilitators of their therapy engagement
the fact that their therapy might reduce intrafamily
conflicts, reduce their aggressive behaviour
towards their family and make their family happy. These
changes might be beneficial to the adolescents themselves.
For example, participants stated,
“I believe that my decision [to undergo therapy] will
improve the bonds between us and I’ll have the support
of my parents for anything I want to do” (Participant
3, girl 14yo, F39)
“I want my mom to feel good, so I’ll go along with
what they ask from me” (Participant 41, girl 15yo,
F39)
The fear of stigma related to a mental health disorder (as
both a barrier and facilitator)
The fear of social stigma
The stigma attached to mental illness is very real. Participants
fear others knowing that they are in therapy,
which may become a barrier to getting therapy. Other
participants fear others making fun of them (their mental
illness), which may facilitate their obtaining therapy.
The fear of stigma related to mental health was both a
facilitator and barrier. For example, participants, when
talking to the interviewer, reflected:
“I don’t have a problem because this won’t be known
and it will also help me … yeah, since you are not
going to say it to anyone, I don’t need to worry …”
(Participant 3, girl 14yo, F39)
“… if I feel it [therapy] helps me more and I want to
finish … I don’t want it much, I want to finish … it
helped me already, I don’t want anything more …
I’m afraid to stop … some classmates make fun of
me” (Participant 10, boy 13yo, F84.5)
Addressing self-stigmatization as a facilitator of therapy
engagement
Adolescents’ recognition that they are not dealing with a
serious issue seems to function as a relief and encourages
them to seek treatment. For example, two participants
reflected:
“Since I know the reason … I am aware of my condition,
that it’s not a serious problem or something to
worry about, I don’t see it [the treatment] negatively,
as another child might, and I am OK with it and
myself and I don’t worry” (Participant 13, boy 16yo,
F40, F51)
“I don’t have a special problem, but I think it would
be good to discuss my problems with someone” (Participant
26, boy 13.5yo, F39)
This may be the reason why adolescents with mental
disorders may shift the responsibility for therapy exclusively
to parents (see below on the role of family).
Considering all the above-mentioned results and after
having ranked the identified barriers and facilitators as
major and minor, the findings of this study can be briefly
summarized as follows: In the interviews, all of the participants
highlighted facilitators of rather than barriers
to their treatment engagement. Positive experiences with
therapy, namely, positive treatment outcomes and the
perceived effectiveness and usefulness of treatment, were
reported as strong (“major”) facilitators of therapy engagement
for adolescents with mental disorders, whereas
negative experiences with therapy (perceived as ineffective
and unhelpful) were reported as strong (“major”) barriers
to it. The participants equally highlighted the
importance of eliminating their symptoms and improving
their socialization skills. Furthermore, and most importantly,
a ‘good’ adolescent-therapist relationship was
reported as a strong (“major”) facilitator, whereas negative
experiences of participants with their therapist
(namely, a “bad” relationship with the therapist) were reported
as a strong (“major”) barrier to their therapy engagement.
A meaningful adolescent-therapist
relationship meant ‘good’ adolescent-therapist interaction,
namely, a meaningful, close, trustful, warm, open,
communicative and familiar relationship with the therapist
in which adolescents feel comfortable. Note, however,
that several adolescents unilaterally set the terms
of a (perceived as) “good” relationship with therapist.
Moreover, goals such as getting rid of the symptoms and
negative consequences of the mental disorder, improving
personal well-being, and improving social skills and relationships,
especially with peers, emerged as strong
(“major”) facilitators of therapy engagement. Importantly,
early remission of symptoms emerged from the
study as a strong (“major”) barrier to therapy
engagement for participants. This was described as a factor
that can cause a high attrition rate. Among the
weaker (“minor”) perceived facilitators were goals such
as confessing to a trustworthy person, becoming able to
achieve personal expectations and life goals, enhancing
independence and self-esteem, and developing a positive
self-image. In addition, the (active or supportive) role of
family emerged as a facilitator. The stigma related to
mental health emerged from the study as both a
(“minor”) facilitator of and barrier to therapy engagement
for participants. Friends were reported as having a
role ranging from neutral to mildly supportive.
Discussion
The authors of this paper would not expect to find quite
different results among adolescents without DMCs, with
the exception of results related to the adolescenttherapist
relationship. Note, however, that, as the participants
in this study were all voluntarily receiving therapy,
the authors can imagine that adolescents who were not
in therapy by choice might answer differently.
The facilitators of and barriers to psychotherapy engagement
that emerged from this study were ranked as
major (strong) and minor (less strong) according to their
recurrence rate of the related data in the interviews
(quantitative criterion) and the emphasis placed on these
interview data by participants (qualitative criterion).
From this perspective, below, the authors discuss the results
of this study. As the authors conducted an inductive
content analysis, the structure of this section is based
on the key findings of the study.
The adolescents’ attitudes towards therapy
All participants had a positive attitude towards treatment.
The vast majority of the participants in this research
clearly acknowledge the benefit of receiving
treatment and express explicit desire to undergo treatment.
This is not consistent with the findings of prior
studies, according to which adolescents frequently do
not perceive the need for psychotherapy [4, 54]. It is argued
that adolescents may lack the cognitive abilities
and experience to fully understand the rationale behind
treatment and doubt that it will have any meaningful impact
on them [5]. Furthermore, it is argued that adolescents
are less able than adults to assimilate and
integrate, analyse, synthesize and evaluate the information
provided, even though they may completely
recognize the (short-term, but not the long-term) benefits
of the recommended treatment [19]. Moreover, it
should be highlighted that “it is unclear how well adolescents
with psychiatric problems appreciate their disorder
and treatment recommendations …” [55]. Note, however,
that the researchers included only adolescents who
we considered competent to make decisions and were
already in therapy. As anticipated above in the Introduction
section, a subset of adolescents with mental disorders
are likely to be decision-making competent in
specific contexts. These adolescents can be effectively involved
in the SDM process and hence effectively engage
in their treatment. To that effect, many theorists suggest
that “children may have far more potential to understand
complex illness concepts than they have previously
been given credit for” [56].
Many of the participants were of the opinion that the
remission of the symptoms would be a good reason for
premature termination of therapy, which in turn may
hinder the effective delivery of mental health services
[57]. It is important that quite a few adolescents seem to
try to “have control” of the therapeutic relationship, setting
their own terms for treatment delivery, which they
mainly relate to the quality of their relationship with the
therapist (see below). This corresponds with adolescents’
desire for immediate results and focus on short-term
outcomes and is consistent with the egocentrism of adolescence.
Adolescents’ perceived limits to their freedom
to “choose”, tendency to regard psychotherapy as an effort
to control them and as in conflict with their striving
for autonomy, and stereotype-based inaccurate impressions
of psychotherapy may be significant barriers to
therapy engagement. This is particularly so when adolescents
in therapy fail to perceive themselves as needing
therapy and participate in therapy because others want
them to be in therapy [5]. Αdolescents have a propensity
towards risk-taking and short-term reward (reward reactivity)
due to asymmetry in the development of various
structures in the adolescent brain [23, 27]. In addition,
adolescence is characterized by the perception of invincibility
and egocentrism (failure to inhibit selfperspective)
[58, 59]. Many participants clearly and unequivocally
stated that they were afraid of nothing. Naturally,
this agrees with the feeling of invincibility and
risk-taking during adolescence.
As all of the participants were actively engaged in therapy,
it is likely that their prevalent symptoms are potential
facilitators of their engagement in therapy. In that
regard, the interesting finding that early remission of
symptoms may increase the risk of early withdrawal
from therapy should be highlighted. A possible explanation
may be that the remission of symptoms may considerably
reduce both public stigma (related to mental
disorder) and self-stigmatization. In addition, with the
remission of the symptoms, the need for follow-up is
eliminated.
Last, it is noteworthy that our participants did not
hold beliefs about mental illness, mental health treatment
or terrifying hospital experiences that contributed
to poor treatment engagement, as Stafford and Draucker
recently found in their study [54].
The important adolescent-therapist relationship
The vast majority of participants in this study reported
that they had developed a meaningful connection
with their therapist. They said that this was a
significant facilitator of their therapy engagement.
They stressed their belief that negative experiences
with their therapists would be a major barrier to their
therapy engagement. The findings were consistent
with previous studies [5, 54]. The literature has long
acknowledged the adolescent-therapist relationship as
crucial for adolescents’ engagement in treatment [5].
Adolescents’ perceptions of therapists predict therapeutic
outcomes [5]. Treatment engagement is decisive
in an effective therapeutic process and in
achieving successful outcomes and ‘may be particularly
relevant early in treatment’ [4]. The better the
treatment engagement, the more favourable the therapy
outcomes may be.
Several participants mentioned trust in the therapist.
Adolescents are more likely to seek health care if their
provider guarantees confidentiality, but in providing
confidential care, a balance among the needs of the adolescent
patient, the parents, and the provider must be
considered [60]. In the literature, distrust of psychotherapists
is most commonly reported as a barrier to therapy
engagement in Latino adult populations. Furthermore,
adolescents want a relationship with their therapist that
carries a genuine sense of mutual trust [54, 61–68]..
Participants in this study desired a humane, approachable
therapist who would collaborate with them and
treat them as equals. Therapeutic engagement is “a reciprocal
interaction in which both therapist and client(s)
have a responsibility for establishing an effective rapport”,
namely, creating an optimum working collaboration
between the therapist and adolescent [5].
Adolescents should be offered a way to build rapport
with the therapist. They should participate fully and engage
in positive interactions to achieve successful therapy.
Healthcare providers’ ability to engage adolescents
increases the likelihood of continuation of treatment
[69]. Positive attitudes of psychotherapists towards their
patients are more engaging than the more traditional
neutral stance often assumed by psychotherapists.
Adolescent-therapist agreement, i.e., co-endorsement of
aetiological beliefs, may significantly facilitate treatment
engagement by promoting communication/openness,
adolescent-therapist interaction, and adolescents’ perceived
usefulness of treatment [70].
Oetzel and Scherer argue that “succeeding as a
psycho-therapist with adolescents can be challenging”
[5]. The authors state, “establishing a strong therapeutic
alliance with adolescents require that therapists express
empathy and genuineness … and increase choice in therapy”
[5].
Many participants expressed their need to feel that
their therapist would understand them and that he or
she would be a source of support. Participants appreciated
the fact that the therapist gave them thoughtful and
effective advice. This is inconsistent with prior literature
[68]. They perceived their therapist as empathic, caring,
open, and sincere.
Some participants said, “the therapist understands
me”. It is true that both the therapist and adolescent
should be minded to ‘understand’. Indeed, reciprocal understanding
between the adolescent and therapist is of
great importance. Understanding how adolescents perceive
mental illness may be important for therapists to
improve engagement [71]. If providers motivate adolescents
to understand the value of treatment, they may increase
the engagement of adolescents, who will be less
likely to terminate prematurely [72]. It is crucial to bear
in mind that adolescents may undervalue or overestimate
the importance of their psychological symptoms
and may be ashamed of reporting them [5]. It is possible
to identify different treatment engagement profiles [73].
Note, however, that treatment motivation should be distinguished
from treatment engagement [74]. Motivational
interviewing, used as a pre-treatment
intervention, is a promising way to facilitate engagement
in adolescent mental health settings [75].
Empathy is necessary for developing a therapeutic alliance
with adolescents but is not sufficient. Adolescents
appreciate therapists who are committed to them and
their well-being.
Some participants said that they wanted the therapist
to be precise and that they wanted to feel comfortable
with him or her. Sincerity, candour or “being real” with
adolescents is a crucial therapy engagement facilitator.
Candour implies telling adolescent patients the truth tailored
to the adolescents’ developmental capacities. Cognitively
immature adolescents require the therapist to
use simple inquiries devoid of abstract terms, concrete
examples, and guidance on how to establish therapeutic
rapport [5].
Some participants stated they were willing to interrupt
treatment if it contradicted their values. Respect for the
personal values of the adolescent is crucial both in the
therapist’s approach and for the adolescent’s therapeutic
goals. In relation to the above, it should be mentioned
that each minor experiences the outside world in his or
her own unique way, even though he or she lives in the
same social-cultural context as other children [76].
All the aforementioned features of a therapeutic relationship
are necessary to develop an effective SDM
process that predicts effective treatment engagement in
adolescents. Therapists should establish a climate that
enables a thorough exchange with adolescents and their
families, which allows for flexible and respectful SDM
[77]. Furthermore, therapists should balance the views of
parents and children [78] while making every effort to
involve the adolescent’s family in the decision-making
process [36, 79, 80].
It is important for therapists to go beyond the
provision of adequate, clear, concise and unbiased information
to the patient [81]. Therapists have to empower
and stimulate adolescents to fully engage them in the
process of making shared decisions, with their own
values derived from their own viewpoint, preferences
and emotions [11, 81]. Importantly, the irrational decisions
of adolescents that are nevertheless coherent with
their “internal rationality” may be regarded as internally
reasonable decisions [82]. SDM ‘is increasingly being
suggested as an integral part of mental health provision’
[6], especially in the context of child and adolescent
psychiatry [7]. However, while a subset of adolescents
are decision-making competent [17, 83], therapists may
have challenges engaging adolescents with mental disorders
in SDM [6, 84].
The therapy as a means of achieving goals to improve
adolescents’ well-being
Most participants did not correlate their goals for the future
with their present treatment. The fact that adolescents
feel “invincible” and have a short-term perspective
probably helps them deal with weaknesses. However, for
some, the realization of their aspirations and expectations
constituted a facilitator of their treatment engagement.
In that sense, it is important to note Almroth
et al.’s statement that “interventions aimed at increasing
aspirations and engagement in school may prevent mental
health problems in adolescence” [85]. Furthermore,
leaving home and university studies seem to be important
aspirations for adolescents in the research and an
element of autonomy and independence from family
safety and protection. The selection of a foreign country
for further schooling appears to be an idealistic choice
that signifies social recognition and financial
independence.
The role of peers
Acceptance by peers and improvement of social skills as
essential preconditions for acceptance in the social environment
seem to constitute a strong motive for seeking
treatment. This is not surprising. Adolescents pursue
their need for independence by placing a considerable
emphasis on attempting to shift from dependency on
parents and family towards greater belonging among
peers [5]. Many writers highlight the participation of adolescents
in groups of peers as a necessary process of
maturation, experimentation and finally discovery of the
true self [86–88].
Potential social stigma against mental illness and
their inability to deal independently with their difficulties
pushes adolescents to conceal their receipt of
treatment from their social circle while they simultaneously
seek help to integrate into it and to develop
trusting relationships with peers. The mental
disorder-related stigma attitudes of peer groups towards
adolescents in psychotherapy may result in adolescents
feeling scorned [5].
However, our research has shown that stable and
tested friend relationships can function to encourage adolescents
towards therapy and that there is a distinction
between “companions” and “friends”. In that regard, it
should be highlighted that peers, even though they often
are not part of the medical conversation, may actually
motivate a (mentally or not) ill adolescent to be more
socially active, thus improving his or her DMC [23]. Indeed,
in a peer context, an observed adolescent may
want to send a social signal to his or her peers [29]. The
developmental processes that underlie the sensitivity of
adolescents to peer influence are poorly understood [29].
At any rate, it should be highlighted that the influence
of peers on outcomes in psychiatric mental health contexts
remains poorly understood [19].
The role of family
In almost all of the cases, adolescents were backed by
family to some extent. Adolescents in the study acknowledged
the important role of family in their decisions.
Tsiantis et al. state that when an adolescent comes
for therapy, he or she has already been exposed to familial,
friend and social influences, and this can make his or
her attitude towards treatment positive [89].
It is very important that parents first note there is a
problem and persuade the adolescent to seek treatment,
because, as a participant said, “if the family doesn’t
accept the problem, then nor does the child” [89]. Although
this was not the case for the participants in our
study, adolescents often underestimate the importance
of and need for treatment and are involuntarily referred
by parents and other health care providers [90]. Furthermore,
not only in mental health care but also in other
health care contexts, parents may facilitate adolescents’
DMC more than physicians do, creating the context for
adolescents’ competent decision making [6]. Parents can
be a barrier to or facilitator of an adolescent’s treatment
decision [91]. The American Academy of Pediatrics
claims that parents have no absolute legal right to make
autonomous treatment decisions regarding their children
[17]. Parents do have a responsibility to preserve family
relationships and further the best interests of their children.
According to the model of constrained parental
autonomy, parents can “balance the “best interest” of the
minor patient with his or her understanding of the
family’s best interests …” [17]. At any rate, it is important
to highlight the fact that parents and physicians do
not always understand what is in adolescents’ best interest
[92]. When parents perceive their children’s mental
health problems to be serious, they are more likely to
seek mental health therapy for their children [54, 93].
However, while the majority of families perceive the
need for treatment, that perceived need may not be associated
with treatment engagement [94].
Adolescents’ and parents’ needs and perceptions regarding
the need for and barriers to care may differ. It is
important to align adolescents’ and parents’ needs
throughout treatment [91]. Moreover, a collaborative relationship
between the family and the health provider
may increase engagement [4].
Additionally, it is important to bear in mind that the
influences of parents and family on outcomes in psychiatric
mental health contexts are poorly understood [19].
The fear of stigma related to mental health disorder
The fear of mental health-related stigma emerged in the
interview excerpts regarding the interviewee-therapist
and interviewee-peer relationships. The role of the
stigma that many adolescents associate with psychotherapy
should be noted. In the literature, stigma associated
with mental illness is most commonly reported as a potential
but fundamental attitudinal barrier to seeking
and engaging in mental health treatment among adolescents
with mental disorders [54, 62, 66–69, 95, 96].
Unlike in previous research [54], the participants in
this study did not report bad patient experiences in the
hospital. Financial or infrastructural barriers that prevent
access to care were not identified as affecting adolescents’
treatment engagement or health-seeking behaviours
with regard to mental health care.
Limitations
The authors of this paper did not explore the perceptions
of the participants’ families. Furthermore, they did
not explore how developmental factors may help or hinder
therapeutic engagement. Moreover, as in this study
the authors combined participants from across a broad
spectrum of diagnosis areas and some of the participants
could not be classified in mutually exclusive diagnosis
areas, they did not conduct different data analyses for
each diagnosis-related group. In addition, it should be
noted that the participants in this study were consensually
engaged in ongoing treatment for at least four
months at the time of the interview. Last, the researchers
tried their utmost to better assess the participants’
DMC. However, this assessment involved a degree of
uncertainty and therefore may be seen as a limitation.
Ιmplications
For the most part, the findings enhance prior studies.
However, the authors of this paper identified some nuances
that can be used to inform the development of interventions
that might contribute to enhancing
facilitation techniques and reducing barriers to mental
health care engagement among adolescents. For instance,
with the remission of symptoms, adolescents are
likely to terminate treatment prematurely. To address
this issue, therapists should highlight the long-term benefits
of therapy. Moreover, therapists should highlight
the association between these long-term benefits and the
achievement of adolescent clients’ goals and encourage
adolescent clients to consider the prospect of achieving
enhanced family well-being because of the improvement
in their mental health. Being a psychotherapist for adolescents
is challenging and is a role that needs to be
supported.
Conclusions
A number of more or less strong barriers and facilitators
were identified. Positive experiences with therapy were
reported as strong (“major”) facilitators of therapy engagement
for adolescents with mental disorders, whereas
negative experiences with therapy were reported as
strong barriers to it. Furthermore, and most importantly,
a “good” adolescent-therapist relationship was reported
as a strong facilitator, whereas negative experiences of
participants with their therapist were reported as a
strong barrier. Moreover, goals such as getting rid of
symptoms, improving personal well-being, and improving
social skills and relationships (especially with peers)
emerged as strong facilitators of therapy engagement.
Importantly, the early remission of symptoms emerged
in the study as a strong barrier to therapy engagement
for participants. Among the weaker (“minor”) perceived
facilitators were goals such as confessing to a trustworthy
person, becoming able to achieve personal expectations
and life goals, enhancing independence and
self-esteem, and developing a positive self-image. The
(active or supportive) role of family emerged as a facilitator.
The stigma related to mental health emerged as
both a (“minor”) facilitator of and barrier to therapy engagement
for participants. Friends were reported as having
a role ranging from neutral to mildly supportive.
Adolescents’ interactions with their social environment
might be a facilitator of or a barrier to their treatment
engagement.
For the most part, the findings of this study are consistent
with the findings of previous research on the
topic of interest. They enhance the findings of prior
studies. It is noteworthy that the assessed-as-decisionmaking
competent participants in this study had a
(mostly strong) positive attitude towards their treatment
engagement. Furthermore, the authors of this study
identified some nuances that, to some extent, extend the
findings of previous studies and might be used by therapists
to enhance adolescents’ treatment engagement. For
instance, considering that symptom remission is likely to
cause adolescents to terminate the treatment prematurely,
highlighting the achievement of adolescents’ future
goals as well as the prospect of achieving enhanced
family well-being because of the improvement in adolescents’
mental health may contribute to reducing the attrition
rate. This implication for therapists can be used
to guide them and lead them to assume more responsibility
and initiative for enhancing treatment engagement
in adolescents with mental disorders.