Introduction
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a significant
worldwide health concern, and is highly prevalent in
sub-Saharan Africa [1]. A recent meta-analysis showed
that the pooled prevalence of probable current PTSD
across 10 countries in sub-Saharan Africa was 22% [1].
These numbers are drastically higher than the estimated
4% prevalence of lifetime PTSD diagnosis reported in a
25-country study that included South Africa as the sole
African country [2].
Sub-Saharan Africa is also disproportionately affected
by the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Of the 38 million people
estimated to be living with HIV/AIDS worldwide, over
70% live in sub-Saharan Africa [3]. While HIV has become
a chronic illness, due to the wide spread roll out
of antiretroviral therapy (ART), and mortality from
AIDS greatly reduced [4], mental health issues remain
common among persons living with HIV (PLWH) [5].
These issues include PTSD, depression, substance use
disorders, eating disorders, and anxiety disorders, and
they commonly co-occur [6, 7]. Probable PTSD occurs
due to traumatic events experienced by the general
population like serious accidents, natural disasters, political
upheavals, and armed conflict, all which are common
in sub-Saharan Africa [1]. PLWH in sub-Saharan
Africa also may have increased risk of probable PTSD
due to HIV-related traumatic events, such as intimate
partner violence (IPV) and physical abuse [8].
Probable PTSD is associated with impaired quality of
life, poor adherence with medical interventions, and high
risk sexual behaviors [9, 10]. Among PLWH, probable
PTSD may negatively affect HIV treatment outcomes
[11, 12], adherence [13, 14], and retention in HIV care
[15]. In addition, probable PTSD is further complicated
by other common comorbid mental health disorders
such as depression, as well as substance and alcohol use
disorders [16]; among PLWH, probable PTSD commonly
co-occurs with depression and alcohol use [17,
18]. Alcohol use is highly prevalent among PLWH [19]
and may act as a coping mechanism for HIV-related
stress [20, 21] and possibly probable PTSD.
While levels of probable PTSD in sub-Saharan Africa
have been found to be high in several studies, there has
been a high degree of heterogeneity in the results [1]. In
addition, few studies have examined PTSD among
PLWH in sub-Saharan Africa, and we are unaware of
studies measuring probable PTSD among persons engaging
in heavy alcohol use in this setting. Thus, we
aimed to estimate the prevalence of probable PTSD in
PLWH engaging in heavy alcohol use in Southwestern
Uganda. Since untreated PTSD is associated with a host
of negative consequences, and heavy drinking may be a
response to PTSD which is not likely to be treated in
low-income settings, we also sought to determine
whether the level of alcohol consumption is associated
with experiencing probable PTSD, and investigated other
psycho-social factors as well. We conducted these investigations
within a study of PLWH who engage in heavy
alcohol consumption and who are co-infected with latent
tuberculosis (TB) in Southwestern Uganda.
Materials and methods
Setting and population
The present analysis uses baseline data (up to time of
this interim analysis) from an ongoing research study of
PLWH who were recruited from 4 large HIV clinics
(ranging between 5000 and 15,000 patients) in Southwestern
Uganda. The parent study, the Drinkers Intervention
to Prevent Tuberculosis (DIPT, NCT03492216)
study, is a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of economic
incentives. The incentives are designed to promote
reduced alcohol consumption by incentivizing
negative point-of-care urine tests for the short-term alcohol
biomarker, ethyl glucuronide (EtG) [22], and to
promote isoniazid (INH) adherence by incentivizing
INH-positive point-of-care urine tests, (using the Iso-
Screen test) [23], among persons who engage in heavy
alcohol consumption and are co-infected with HIV and
TB, while receiving 6 months of INH preventive therapy.
Details of the trial are described elsewhere
(NCT03492216).
Study procedures
Screening for the DIPT Study is a multi-step process.
Eligibility criteria at the initial screening step includes
adults (≥18 years old) living with HIV, who are fluent in
Runyankole or English, have been prescribed antiretroviral
therapy (ART) for at least 6 months, live within 2 h
driving distance or 60 km of the study site, have no plans
to move out of the clinic’s catchment area, have no history
of active TB or taking TB preventive medications,
and are a current self-reported drinker (prior 3 months).
Exclusion criteria includes currently taking or having
taken nevirapine (NVP) in the prior 2 weeks, those who
are prescribed anti-convulsant medications or who have
a history of recurring seizures. Eligibility further includes
being positive for heavy alcohol use via the AUDIT-C
(≥3 for women; ≥4 for men); positive for recent alcohol
use based on a urine ethyl glucuronide (EtG) dipstick
test (300 ng/mL cutoff, by Confirm Biosciences, San
Diego, California); having alanine transaminase (ALT)
and aspartate transaminase (AST) levels <2x the upper
limit of normal; being cleared of active TB (those reporting
TB symptoms); not being pregnant, and having a
positive tuberculin skin test (TST) with an induration
≥5mm 48–72 h after injection with purified protein derivative
(PPD). TST was performed by study research
assistants.
Measures
Research assistants collected data electronically with an
interviewer-administered survey. The interviews were
held in private rooms for confidentiality and were administered
in Runyankole or English according to the
participants’ language preference. The study questionnaire,
including the PTSD scale described below, was
translated into Runyankole, back-translated to English,
and the original and back-translated questionnaires were
compared to assess how accurately each item was translated.
Items found to be less accurately translated were
discussed further to arrive at translations best mirroring
the original meaning. The interview comprised of questions
on demographics, alcohol use, other substance use,
medications, general health status, and several psychosocial
measures described below.
Dependent variable - Post-traumatic stress disorder
We measured probable PTSD at baseline using the primary
care PTSD Screening Scale from the DSM-5 (PCPTSD-
5) [24]. This scale first screens for ever experiencing
a serious traumatic event, including a serious accident
or fire, a physical or sexual assault or abuse, an
earthquake or flood, a war, seeing someone being killed
or seriously injured, or having a loved one die through
homicide or suicide. Those who answer yes are then
asked about experiencing the following PTSD symptoms
in the past month: (1) having nightmares about the
event or thoughts about the event when one did not
want to, (2) trying hard not to think about the event(s),
or going out of one’s way to avoid situations that
reminded one of the event(s), (3) being constantly on
guard, watchful or easily startled, (4) feeling numb or detached
from people, activities, or one’s surroundings,
and (5) feeling guilty or unable to stop blaming oneself
or others for the event(s) or any problems the event(s)
may have caused. The sum of the ‘yes’ responses to the
5 questions was used to calculate a score of 0–5; probable
PTSD was defined as a score ≥ 3. The PC-PTSD-5
screening tool has shown strong diagnostic accuracy
[24], and can be effectively used to identify people with
probable PTSD [24, 25].
Independent variable - Alcohol use
The Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test-
Consumption (AUDIT-C), a brief screening for heavy
drinking and or active alcohol use disorder [26], was used
to assess the level of drinking; we used a version modified
to assess drinking in the prior 3 months [27, 28].
Covariates
We collected participant characteristics that included
age, sex, level of education, and marital status. We
assessed general health status using the first question of
the Medical Outcomes Study-HIV (MOS-HIV) Health
Survey that asked; In general, would you say your health
is excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor? The MOSHIV
has been used before as a validated measure of
health in Uganda [29]. We assessed lifetime (ever) and
current (past 3 months) tobacco and other substance
use. We measured social desirability reporting using the
Marlowe-Crowne Social Desirability Scale (MC-SDS)
[30] 28-item modified survey (possible range 0–28), as a
continuous variable. Social desirability was considered as
a potential confounder for probable PTSD and alcohol
use. We measured symptoms of depression using the
Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CESD)
Scale, which has 20 questions, each scaled from 0 to 3,
with a positive assessment if the score was ≥16 [31, 32].
We measured spirituality/intrinsic religiosity using the
Duke University Religion Index (DUREL scale [33]) and
also assessed religion. Religion and spirituality were of
interest as they may impact one’s response when faced
with trauma. We used intrinsic religiosity/subjective religiosity
(subscale 3) to measure the participants’ degree
of personal religious commitment and motivation in religious
matters. The scores on this scale were considered
as a continuous variable.
Statistical analyses
We included baseline data only. We described the sample
characteristics using proportions for categorical variables
and mean, median, interquartile range (IQR) for
continuous variables. We estimated Spearman correlations
between pairs of potential predictor variables to
avoid including any highly correlated variables in the
same multivariable models. We used unadjusted odds
ratios for two variables and adjusted for multiple variables
to examine associations between the predictors
and probable PTSD. The final multivariable model included
level of alcohol use, using the AUDIT-C score as
a continuous variable and any covariates that were associated
with probable PTSD in bivariate analyses at p <
0.10. We also conducted two sensitivity analyses of the
final model: 1) to examine whether sex acts as an effect
modifier for the association between alcohol use and
PTSD, we included and tested for an interaction between
participant sex and alcohol use in the adjusted
model; 2) we excluded depression to see its impact on
the association of level of alcohol use with PTSD, i.e., exploring
whether it was on the causal pathway from level
of alcohol use to probable PTSD.
Results
We screened 3293 persons with HIV from May 2018
through March 2020 (Fig. 1). Of those screened, 2611
people were eligible after the initial screening step; the
main reasons for exclusion at this step were having a
history of taking TB medications, a history of active TB,
or taking nevirapine. At the next screening step which
included urine EtG screening for recent alcohol use, and
testing to exclude elevated liver enzymes, active TB, and
pregnancy, the most common reason for exclusion was a
negative EtG test (n = 1251); 1114 people remained eligible
for PPD screening. Finally, 435 people (39%) who
tested PPD-positive, were enrolled, and participated in
the baseline survey. Four hundred twenty-one (421) participants
were included in this analysis, as 14 had missing
answers to the PTSD questions. Of the included
participants, more than two-thirds (68.2%) were male
and the median age was 40 (interquartile range [IQR]
32–47). The majority of the participants reported primary
school education or less (78.6%), and 59.4% of the
participants were either married or cohabiting. Participants
reported their religious affiliation as Catholic
(50.4%), Protestant (43%) and other denominations
(6.7%). One in five of the participants (18.3%) reported
having depressive symptoms (CES-D ≥ 16). More than
half of the participants reported their general health status
was excellent or very good (52.0%). The median
AUDIT-C score was 6 [IQR 4–8]. Nearly 40% of participants
reported having ever smoked tobacco in their
lifetime, and 12.8% of participants reported ever using
illicit drugs (Table 1). Khat (a chewed stimulant) was the
most commonly used illicit drug, reported by 10%,
marijuana was reported by 3.8%, kuba (a Ugandan informal
word for a form of smokeless tobacco) by 3.1%,
petrol sniffing by 1%; while no participants reported having
ever used other illicit drugs.
PTSD symptoms and prevalence of probable PTSD
Half (50.1%) of the participants reported ever experiencing
a traumatic event. PTSD symptoms experienced in
the past month included avoidance (28.3%), having
nightmares (27.3%), feeling on guard or easily startled
(21.6%), feeling guilty or blaming one’s self or others
(11.6%), and feeling numb or detached (10.2%). The
prevalence of probable PTSD (i.e., a score ≥ 3) among
the 421 participants was 20.7% (Table 1).
In the unadjusted analyses, AUDIT-C score (OR for
one unit increase 1.09; 95% CI: 0.99, 1.20) was associated
with PTSD, as were age (OR = 0.96; 95% CI: 0.93, 0.98),
the presence of depressive symptoms (OR = 2.37; 95%
CI: 1.37, 4.09), and intrinsic religiosity (OR for one unit
increase in score = 1.07; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.14) (p < 0.10)
(Table 2). There were also associations between lifetime
smoking (OR = 1.61; 95% CI 1.00, 2.59) and lifetime drug
use (OR = 1.76; 95% CI: 0.93, 3.33) with probable PTSD.
In adjusted analyses, self-reported level of alcohol use
was not associated with probable PTSD (adjusted OR
[AOR] for one unit increase in AUDIT-C point 1.02;
95% CI: 0.92, 1.14). Presence of depressive symptoms
(AOR = 1.89; 95% CI: 1.04, 3.44) and lifetime smoking
(AOR = 1.89; 95% CI 1.10, 3.24) were associated with
probable PTSD (Table 3). There were increased odds of
probable PTSD with higher levels of intrinsic religiosity
(AOR for one unit increase in score 1.07; 95% CI: 0.99,
1.14) and good, fair, or poor versus excellent or
very good health status (AOR = 1.54; 95% CI: 0.91, 2.61);
however, these associations were not statistically significant.
In sensitivity analyses, we found no significant
interaction between gender and AUDIT-C level, and the
association between AUDIT-C level and PTSD did not
substantially change after excluding depressive symptoms
(data not shown).
Discussion
In this analysis among PLWH who engage in heavy alcohol
consumption in southwestern Uganda, we found that
half of the participants surveyed reported experiencing a
traumatic event and 21% met criteria for probable PTSD.
We are aware of a handful of other studies that assessed
probable PTSD among PLWH in low resource settings.
The probable PTSD prevalence observed in this analysis
was similar to the 19.6% prevalence of probable PTSD
found in a study of PLWH in care in urban Uganda [34],
lower than that observed in PLWH in a study conducted
in Zimbabwe (55.3%) [35], and higher than that reported
by a study among PLWH in post-conflict northern
Uganda (8.3%) [9]. The prevalence we observed is
quite similar to the 22% prevalence reported from a
meta-analysis of data from 10 countries in sub-
Saharan Africa that included some studies among
PLWH, but did not calculate probable PTSD prevalence
by HIV status [1]. The wide range of proportions
of probable PTSD in these studies of PLWH
and in the studies included in the above metaanalysis
may be due to differences in scales used and
differing populations. This study adds to the literature
suggesting much higher rates of probable PTSD in
low-resource settings in Sub-Saharan Africa compared
to elsewhere [1, 36].
The level of alcohol use was not associated with probable
PTSD in our study; this was consistent with the
findings of a study among PLWH in a post-conflict area
in northern Uganda [9]. However, we were only including
people if they used alcohol at unhealthy levels, thus
within this restricted sample, alcohol use severity and
PTSD symptoms were not associated. But within the
general population, alcohol use has been associated with
probable PTSD [18, 37], and several theories have been
put forward to explain this relationship. Alcohol use
may lead to traumatic events that may cause probable
PTSD, or may serve as self-medication to deal with
symptoms of PTSD and therefore be a coping mechanism
[20]. Our study population was comprised only of
persons engaging in heavy drinking, so if alcohol is consumed
to cope with probable PTSD up to only a certain
level, e.g., a ceiling effect, such an effect might explain
our failure to detect an association between level of
drinking and probable PTSD. Another possible explanation
for lack of association between level of drinking
and probable PTSD in our sample could be underreporting
of PTSD symptoms due to stigma and other barriers
to admitting a mental health problem [38]. Underestimation
of prevalence of mental health disorders is also another
possible explanation for lack of significance
between alcohol use and PTSD [39].
A notable finding was the association between depressive
symptoms and probable PTSD. In our study, we
found that having symptoms of depression was associated
with probable PTSD; other studies of PLWH have
reported similar associations [9, 40]. This association
could be due to common overlapping symptoms between
depression and probable PTSD [41]. Another possible
explanation for this association could be the cooccurence
of mental health disorders [35]. One study in
South Africa that examined the prevalence and factors
associated with probable PTSD found increased prevalence
of depression among PLWH with probable PTSD
compared to those without (29% versus 7%) [42]. Individuals
with co-occurring probable PTSD and major depressive
disorder tend to display more anxiety,
depression and more PTSD symptoms and the
occurrence is related to a more severe symptom presentation
[43]. Co-existence of multiple mental disorders
among PLWH is common and has been reported [35,
42]. Higher intrinsic religiosity was also associated with
probable PTSD; other studies have reported religiosity as
a coping mechanism for probable PTSD [44]. Those
who had a history of lifetime smoking had higher odds
of probable PTSD. Smoking has been found to be highly
prevalent among patients with probable PTSD for its
mood enhancement consequences and may serve as a
coping mechanism for a cluster of negative affect, anxiety,
and depression induced by probable PTSD [44–47].
Limitations
This study was embedded in a research study that had
specific entry criteria, including requiring a purified protein
derivative positive (PPD+) result and being on ART
for at least 6 months, thus the generalizability may be
limited. We did not measure the different specific life
events that may have led to probable PTSD, so we have
an incomplete picture of what may have precipitated the
probable PTSD. The cross-sectional design limited the
findings to associations only, and we are not able to establish
cause and effect between probable PTSD and factors
that were associated with probable PTSD, such as
depression, religiosity, and smoking. Although the populations
consisted of persons with confirmed heavy alcohol
use, the level of drinking was self-reported and this
may be subject to social desirability. Social desirability in
reporting level of alcohol use has been demonstrated in
this population [48], however we attempted to correct
for this by including a social desirability scale.
Strengths
All participants who were included in this study were
confirmed to be persons who engage in heavy drinking
through ethyl glucuronide testing. Drinking status can
be particularly unreliable by self-report due to social desirability
bias, so having an objective biologic measure is
a strength for measuring this. Having four different sites,
two of which were in a rural setting, with extensive clinical
data from a relatively large care- seeking sample,
was a strength.
Conclusion
While we found that probable PTSD is common among
PLWH who engage in heavy alcohol consumption, we
did not find a relationship between higher level of alcohol
consumed and probable PTSD. The high level of
probable PTSD and its association with depression suggests
that there is a need for routine mental health
screening in this population and more studies to assess
coping mechanisms and design interventions for probable
PTSD in this population.