Introduction
The postpartum period, also known as the fourth trimester, is a time of psychological vulnerability for
women. Postpartum depression (PPD) and postpartum
post-traumatic stress disorder (PP-PTSD) are two common mental disorders that occurred during this period
[1, 2]. PPD is defined as “a major depressive episode
with peripartum onset and onset of mood symptoms occurs during pregnancy or within 4 weeks following delivery” according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorder (DSM-5) [3, 4]. The prevalence of
PPD is estimated to be 10–20% globally and higher in
low-income regions (18.7, 95% CI 17.8–19.7, in low and
middle income countries vs. 9.5, 95% CI 8.9–10.1, in
high income countries) [5–8].
In addition to PPD, postpartum post-traumatic stress
disorder (PP-PTSD), a more severe mental disorder, has
gained increased attention from researchers and clinicians worldwide [2]. High co-morbid rates of PPD and
PP-PTSD have been reported by some researchers
(90.4% of women with PP-PTSD had also experienced
PPD and 31.5% women with PPD had also experienced
PP-PTSD [2, 9]. PP-PTSD is an anxiety disorder that develops as a direct consequence of a difficult or traumatic
birth. Women may even suffer from PP-PTSD following
a successful birth [10]. Like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the three core symptoms for PP-PTSD
are re-experiencing, avoidance and numbing, and hyperarousal [10]. Although the prevalence of PP-PTSD varies
widely across studies and countries, the estimated prevalence of PP-PTSD is 5.0–8.0% of women in a community
sample 1–3 months postpartum, and the prevalence of
clinically-significant symptoms in parturients with PPPTSD ranged between 9.6 and 27.3% [10].
An abundance of evidence has shown that the health
of a baby is directly linked to the health of the mother in
the postpartum period [5, 11–13]. The association of
PPD and/or PP-PTSD with poor maternal and child outcomes is well-documented [14–18], and includes impaired mother-infant bonding, low breastfeeding rates,
an adverse effect on child development, and long-term
somatic and psychiatric morbidity [15, 18]. A prospective impact of PPD symptoms among mothers on the
social-emotional development of offspring has been reported, even 18 years after birth [19].
Despite the increased interest from researchers in
PPD and PP-PTSD globally, related studies are limited
in China. The prevalence of PPD has only been reported in several regions of China and there is wide
variability among the studies (6.7% in Hunan [20],
11.8% in Guangzhou [21], 21.4% in Fujian [22], and
23.2% in Shanghai [23]). Moreover, there is less or no
available data on PP-PTSD at present. PPD and PPPTSD co-morbidity has been reported [2, 24], but no
studies discuss the two clinical entities together in
China.
The literature on risk factors for PPD, including low
social support [25], low social economic status [26],
cigarette smoking [27], low sleep quality [28, 29], unplanned pregnancy [26], and intimate partner violence
[30] is substantial. The potential risk factors for PPPTSD include childhood sexual abuse [31], intimate
partner violence [31], low social support [32], instrumental birth, and caesarean section [33, 34]. Indeed, the
potential risk factors that have been identified and tested
in other countries or regions have not been thoroughly
investigated in China. Due to differences in cultural
values, health care policies, and welfare systems [35], risk
factors for PP-PTSD in the medical literature might not
apply to Chinese women.
In summary, the literature is not complete in providing a comprehensive understanding of PPD and PPPTSD in China. Thus, the aim of this study was to address these gaps in knowledge to achieve a better understanding of PPD and PP-PTSD in China. The objective
was to detect the prevalence of PPD and PP-PTSD, and
to examine relationships between a range of sociodemographic and obstetric variables, and PPD and PP-PTSD.
Such findings will be of great importance for raising
awareness and providing appropriate interventions for
PPD and PP-PTSD.
Methods
Design
This was a cross-sectional, descriptive study.
Setting and participant recruitment
This study was carried out between June and December
2019 in Shanghai, one of the largest cities and the economic center of China. The participants were recruited
from one of the 3-A-Class specialized hospitals, which is
also one of the earliest provincial and municipal maternal and child health centers in China with > 800 beds,
30 wards, and approximately 30,000 births annually
(Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital, 2020).
Women were recruited for the study during their routine postpartum clinical visits (usually 6–8 weeks postpartum). A convenience sample was used. Eligible
women were approached by the researcher and given
enough time to think about participation. After informed
consent was gained, the researcher guided the women to
complete an anonymous electronic questionnaire in
Chinese. Eligible participants were 6–8 weeks postpartum with no complications, > 18 years of age, and had a
singleton, live birth. To complete the online questionnaire, women needed to be fluent in Mandarin and have
access to a mobile phone. Women with a gestational
age < 28 weeks or a neonate weighing < 1500 g were
excluded.
Variable and measurements
Sociodemographic characteristics
Sociodemographic characteristics were collected from
the participants, and included questions on age (< 35
or ≥ 35 years), household registration location (Shanghai,
non-Shanghai), ethnicity (Han or non-Han), education
level (primary, secondary, bachelor, or master or above),
employment (unemployed/housewife or employed), the
only child (yes or no), cigarette smoking (yes or no), and
sleep quality (low, medium, or high), and social support.
For use in a busy clinical setting in this study, a single
question was adapted and modified from the Pittsburg
Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) to evaluate women’s sleep
quality. The question is “How did you feel about your
sleep quality in the last month?” and the response options were “low, medium, and high”.
Social support was measured using the Perceived Social Support Scale (PSSS) [36]. The PSSS is a 12-item instrument to assess support from family, friends,
relatives, and colleagues. Each item is rated on a 7-point
Likert scale ranging from 1(strongly disagree) to 7
(strongly agree). The total score ranges from12–84, with
higher scores indicating higher perceived social support.
A score between 12 and 36 indicates low support, 37–60
indicates medium support, and 61–84 indicates high
support. The Chinese version of PSSS has been tested by
Jiang [37] and was shown to have excellent reliability,
with a Cronbach’s α of 0.99. The Cronbach’s α in this
study was 0.89.
Pregnancy-related characteristics
Pregnancy-related characteristics were collected through
the electronic medical records, included parity (primiparous or multiparous), planned pregnancy (yes or no),
histories of abnormal pregnancy (yes or no), mode of
birth (normal vaginal birth, instrumental birth, or
cesarean section). According to the the Maternal Pregnancy Risk Assessment and Management Norms released by the National Health Commission of the
People’s Republic of China [38], histories of abnormal
pregnancy including miscarriage ≥3 times, history of
preterm birth, perinatal death, birth defects, history of
ectopic pregnancy, history of trophoblastic disease, history of previous pregnancy complications and comorbidities. Instrumental birth defined by when vaccum
extractor or delivery forceps were used, and cesarean
section included both planned cesarean section and
emergency cesarean section. An emergency cesarean
section was performed when there is a situation that immediately threatens the life of the mother or fetus. In
this study setting, medical indications for emergency
cesarean section included hemorrhage due to placenta
praevia, placental abruption, acute fetal distress, amniotic fluid embolism, umbilical cord prolapse, uterine
rupture, etc.
Newborn-related characteristics
Newborn-related characteristics were collected from the
electronic medical records, and included baby gender
(boy or girl), weight of the neonate (low birthweight:
1500 g–2499 g, normal birthweight: 2500 g–3999 g, or
fetal macrosomia: ≥4000 g), gestational age (preterm:
28–36+ 6 weeks, full term: 37–41+ 6 weeks, or postdates
≥42 weeks), newborn’s Apgar score in 1 min (0–3: severe
asphyxia, 4–7: mild asphyxia, 8–10: no asphyxia), Apgar
score in 5 min (0–3, severe asphyxia, 4–7, mild asphyxia,
8–10, no asphyxia), NICU admission (yes or no), incubator admission (yes or no), and diagnosis of hyperbilirubinemia (yes or no).
Psychosocial characteristics
Both PPD and PP-PTSD were collected through selfreported questionnaires.
Symptoms of PPD were measured with the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), the most
widely used tool for identifying possible PPD and has
been recommended by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) [3]. The
EPDS is a 10-item, self-report instrument, first published by Cox et al., [39, 40] and translated into over
60 languages. Each item of EPDS is rated on 4-point
range from 0 (no, not at all) to 3 (yes, most of the
time), and the total score ranges from 0 to 30, with
higher scores indicating greater severity of symptoms.
We used the Chinese version of the EPDS, which has
been validated in Chinese parturients with reliability
and validity [41], and the Cronbach’s α for EPDS in
the current study was 0.879. A cut-off score ≥ 13, with
sensitivity (86%) and specificity (78%) [40] was used
in this study.
Symptoms of PP-PTSD were measured with the
Perinatal Post-traumatic Stress Questionnaire (PPQ).
The PPQ is a self-rating scale, developed by DeMier
[42] and based on DSM-IV to identify women
suffering from PTSD symptoms at 1–18 months
postpartum. The PPQ has 14 items, with each item
scoring from 0 (not at all) to 4 (often for more than
1 month). The total score ranges from 0 to 56, with a
score ≥ 19 indicating that PP-PTSD symptoms exist.
The reliability and validity of the Chinese version of
the PPQ were tested by Zhang [43] with a Cronbach’s
α of 0.84; the test-retest reliability was 0.88. The
Cronbach’s α in this study was 0.83.
Procedure and ethical consideration
Ethical approval for the study was obtain from the hospital Ethics Committee. Researchers approached potential participants and gave a brief introduction of the
study (research purpose, potential impact, and participants’ rights). Women were informed that their participation was entirely voluntary, and whether they agreed
to participate or not did not impact their treatment. Informed consent was obtained from participants at the
beginning of the online questionnaire. All participants
were assured that their data would be kept confidential
and only accessed by the researcher.
Data analyses
Data were analyzed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS, version 22.0 for Windows). Scores
of EPDS and PPQ are presented as the mean (M) and
standard deviation (SD). To facilitate statistical analysis
and interpretation of the results, the PSSS, EPDS, and
PPQ scores were converted into categorical variables.
Frequencies and percentages are presented for all categorical variables. A chi-square test and logistic regression analysis were performed to evaluate the association
of factors related to PPD and PP-PTSD. Variables were
included into the multivariate logistic regression model
if the variables had a significant association (P ≤ 0.20) by
the χ2 test or deemed important enough clinically, despite no statistical significance. All statistics were performed using two-sided tests, and the significance level
was set at a P < 0.05.
Results
Characteristics of participants
During the research period, 1200 eligible women were
approached, and 1136 of them agreed to participate in
the study and completed the questionnaire (94.6% response rate). The characteristics of the participants are
shown in Table 1. The mean age of the participants was
30.16 ± 3.91 years. The majority of participants had a
bachelor’s degree or above (n = 961 [84.6%]), 2 participants (0.2%) reported smoking cigarettes during pregnancy, 479 participants (42.2%) had only 1 child in the
family, and 821 participants (72.3%) were primiparas.
Prevalence and factors for PPD symptoms
The mean EPDS score was 9.54 ± 4.46 (range = 3–25),
and 267 (23.5%) women had PPD symptoms with an
EPDS score ≥ 13. Based on univariate analysis (Table 1),
there was a significant difference in the prevalence of
PPD symptoms among the groups with respect to the
household registration location, ethnicity, one child families, sleep quality, social support, newborn’s Apgar score
in 1 min, newborn’s incubator admission and PP-PTSD
symptoms (P < 0.05) using a chi-square test.
In the multivariate model (Table 2), women with low
sleep quality (OR, 3.658; 95% CI, 1.995–6.706) or
medium sleep quality (OR, 1.924; 95% CI, 1.314–2.760)
were more likely to have PPD symptoms than women
with high sleep quality. Compared to women with a low
level of social support, medium or high social support
reduced the odds of PPD symptoms (OR, 0.128; 95% CI,
0.035–0.465 and OR, 0.030; 95% CI, 0.008–0.108, respectively). Women with a newborn who had incubator
admission reported a higher risk of PPD symptoms than
women without (OR, 2.109; 95CI, 1.117–3.982). The
presence of PP-PTSD symptoms increased the risk of
PPD symptoms (OR, 9.170; 95% CI, 4.773–17.617).
Prevalence and factors for PP-PTSD symptoms
The mean PPQ score was 6.30 ± 6.37 (range = 0–45),
and 69 (6.1%) women had PP-PTSD symptoms with a
PPQ score ≥ 19. Based on univariate analysis (Table 1),
there were significant differences in the prevalence of
PP-PTSD symptoms among the groups with respect to
household registration location, ethnicity, one child families, sleep quality, social support, newborn’s Apgar score
in 1 min, and PPD symptoms (P < 0.05) using a chisquare test.
In the multivariate model (Table 3), women of nonHan ethnicity were more likely to experience PP-PTSD
symptoms that women of Han ethnicity. Women with
pregnancy-induced hypertension had a higher risk of
PP-PTSD symptoms than women who did not have
pregnancy-induced hypertension (OR, 5.041; 95% CI,
1.724–14.743). Being the only child in the family and
having high social support reduced the odds of PPPTSD symptoms (OR, 0.436; 95% CI, 0.023–0.828 and
OR, 0.211; 95% CI, 0.069–0.643, respectively). The presence of PPD symptoms increased the risk of PP-PTSD
symptoms (OR, 9.807; 95% CI, 5.071–18.962).
Discussion
Prevalence of PPD and PP-PTSD symptoms
Maternal mental disorders, including PPD, anxiety, and
PP-PTSD, are common but often overlooked in China.
Due to diversity of the regional economy, culture and
policy, and heterogeneity in the prevalence of maternal
health disorders has been reported among regions of
China [20–22]. In our study, the prevalence of PPD
symptoms was 23.5%, which was within the range of 8–
26% reported in a global review article that included 58
articles (N = 37,294 women) [44], but higher than studies
reported in other areas of China [20–22]. This finding
suggests that PPD symptoms among women in Shanghai
may be high in China and in need of more attention.
One explanation is that this study conduct in Shanghai,
one of the most economically developed regions in
China, the increasing public awareness of maternal
mental health, and practice of routine screening PPD
may contribute to the increased detection of PPD
symptoms. Another possible explanation is that
Shanghai has a large amount of transient and floating
population. In this study, only 29.5% of the participant are Shanghainese (with local identification). The
high mobility of society may weaken the individual’s
identity of the residential community and reduce the
availability of social support, then results in poor
mental health.
We reported a PP-PTSD symptom prevalence of
6.1% among parturients 6–8 weeks postpartum. This
finding is similar to that reported by Yildiz et al. [14]
(5.8%, 4–6 weeks, 1.4%, 3 months; and 6.8%, 6 months)
in a review article that included 28 international studies, but less than the results reported by Radoš et al.,[45] (11.8% as measured by the City Birth Trauma
Scale). This inconsistency may be explained by the
different measures.
It is worth noting that due culture and social norm
differences, Chinese often adopt a more conservative attitude toward mental disorders and tend to conceal their
psychological discomfort [24]. This fact may contribute
to a lower rate of reporting mental disorders in China.
Influencing factors
Previous studies have shown that mental health disorders
often co-exist and affect each other [2, 24]. Suffering from
prior depression leads to a strong vulnerability for developing PP-PTSD, while prior PTSD has been shown to render women vulnerable to PPD [2]. In this study, we also
confirm that PP-PTSD is the strongest risk factor for PPD
and vice versa. Dekel et al. [2] emphasized that co-existing
PPD and PP-PTSD signify a distinct condition and should
be deemed as an independent childbirth outcome. Biological studies of non-postpartum samples have shown
that compared to depression or PTSD alone, co-morbid
depression and PTSD are associated with distinctive biomarkers [46, 47].
Social support was an important protective factor for
PPD and PP-PTSD in the current study, which is consistent with previous studies [24, 48]. Being a mother
and taking care of a newborn in the early postpartum
period can be very challenging, which involves hormonal
imbalance, blood loss, pain, and sleep deprivation [10].
Even a full-term delivery with health outcomes may be
associated with fear, loss of control, and body integrity
[10]. All of these factors result in a greater need of support from family, friends, neighbors, colleagues, and
other groups. Without adequate social support, women
will be at high risk for mental disorders. Moreover, different aspects of social support are recommended in different contexts. For example, informational and
instrumental support may be more in need at 3 weeks
postpartum, while social integration may be more in
need at 8 weeks postpartum [49].
The association between sleep quality and PPD was
confirmed in our study, which is consistent with previous studies [29, 50]. Poor sleep quality has been reported
in women from late pregnancy to even 3 years postpartum [50]. Thus, a flexible suite of interventions targeting
poor sleep quality may be a good way to solve mental
health problems [50].
Our results showed that compared to women of Han
ethnicity, women of non-Han ethnicity were more likely
to report PP-PTSD symptoms. China, it should be noted,
is one of the world’s largest multi-ethnic countries, with
55 ethnic minorities accounting for approximately 8.5%
of the overall population [51]. Compared with the Han
ethnicity, the non-Han ethnicity (ethnic minorities) is
often under greater social and economic pressure and
has more difficulties to get advanced medical resources
[51]. The health inequality in maternal and child care
may contribute to the differences in maternal mental
health status.
An interesting finding in the current study was that
being the only child in a family was a protective factor
for PP-PTSD. The majority of our participants were
born under the influence of the one-child policy in
China (1978–2015) and approximately one-half of the
participants (n = 479 [42.2%]) were the only child in the
family [52]. Compared to women with siblings, women
who were the only child in the family usually had more
parental attention, higher family support, more opportunities for a higher education, and lower economic
pressures [52]. This fact may explain the protective role
of the one child status and PP-PTSD symptoms. The
moderating role of the one child status in direct and indirect relationships between negative life events and
PTSD symptoms have been tested in non-postpartum
samples [53, 54].
Several factors, such as low education [48], cigarette
smoking [48], primiparity [48] and a history of a
cesarean section [33, 34] have been reported to be associated with PP-PTSD in some studies, but not confirmed
in our study. The reason for this discrepancy might be
differences among study populations, regions, study settings, and the measurement tools used. In the study
sample, the education level of women was relatively
high, with 84.6% having a bachelor’s degree or above
and the number of women who reported cigarette abuse
was extremely low (2 of 1143). With respect to parity,
the results are conflicting. In contrast to previous studies
[33, 34], Abedian et al., [55] reported that multiparas
had a higher rate and mean score of PP-PTSD than primiparas. This finding may be attributed to lower postpartum social support among multiparas and a higher
rate of unplanned pregnancy than primiparas [55]. More
quantitative research is needed to further evaluate these
associations.
Furthermore, newborn-related factors, only newborn’s
incubator admission had been confirmed to be related
with women’s PPD symptoms in this study, other factors
such as low birth weight, preterm birth, NICU admission, and diagnosis of hyperbilirubinemia showed no association with PPD or PP-PTSD in the current study,
which was consistent with a study of 1531 women in
Spain with PP-PTSD assessed by the PPQ [33]. A possible explanation is that women with newborn had complications may receive more meticulous care and
support from both healthcare providers and family
member. It can be assumed that compared with the occurrence of newborn complications itself, how the
mothers treat and deal with those events may have a
greater impact on her psychology. Qualitative and quantitative research can be carried out to further explore
these issues. Moreover, the newborn’s Apgar score in 1
min was correlated with PPD and PP-PTSD symptoms
based on univariate analysis but failed to reach statistical
significance base on multivariable analysis. The limited
number of newborns with mild or severe asphyxia (9/
1136) in this study may lead to the contingency of the
results.
Implications
Although there has been an extensive improvement in
prenatal care, psychological care is still largely overlooked. Undetected and untreated mental disorders may
lead to a burden on women, their family, the health system, and whole society. Considering the incidence of
disease, a routine screening of PPD for all women and PP-PTSD for women at risk during the postpartum
period was recommended. Because the comorbidity of
mental health disorders existed, for women who exhibited early signs and symptoms of mental health, a more
comprehensive and multiple screening of mental disorders is suggested. Obstetricians and midwives can play a
crucial role in the initial assessment. For women who
are identified to be at risk for PPD or PP-PTSD, prompt
referral to multidisciplinary specialists for further assessment and interventions is needed.
Limitations
Firstly, the nature of a cross-sectional study has its own
limitation. Further longitudinal studies are needed to
test how those risk factors play a role in the development or maintenance of the symptoms, and to generate
more robust and generalizable findings. Secondly, the
absence of strong measures on sleep quality may limit
conclusions on the accuracy or internal validity of the
measure. Moreover, self-report measures (EPDS and
PPQ) for possible PPD or PP-PTSD symptoms were
used in this study, which may result in a higher prevalence than clinical diagnostic criteria. Reassuringly, the
difference between clinical interviews and questionnaires
measures was not significant, and women who suffer
from PPD or PP-PTSD symptoms, but do not fulfill
diagnostic criteria may also benefit from treatment [14].
Finally, some important factors such as marital problems, pregnancy depression were not collected in this
study, which needs to be further confirmed by later
studies.
Conclusions
This study addressed some gaps in the literature and
provided a better understanding of PPD and PP-PTSD
in China, which may contribute to early detection and
early intervention. In this study, the prevalence of PPD
and PP-PTSD symptoms was 23.5 and 6.1% in Shanghai,
China, respectively, and co-existing PPD and PP-PTSD
was also confirmed in the study sample. More attention
should be paid to women who are most susceptible to
PPD and/or PP-PTSD, including those with low social
support, low sleep quality, non-Han ethnicity, and
women with siblings.