Background
Family involvement practices in adult mental health services
vary considerably, in terms of both quantity and
quality. In this study, we focus on practices towards patients
with psychotic disorders [1] and their relatives,
but our methods and findings may be relevant to all
health services dealing with severe and chronic illness.
Previous research describes how relatives of patients
with severe mental illness report a lack of adequate information,
support, and cooperation from mental health
services [2, 3]. Studies have also documented the overall
poor implementation of standardised family interventions
in mental health care [4, 5], despite evidence of
beneficial outcomes for both patients and relatives [6–
15]. Family psychoeducation (FPE) is one such structured
family intervention and a cornerstone of the
evidence-based treatment of psychotic disorders. It begins
with separate alliance sessions with patient and relative(
s) and continues with joint psychoeducative
sessions, communication skills exercises, and problemsolving
sessions [16]. Mental health services may lack the
capacity to offer such labour-intensive interventions to all
of their eligible patients, and in a few cases the intervention
is unnecessary or even contraindicated. Lack of resources,
training and capacity are examples of
organisational barriers to family involvement, but there
are also significant clinical barriers, related to the perspectives
of professionals, families, and patients [4, 17, 18].
However, clinicians should always attempt to establish
a connection with the patient’s relatives to assess their
resources, burdens and needs as informal carers, and listen
to their experiences, concerns and preferences. Relatives
should be encouraged to provide information
concerning the patient and should receive general information
on the illness, the health services, and where to
obtain further support if necessary. This basic level of
family involvement and support is important in all cases
of chronic and severe illness. In adult mental health services,
it may be viewed as the obligatory basis of a
pyramid that extends further to include family psychoeducation,
consultation, and family therapy, depending
on the families’ needs [19].
In Norway, the Directorate of Health has provided
general recommendations on family involvement and
support in the health- and care services [20]. These are
based on discussions between key stakeholders and experts,
research evidence, and ethical considerations.
They also include the legal regulations, whereby the
health- and care services are obligated to provide information,
guidance, support, and appropriate involvement
to relatives, who have a corresponding right to these services.
The Directorate has also issued specific guidelines
on the treatment of psychotic disorders, recommending
standardised family interventions as a first-line treatment
during all phases of the illness [21], in line with
comparable guidelines in other countries [22–25]. In this
article, we refer to the general and specific guidelines on
family involvement collectively as ‘the national
guidelines’.
To improve family involvement practices for persons
with psychotic disorders, we needed a systematic and
comprehensive assessment of the current level of implementation
of these national guidelines. Our hypothesis
was that the level of implementation would be low. As
part of the ‘Implementation of Family Involvement for
persons with Psychotic disorders’ – (IFIP) trial [26], we
conducted a baseline assessment of family involvement
practices in all fifteen participating community mental
health centre (CMHC) units, using three fidelity scales.
Measuring program fidelity is an established strategy in
implementation science and mental health services research,
providing a standardised assessment of evidencebased
practices [27]. In order to investigate and implement
basic family involvement and support, we developed
a novel fidelity scale. The purpose of this article is
both to present this new fidelity scale and to report the
results from the baseline assessment. To our knowledge,
this paper describes the first systematic, comprehensive
and broad investigation of family involvement practices
in CMHCs to date.
Methods
This article conforms to the ‘Strengthening the reporting
of observational studies in epidemiology (STROBE)
statement’ [28] (Additional file 1).
Study design, setting and participating sites
The investigation reported here is a cross-sectional substudy
of the IFIP trial. The trial as a whole employs a
cluster randomised controlled design, where a cluster is
defined as one or more CMHC outpatient units with the
main responsibility for treating patients with psychotic
disorders in their discreet catchment area. We accepted
all such units and invited all the sixteen CMHCs in five
counties of the South-Eastern Norway Regional Health
Authority to participate in the trial. Fifteen clinical sites
from twelve CMHCs agreed to participate, including
both rural and urban units. The main reason given for
non-participation among the remaining CMHCs was a
lack of capacity to take part in a research project. Two
of the participating sites were merged into one cluster,
but were scored separately in this baseline assessment,
which took place before randomisation. After randomisation,
half of the clusters will receive training and support
for 18 months to implement recommendations
from the national guidelines, whereas the other half will
be given training and support after the 18 months
period. The sample size was calculated for the IFIP trial
as a whole [26]. Table 1 sums up the characteristics of
the clinical sites, and demonstrates the variation in organisation
and structure among the services offered to
patients with psychotic disorders in Norway.
Instruments
In the present survey, we employed three fidelity scales
with 12–14 items. In each scale, the items are scored
from 1 to 5, where 1 equals no implementation and 5
equals full implementation. The item scores are summed
up and divided by the number of items in the respective
scale, to produce an average score.
The BFIS scale
The project group developed a 14-item fidelity scale to
measure the structure, content, penetration rate and implementation
of Basic Family Involvement and Support
(BFIS) (Additional file 2). The purpose of the scale is to
operationalise the national recommendations on family
involvement and support in the health- and care services.
We were unable to find any similar fidelity scale in
the published scientific literature.
The study protocol describes how the project group
developed the IFIP intervention, by selecting recommendations
from the national guidelines and clustering them
into the following key elements [26]:
Clinical interventions:
1. A basic level of family involvement and support.
2. Family psychoeducation (FPE) in single-family
groups.
Implementation interventions:
1. Training and guidance of health personnel.
2. A family coordinator.
3. Other implementation measures.
In parallel with that process, we identified model dimensions
and items for the BFIS scale to cover the key
elements of the IFIP intervention, apart from FPE
(Table 2). A detailed account of the IFIP intervention is
available in the study protocol [26].
While developing the BFIS scale, we sought to include
items measuring both practice and penetration rate. By
‘penetration rate’, we mean the percentage of eligible patients
and/or relatives that receive a certain invitation,
treatment, service or practice. Consequently, the scale
emphasises the importance of reaching a significant
amount of patients and relatives, while also practicing
the model accurately. Although the scale rates whether
the unit provides annual training in basic family involvement
and support (item 1), we did not require such
training of the local clinicians in order for the unit to
achieve scores on clinical practice items (items 3–13). In
addition to clinical elements, the scale measures implementation
elements to investigate the organisation and
structure of family involvement practices. Thus, we intend
the scale to give a comprehensive picture of the status
quo, as well as being able to monitor changes during
an implementation process.
The project group followed the standardised procedures
for scale development described by Bond and
colleagues [35]. One exception was that the scale had
limited piloting because of time constraints. Some
items were therefore eliminated or changed after the
baseline data were collected. Where additional data
and clarifications were required to adjust the scores,
fidelity assessors did follow-up interviews with local
personnel by phone. The baseline scores and reports
were adjusted a second time after the fidelity assessments
at 6 months follow-up, which resulted in some
minor changes to the scale. Only the consensus
scores were adjusted, in order not to interfere with
the calculation of interrater reliability, except where
eliminated items resulted in changes to the individual
scores.
The FPE scale and the GOI scale
The 14-item Family Psychoeducation Fidelity Assessment
(FPE) scale was used to measure the practice and
content of FPE. This scale has demonstrated acceptable
psychometric properties in previous trials, including in a
Norwegian translation and context [36, 37]. The 12-item
General Organizational Index (GOI) scale provided a
complementary assessment of FPE’s integration in the
unit’s practice, by measuring individualisation, quality
improvement, program philosophy, and penetration
rate. A recent study reported acceptable psychometric
properties of the GOI scale, when used to assess the
implementation of Illness Management and Recovery
in Norway [38]. In both scales, an average score of 4
or above indicates adequate implementation, whereas
scores below 4 signals low implementation. By convention,
the sites that did not offer FPE to patients
and their families were scored 1 on all items in the
FPE scale and GOI. Item 7: ‘prodromal signs’ in the
FPE scale was not scored, since the units in question
treated patients with an established or tentative diagnosis
of psychotic disorder, rather than prodromal or
Ultra High Risk states.
Data collection
The clinical units were recruited during the three first
quarters of 2018, and baseline assessments took place
during November and December that same year.
Trained fidelity assessors visited each unit and measured
fidelity by performing structured interviews with leaders,
clinicians and resource-persons, and by reviewing written
material such as procedures, checklists, information
leaflets, invitation letters, and didactic material. The
head of the unit (department-, section- or team leader)
was interviewed individually, whereas team leaders (if
applicable), clinicians, and resource-persons (if applicable)
were interviewed in separate or combined groups
of 2–5 persons, with a total of 2–4 interviews of 1–1,5 h
length at each site. We also collected organisational data
(Table 1).
At each site, the two fidelity assessors first scored
all items independently and then reached a consensus
score for each item. The assessors, and the pairing of
them, varied between sites. They were drawn from a
pool of five researchers, who were also health professionals,
but none of them worked at the clinical sites
in the study. We exclusively assessed the units’ practice
towards patients with psychotic disorders and
their relatives. The fidelity assessors prepared a detailed
report for each site to accompany the scores.
Scores and reports were sent to the units in the
intervention arm after randomisation, for them to
correct any misunderstandings or misconceptions, and
to adjust scores if necessary. However, none of the
units gave any feedback that resulted in a score adjustment.
The sites in the control arm did not receive
their scores or reports, to avoid influencing their
practice during the intervention period.
Data analysis
We examined item distributions for all three scales, including
means, ranges, standard deviations and number
of sites achieving low, adequate and full implementation
of the various items. Based on organisational data from
the clinical sites, we calculated the percentage of patients
with psychotic disorders who had received FPE.
For the BFIS scale, we calculated the percentage of
exact agreement for each item. We also investigated
interrater reliability (IRR) by calculating the Intraclass
Correlation Coefficient (ICC) for total mean fidelity
and for each item, using a one-way random effects
analysis of variance model for agreement
between two assessors. By employing the same model,
we calculated the ICC for the FPE scale and the GOI
scale. To investigate a possible correlation, between
whether the units offered FPE and the BFIS scale
scores, we employed an independent samples Mann-
Whitney U test. All data analyses were carried out
using SPSS version 26.
Results
Basic family involvement and support
Item distributions and interrater reliability for the BFIS
scale are listed in Table 3. The mean BFIS score in fifteen
sites was 2.33, ranging from 1.57 to 3.79. None of
the sites had annual training of their health professionals
in family involvement and support. Personnel had access
to supervision on the subject in eleven of the sites (item
1). Only four sites had health professionals designated to
coordinate family involvement and support (item 2).
Their responsibilities varied and one of them did not
have allocated time to the task. In accordance with the
law, all units had procedures and health personnel responsible
for taking care of children as next of kin.
Overall, the units routinely identified the patients’ next
of kin and discussed family involvement with most of
the patients (items 5 and 7). None of the units had routines
to provide written information to patients and relatives
about useful websites, support groups and
resources, and only one site routinely provided written
information about their unit’s family involvement (item
2). Five units offered information meetings/ psychoeducative
seminars for relatives, but the recruitment strategies
to, and attendance of, these courses varied between
the units (item 12).
There was a large variation in practices between the
units when it came to inviting patients and relatives to a
conversation with personnel, together and/or separately,
to discuss family involvement (items 6, 8, 9 and 10).
Only two of the units used checklists to standardise the
content of such conversations, and the topics usually
covered varied between clinicians and between sites
(items 3 and 4). The use of crisis/coping plans (item 11)
and documentation of family involvement in the patients’
discharge report (item 13) also varied
considerably.
There were small differences in average scores on several
items, between the units who offered FPE and those
who did not. To investigate any correlation between the
BFIS scores and the units’ FPE status, we employed an
independent samples Mann-Whitney U Test with twotailed
significance level α = 0.05. For the average BFIS
scores we calculated U = 27.5 and p = 0.955. P-values for
individual items varied greatly, from p = 1.0 (items 1, 3, 5
and 14) to p = 0.054 (item 13). Thus, no statistically significant
correlation was found.
Family psychoeducation
Eight of fifteen sites offered FPE to patients with psychotic
disorders and their relatives. The percentage of patients
with psychotic disorders who had received or were
receiving FPE in all units was 4.2%, ranging from 0 to
17.5% between sites. In the sites that offered FPE, the
percentage was 9.4%, ranging from 1.9 to 17.5%. One
unit offered both FPE and another family intervention
inspired by Open Dialogue [39], but the remaining seven
did not provide such interventions to their patients at
all.
Item distributions for the FPE and GOI scales are
listed in Tables 4 and 5. The mean fidelity score on the
FPE scale was 2.78, ranging from 1.00 to 4.77. However,
the distribution was markedly bimodal, since the seven
units who did not offer FPE were scored 1 on all items.
In the eight sites that did offer FPE, the mean score was
4.34, ranging from 4.00 to 4.77, showing that all of them
practiced the model with adequate fidelity. Only four
sites had appointed personnel to coordinate FPE activities
(item 1). In general, clinicians remained true to the
structure and content of the model (items 2–6, 8, 9 and
11–13), but the use of multimedia sources varied (item
10). Active recruitment of patients and relatives to FPE
was generally low, with an average fidelity score of 2.5 in
the sites that offered FPE (item 14).
A similar tendency was seen in the GOI scores, where
only one unit had a standardised form of eligibility identification
(item 2) and none of them had provided FPE
to more than 20% of eligible patients (item 3). Our
premise when rating item 3 was that all patients with
psychotic disorders were eligible to receive FPE, which is
probably an overestimate. The average GOI score in all
15 sites was 1.78, ranging from 1.00 to 3.00. Among the
eight sites who had implemented FPE, the average GOI
score was 2.46, ranging from 1.92 to 3.00, indicating that
none of these had achieved an adequate integration of
FPE in their organisation.
Psychometric properties
From the present survey in 15 sites, we have calculated
the percentage of exact agreement and the intra-cluster
correlation coefficient (ICC) for each item, and the mean
total fidelity of the BFIS scale (Table 3). These preliminary
measures of IRR indicate a high level of agreement
between raters, with an ICC of 0.99 for mean total
fidelity.
Concerning the FPE scale, we calculated an ICC of
0.93 for mean total fidelity, whereas the GOI scale had
an ICC of 0.96. Both numbers suggest a high level of
agreement between raters. These calculations were only
based on the results from the eight sites that offered
FPE, because including the unanimous scores from the
units who did not offer FPE would produce an artificially
high correlation.
Discussion
Basic family involvement and support
The results from this study demonstrate a general lack
of structures and standard procedures in Norwegian
CMHCs, when it comes to family involvement and support
for persons with psychotic disorders.
Several units had local resource persons with special
competence in family involvement, who worked hard to
increase the awareness and recognition of their field.
During this survey, the project group took note of many
exemplary practices that could inspire other units and
clinicians in the subsequent phases of the IFIP trial.
Some of the clinical sites had established local structures
and routines for basic family involvement and support,
and several had information meetings or other support
measures for relatives.
In most units however, contact with and involvement
of relatives appeared both random and inadequate, depending
highly on the practice of the patient’s clinician.
As such, the results of this systematic survey of mental
health services is consistent with the findings of previous
research on relatives’ experiences [2, 3]. The poor organisation
of family involvement and support for adult relatives
contrasted distinctly with the legally mandated
structures, procedures and responsibilities for children
as next of kin. Nearly all the units in our survey had
personnel responsible for taking care of children as next
of kin and written procedures on this subject, which
were widely used among the remaining personnel. The
legislation concerning children as next of kin was passed
in 2009, whereas the guidelines on family involvement in
the health- and care services were published in 2017.
The differences in implementation rates may be primarily
due to legal incentives (and sanctions) being more
important to administrators than following guidelines,
but also related to the longer time span and family work
towards children receiving more attention. In any case,
it shows that improvement in CMHCs’ family work is
feasible with appropriate focus, support, and incentives.
Several clinicians had frequent contact with relatives
by phone, and the BFIS scale does not include the penetration
rate of such calls. The low percentage of relatives
who were invited to a conversation at the CMHC, with
or without the patient present, indicate that such
conversations are not part of the standard approach in
most units. The variable use of crisis plans and infrequent
documentation of family involvement in the patients’
discharge reports may disrupt the continuity of
care that is vital to this patient group and their next of
kin.
The fact that none of the units had annual training of
their clinical personnel in family involvement is a particularly
important finding, since the education of health
professionals in Norway have generally given limited attention
to this subject. It therefore requires substantial
effort within the health services to implement family involvement
as a standard approach among clinicians.
There may be several reasons why family involvement
has received such little attention, in both training
and implementation in Norwegian mental
healthcare. The research literature suggest that poor
implementation is a problem internationally, and that
barriers to family involvement exist on multiple levels.
On a system level, these include a lack of financial incentives
and explicit prioritization from managers and
politicians, organisational cultures and paradigms, attitudes
of leaders and staff towards evidence-based
practices in general and/or family involvement in particular,
inter-professional struggles, and poor access to
training and supervision [4, 17, 18]. As part of the
IFIP trial, we aim to investigate barriers to and facilitators
for family involvement practices on a clinical,
organisational and political level in the Norwegian
context, trough qualitative methods.
The BFIS scale
The present model for basic family involvement and
support is novel and has not yet been investigated scientifically
as a whole. It consists of elements whose rationale
varies from scientific evidence to legal frameworks
and rights, as well as moral obligations. This reflects the
composite nature of the guidelines that the model is
based on. As such, the BFIS fidelity scale is one of the
first instruments of its kind to measure the implementation
of guidelines and practices that are not exclusively
evidence-based. We would argue that this new application
of the fidelity methodology is justified, since many
practices within mental health services are based on predominantly
ethical and/or legal considerations, rather
than expectations of treatment effect. The scale should
also be appropriate to measure basic family involvement
and support for patients with other forms of severe mental
illness. Perhaps, with some modifications, it may be
suitable for health services towards other patient groups
with chronic and severe illness.
Concerning psychometric properties, the scale shows
promising IRR, appears to have relevant content and
captures variability in practice, but we cannot yet establish
its benchmark value. The percentage of exact agreement
for each item was generally high, but the lack of
standard procedures and high variability among practitioners
complicated the scoring of some items. The fact
that units who offered FPE did not score significantly
better or worse on the BFIS scale, indicates that the scale
measures practices that are independent of FPE, which
may support the introduction of the scale. The Mann-
Whitney U test was appropriate, because of the low sample
size and the irregular distribution of the data. However,
given the low sample size and generally low power
of non-parametric tests, this lack of significant correlation
should be interpreted with caution.
Family psychoeducation
The Norwegian guidelines recommending structured
family interventions as a first-line treatment for persons
with psychotic disorders were published in 2013,
and the evidence supporting such interventions has
been available for much longer. Yet, only 4.2% of the
patients with psychotic disorders in our participating
units had received FPE, and nearly half of the sites
did not offer FPE or any family intervention at all.
These findings are consistent with the international
research literature [4, 5].
In the units who did provide FPE, the penetration
rate was low and the majority of sites lacked structures
and procedures to identify and recruit eligible
patients, and to coordinate FPE activities. However,
the quality of the FPE provided was consistently high,
suggesting that the training and supervision the units
had received from The Early Intervention in Psychosis
Advisory Unit for South East Norway (TIPS Sør-Øst)
was excellent. Yet, training and guidance in FPE by
itself did not appear sufficient to implement the intervention
as an integrated part of the unit’s organisation
and practice. This is revealed by the poor GOI
scores, which illustrate the benefits of using scales
that not only measure practice and content, but also
organisation, implementation and individualisation
[38]. The BFIS scale is an attempt to combine these
elements in a single instrument.
Strengths and limitations
One advantage of fidelity measurements is the standardised
and structured assessment of all units in a sample
[27]. A weakness of this approach is that one does not
investigate practices that are not addressed by the instruments.
However, in our fidelity reports we recorded
if the units had any family involvement practices that
our instruments failed to credit, and these were few.
We could have included additional data sources, such
as observations of FPE-sessions and interviews with patients
and relatives. A review of randomly chosen patient
records at each site would have strengthened the validity
of our survey, particularly of the penetration rate items.
Unfortunately, gaining access to the patient record software
proved so legally complicated that this endeavour
had to be abandoned.
When it comes to the representability of the sample,
we only included units from the southeast of Norway
and we exclusively measured their practice towards patients
with psychotic disorders and their relatives. In
terms of external validity, these findings do not necessarily
reflect the situation in other regions of the country
and/or practice towards other patient groups. Yet, the
sample of clinical units in our investigation include both
urban and rural sites and serves approximately 25% percent
of the Norwegian population. Consequently, our
survey measures specialist health services towards a large
part of this patient group and their relatives in Norway.
We have little reason to believe that the clinical units’
family involvement practices towards other patient
groups with severe mental illness were more systematic
or of higher quality.
The recruitment of clinical units, both in terms of
sample size and type of units, was made considering the
trial as whole, and not specifically this cross-sectional
sub-study. It could be argued that units who did not
offer FPE had greater incentives to join our research
project, which could lead to a form of selection bias.
However, most of the CMHCs in the region agreed to
participate, and the ratio of units who offered FPE versus
those who did not was the same among participant and
non-participant CMHCs.Conclusions
This cross-sectional assessment confirmed our hypothesis;
that the uptake of the national guidelines on family
involvement for persons with psychotic disorders in
Norwegian CMHCs was generally poor. Few patients
and relatives had received FPE, which is a key ingredient
in the evidence-based treatment for these patients. However,
the quality of FPE was consistently high, when provided.
Our novel fidelity scale, which measures basic
family involvement and support, shows promising preliminary
psychometric properties and may prove a useful
tool to improve the quality of health services. There is a
need to increase the implementation and penetration
rate of family involvement practices for patients with
psychotic disorders and their relatives in Norway.