Background
Studying public mental health through social media is a
burgeoning area of research [1, 2] which is changing the
way in which we understand mental health indicators,
such as social isolation and suicidality, in the general
population [3, 4]. Direct contact on social media has enabled
sharing of concerns beyond the boundaries of
face-to-face interactions and connecting people who
would otherwise not have communicated [5]. In 2018, a
study of more than 4000 UK and US adults found that
over 80% were using one or more social networking sites
[6], making it possible to study population-level disclosure
of mental health symptoms.
Reddit is a popular public online forum covering a diverse
range of topics, featuring a user-voting system to
rank posts, comments, and links within its subcommunities
(known as subreddits). Most Reddit users
(54%) come from the USA, with the UK ranking second
and Canada third [7]. SuicideWatch is a subreddit where
people post about their suicidal thoughts (or about
suicide-related issues regarding someone they know) to
receive feedback and support from the community and
it should be emphasised that posts do not necessarily reflect
authorship by people experiencing suicidal ideation.
Nevertheless, because this is a highly sensitive topic, human
moderators make sure that comments left for a
post are not abusive [8]. Work to date includes attempts
to automatically identify helpful comments [8] and
changes in posting activity after high-profile suicides [9].
Weekly variation in suicide mortality has been investigated
in many studies in both the US and UK, with the
majority reporting peaks on Mondays declining to weekend
lows [10–12], although others have noted a peak in
the middle of the week with higher suicide rates on
Wednesdays [13]. Diurnal patterns appear to vary by
gender, age, and chronological time period, with one
Italian study showing peaks in both suicide attempts and
deaths in the morning and early afternoon [14]. However
findings may differ by country and subpopulation, as indicated
by a recent study national data from 1974 to
2014 in Japan [15]. This showed suicide by middle-aged
males was most frequent in the early morning especially
on Mondays after the end of Japan’s high growth period.
Large midnight peaks in suicide deaths were also observed
among young and middle-aged males. The proportion
of early morning suicide deaths by young and
middle-aged males increased as the country’s unemployment
rose. Females and elderly males were more likely
to die by suicide during the day than at night. Interestingly
the authors note the limitation that they studied
the time of death, and of course this will be later than
the attempt, and indeed the antecedent suicidal crisis
when social media posting might occur.
We investigated whether there are similar weekly and
daily trends in the way that Reddit is used by those posting
to SuicideWatch with their public user accounts, and with
anonymous accounts: so-called ‘throwaway accounts’,
(which we shall term ‘anonymous SW’). These accounts
may reveal more sensitive information and socially unacceptable
feelings owing to their anonymity [16]. We
compared how these posting behaviours are different from
general Reddit use by all users, and by those authors who
post with identifiers on SuicideWatch.
Methods
Sample
We acquired a complete, publicly available, Reddit data
dump for the period between December 2008 and August
2015 (https://redd.it/3mg812). The acquired and
indexed dataset contains 196 million posts across thousands
of different fora (subreddits). Using a set of carefully
curated keywords related to mental health [17], we
had previously identified subreddits associated with
mental health [18, 19]. The subreddit data used in this
study is from SuicideWatch (90,518 posts from 42,723
authors), a forum dedicated to the online support of
users with suicidal ideation, or who know someone at
risk. All posts to SuicideWatch in the specified timeframe
were analysed and no exclusion criteria were applied.
We refer to this dataset as ‘SW’ hereafter. Overall,
Reddit users comprise younger males, with poll data
showing 64% of Reddit users are between 18 and 29
years of age and 69% of American Reddit users are male
[7]. However Reddit users only provide a username,
password and email address to sign up, so we cannot
evaluate the age and sex distribution of Reddit authors
contributing posts to the datasets in our study, nor study
changes in demographics over time.
A subset of this subreddit is comprised of authors that
contain the keyword ‘throw’, who can be considered to
have ‘anonymous SW accounts’ (5882 authors, 13.8% of
the SW authors). The use of the keyword ‘throw’ has
been shown to be a high precision technique for identifying
anonymous accounts [16, 20]. Anonymous accounts
are multiple temporary identities permitted by
Reddit. They are perceived to retain anonymity by many
users and allow authors to hide their overall activity in
other subreddits [16]. It was postulated that these posts
might exhibit different patterns compared to those with
author-identifiers. This data subset is referred to as ‘Anonymous
SW’ hereafter.
To identify potential control datasets, we extracted the
author-identifiers in SW and looked up their posts elsewhere,
excluding their posts to other mental healthrelated
subreddits [18]. We selected AskReddit, a subreddit
which contains posts about a multitude of topics
and with the highest number of subscribers (over 15
million, and 1.4 million authors in our data): http://
redditmetrics.com/r/AskReddit. It was also the most
popular subreddit among the SW authors (66,934 posts
and 8065 authors).
We identified two control datasets: (i) AskReddit posts
from all AskReddit authors (‘AR’) and (ii) the subset of
AskReddit which were posted by SW authors, referred
to as AskReddit-SW author posts (and the dataset as
‘AR-SW’) hereafter. (Refer to GitHub repository -
https://github.com/KCL-Health-NLP/temporal_
variation_sw - for a more detailed description of the data
analysis process).
Table 1 summarizes the number of post authors and
numbers of posts in the four datasets: Anonymous SW
is a subgroup of SW and AR-SW is a subgroup of AR.
The “posts per author” column was calculated for account
users with unique IDs. There were only n = 108
deleted posts in the dataset and we are unable to deduce
the number of unique deleted authors.
Datasets
To determine the timing of post publication, we leveraged
a specific field found within each post that records
the local time of the author, as documented by the JSON
API of Reddit (see field “created” at https://github.com/
reddit/reddit/wiki/JSON). Furthermore, in order to aggregate
and extract the temporal characteristics of the
posting behaviour, we considered a time window of 1
week. Starting from Monday through Sunday, we extracted
the timestamp of posts and kept both hour of
the day and day of the week according to the author’s
local time. In order to address weeks where limited activity
occurred (and might therefore introduce measurement
error as the signal might become skewed), we only
kept weeks during which more than 200 posts had been
published. This led to a reduction of between 0.0001%
(AskReddit) and 0.55% (Anonymous SW) of the overall
posts made. The final number of weekly observations
varied for each data source, being 341 weeks for SW,
246 for Anonymous SW, 391 weeks for AskReddit and
354 weeks for AskReddit (SW-authors).
For each weekly observation, we counted the number
of posts made in the corresponding time frames (e.g. for
the “hour of the day” analysis, we counted posts made
during each hour, between minute 00 to minute 59 in all
7 days of the week, and for the “day of the week” analysis
we counted posts made on each different day). As the
total number of observations differed in each dataset
over the entire period (generally increasing in number
over time), it was necessary to produce normalised figures.
We produced the percentages for each week using
the total number of posts made by the corresponding set
of authors in the observed week. For instance, a percentage
value of 5% for AskReddit for a particular hour of
the day refers to the percentage of the total number of
posts on AskReddit during that hour of the day throughout
the whole of the “observed week”.
Statistical analyses
We explored temporal associations of days of the week
and hours of the day between SW, AskReddit, AskReddit
(SW-authors) and Anonymous SW with the use of fractional
response regression models, which are appropriate
to use when the outcome of interest is a proportion
which is bounded between 0 and 1 (e.g. proportion of
posts in SW) [21]. We chose fractional logistic regression
models, as they can tackle inference issues which is
a possibility with values close to the boundaries. Generalised
additive models (GAMs) [22] were also employed
to test any non-linear associations of days of the week
and hours of the day between SW and the three other
datasets. GAMs are flexible extensions of Generalized
Linear Models (GLMs). In GAM the link function includes
flexible functions of smoothing splines, where the
amount of smoothing applied to each predictor is controlled
by the user according to a quantity known as the
equivalent degrees of freedom (df). We used a Poisson
additive model for these data and allow each function to
have 3 degrees of freedom (df) but also chose values 1, 3
and 10.
We also estimated the mean difference in proportions
(MD) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (95%
CI) of SW compared to AskReddit and AskReddit (SWauthors)
for six-hour intervals within a 24-h day -
chosen a priori as early hours of the morning (midnight
to 05:59 h), morning (06:00–11:59 h), afternoon (noon-
17:59 h) and night (18:00–23.59 h) - for the complete
time period under study.
Results
SW authors had temporary identities (anonymous accounts)
in 5882/42,723 (13.8%) cases.
It is immediately apparent in Table 1 that AR-SW authors
posted disproportionally higher numbers of posts
(median n = 3; compared to n = 1 posts for authors in all
other datasets). However, the outcome of Mann-
Whitney U tests between each pair of datasets was p <
0.001, indicating strong disparity between each pairwise
comparison, with anonymous SW authors posting the
least per author, followed by SW authors, then AR and
highest levels of posting by AR-SW authors.
Day of the week results
Figure 1 illustrates the peak in SW posts on Mondays
(solid line): mean 15.61% (95%CI 15.57–15.65); compared
to mean 14.78% (95%CI 14.75–14.82) posts for
AskReddit authors (dashed line). Whereas the peak in
AskReddit posts occurred on Wednesday: mean 15.67%
(95%CI 15.59–15.75). The mean percentage of posts was
lowest on Saturdays for both source subreddits: mean
13.47% (95%CI 13.38–13.56) for SW compared to mean
11.82% (95%CI 11.79–11.85) for AskReddit authors. For
clarity only the trajectory of mean percentages of posts
for SW and AskReddit are summarised in the figure
(Anonymous SW followed a similar trajectory to SW
and AskReddit (SW-authors) followed the AskReddit
trend. These have been omitted from Fig. 1 to allow the
overall trends to be more clearly observed).
Users of SW had the highest probability of posting to
this subreddit on Mondays compared to all other days of
the week (ratios ranged from 1.025 (95%CI: 1.020–
1.030) to 1.189 (95% CI: 1.180–1.198); all p ≤ 0.001 - see
Online Table 1). They also showed higher probability of
posting on Tuesdays compared all other days of the
week, apart from Monday (ratios ranged from 1.106
(95%CI: 1.097–1.115) to 1.160 (95% CI: 1.151–1.170); all
p ≤ 0.001 - see Online Table 1). There was no evidence
for a difference between posts on SW on Wednesdays
compared to Thursday as the baseline. However
Wednesdays compared to Friday, Saturday and Sunday
showed elevated ratios. Thursdays compared to Friday,
Saturday and Sunday had similar estimates. Fridays compared
to Saturday has a slightly elevated ratio of probability
1.021 (95% CI: 1.011–1.032) p ≤ 0.001, and
compared to Sundays had a lower ratio of probability
0.988 (95% CI: 0.978–0.999) p = 0.029. Saturday also
showed a lower ratio of probability compared to Sunday
0.968 (95% CI: 0.958–0.977) p ≤ 0.001. (Refer to Online
Table 1 for all ratios of probability and 95% CIs by day
of the week).
Time of the day results
We explored if there was a non-linear association between
the timing of Reddit posts by hours of the day,
when comparing each of the four different datasets with
each other, using generalised additive (GAM) models.
Within each dataset, non-linear associations were not
observed between suicide related posts and hours of the
day (p-values > 0.05) (this is something expected from
observation of the descriptive graphs, as the four dataset
trajectories are following the same hourly pattern in
Fig. 2).
Figure 2 shows a clear diurnal variation in the distribution
of SW posts, with an upward trend visible in the
early hours of the morning (2:00–5:00 h; highest mean
percentage at 5:00 h; 6.32, 95%CI (6.26–6.37%)), and a
subsequent decrease to a trough in late morning / early
afternoon (11:00–14:00 h; lowest mean percentage at
12noon; 2.16, 95%CI (2.15–2.17%)), whereas the same
authors made the highest volume of posts on AskReddit
between 20:00–23:00 h (highest mean percentage at 23:
00 h; 5.86, 95%CI (5.79–5.93%)), which is also the time
period when all AskReddit authors are more likely to
post (highest mean percentage at 21:00 h; 5.49, 95%CI
(5.48–5.51%)).
The mean percentage of posts in SW was higher between
midnight and noon and lower between noon and
midnight expressed as a ratio of both AskReddit control
groups (as shown in Online Figure 1). The six-hour
interval when the ratio of SW posts far exceeded the
AskReddit posting level was between 6 am-12 pm.
Discussion
We found strong evidence for variation by day of the
week and time of day for posts by Reddit-users to the
subreddit SW, both absolute and when compared to the
same authors’ activity on the most popular ‘non-mental
health’ subreddit AskReddit as well as all Reddit-users’
activity on AskReddit.
Overall, higher levels of posting in AskReddit by SW
authors could indicate that those posting to SW are
higher intensity users of the Reddit platform, posting to
other subreddits too, and finding it helpful to seek support
via the SW forum when in crisis.
Monday was associated with the highest SW posting
levels compared to other days of the week. The trend
over weekly cycles closely follows weekly suicide risk
patterns reported by most previous studies, with a peak
on Monday, a decreasing risk over the course of the
week [23], and the lowest incidence at the weekends
[24]. Therefore the weekly cycle analysis provides face
validity that relevant social media postings may track the
days most associated with suicide risk.
The diurnal variation in SW posting that we present is
as markedly compelling as a biological phenomenon
such as diurnal cycling of cortisol levels – a hormone
well-known for its effect on mood [25]. Most strikingly
the volume of SW Reddit posts peak immediately prior
to hours of the day when suicide attempts and suicide
incidence are at their highest in many countries. This
raises the possibility that posting at such times could be
averting a crisis for some individuals, or that this could
be a time when interventions might be made more
accessible.
Given that the timing of most SW posts is in the
early hours of the morning (peak 05:00 h), contrasting
with the highest volume of AskReddit posts being in
the late evening (peak 21:00 h), sleep disturbance may
represent one potential modifiable risk factor both for
suicidal thoughts being expressed through social
media and suicidal behaviours [26, 27]. From a clinical
standpoint, patients experiencing insomnia in the
early hours are much more able to identify when they
have an issue with their sleep [28] and can be more
willing to reveal this to their doctors than a potential
mental health concern [29]. Given that greater social
media use has been shown to be significantly associated
with disturbed sleep [30, 31] as well as anxiety,
depression and low self-esteem [32, 33] this may be a
useful emerging area when recording the history of
patients with a mental health issue. Therefore reducing
specific night-time social media use might be a
focus of targeted psychological interventions for some
individuals.
It would seem likely therefore that there are several
potential competing hypotheses as to the meaning of the
results. For example: in the early hours of the morning
(1) suicidal individuals are communicating their suicidal
plan or intent, (2) are using social media as a means of
distraction, social engagement, or help-seeking to avert a
potential crisis, (3) are posting because those at risk of
suicide often have mental health issues characterised by
circadian rhythm dysfunction, leading to poor nocturnal
sleep, (4) engage with the Reddit platform for some
other reason, or (5) a combinations of these or other factors.
Recommendations for how and whether to intervene
will differ depending on which of these is occurring
and it will likely vary by different groups within the
population.
In their work, Pavalanathan and De Choudhury (2015)
report a 9% presence of anonymous authors, whereas in
our dataset we observed a presence of almost 14%
(5882/42,723) suggesting more temporary identities are
created to discuss thoughts or emotions around suicide.
The authors may be revealing more sensitive or personal
information and socially unacceptable feelings reflected
in their anonymity.
Strengths and limitations
The key strengths of this study are the clear weekly and
diurnal rhythms revealed simply using the timing of
postings of Reddit data. No pre-processing steps were
required, nor did the semantic content of the posts have
to be analysed for these to be recognised as strong signals,
similar to those observed for socialising propensity
using online gaming data, which showed the highest
probability of making social connections at night (between
20:00 h and midnight) [34].
That said, we do not gain knowledge about factors
underlying people’s choices in posting to the subreddit
SW. Only the timing of the posts was analysed, not the
content, and not all posts were necessarily ‘suicide-related’.
If someone posted something not suicide-risk related
(e.g. information about a support service), this
would have been included in the same way as a post
reaching out for support in a suicidal crisis. The data
used in our study were also based on the time of posting
and therefore assume that the author is writing contemporaneously.
Content analyses might reveal that different
lexicon and linguistic attributes were used at different
times and this could be a useful extension to the study.
It was not possible to investigate author characteristics
(e.g. age or sex) owing to the anonymity of the data and
therefore it is not possible to ascertain the representativeness
of the sample with regard to all Reddit users.
A recent study of the Reddit data dump [35] has found
substantial missing observations, which could affect research
validity in this and all other publicly crawled social
media datasets. However this is more likely to be an
issue when user histories are studied or network analysis
is conducted, rather than simply studying the counts
and timing of posts. Furthermore we could not investigate
associations between posts and mental health outcomes
or suicide outcomes, so the results are observing
a pattern of association without directly linking it with
the outcome.
The analysis we present is an aggregate over a long
period of time across a large set of users, which reveals a
clear overall pattern for the cohort of users. Individual
patterns may of course differ enormously, particularly as
many users publish just a few posts in this subreddit
(which is intended for peer support during a crisis). We
only studied original posts, not ‘comment’ postings from
users, so multiple supportive comment posts in the same
visit would not impact the aggregate results. Any analysis
on an individual level would require a range of
other considerations, including ethical ones, which were
outside the scope of this study.
Conclusions
Given comments on posts from users expressing suicidal
thoughts can be written from any part of the world at
any time, moderating SW and other sensitive fora in a
timely manner can be challenging. However at a national
level in countries with one time zone, (e.g. the UK), or
at a State or regional level for countries with multiple
time zones, (e.g. the USA or Russia), it is entirely plausible
to envisage providing higher levels of moderation on
social media at times of increased posting about suicidality
and potentially developing links to online interventions
or sources of support [36]. There is likely to be
substantial variability between countries in terms of
sources of moderators (e.g. from the voluntary/charitable
sector, from support agencies) and it would be overly
speculative and beyond the scope of this paper to make
specific recommendations about the agency who should
provide moderation/support, although research into
what constitutes a helpful comment from a suicide prevention
perspective is ongoing [8]. Also owing to the
need for assured confidentiality on such internet fora,
the potential association between SW posts and suicide
attempts is unlikely to be conclusively investigated and
any intervention would have to be justifiable as good
practice.
In a societal context, the clear weekly and diurnal
rhythms of propensity of posting to SW should enable
improved access to online support or targeted messages
during the temporal window in which there is an increased
number of SW posts as identified in this study.
Developed carefully these have the capacity to target
otherwise unreachable populations and broker suicide
prevention messaging and interventions when needed
most.