Background
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a widely prevalent
psychiatric disease that is characterized by the presence of
one or two core symptoms, obsessions and compulsions
[1]. This chronic and debilitating disease is as heterogenous
in presentation as it is in nature, with multiple factors
proposed to influence its pathophysiology, from genes to
environmental factors, encompassing infection, vitamin
deficiencies, stressful life events, brain injury and personality,
to cite a few [2]. Since the first report by Swedo et all
[3] of a form of OCD arising after streptococcal infection,
PANDAS (pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder
associated with streptococcal infections), many authors
have studied the role of inflammation in OCD patients,
hypothesizing a role for immune dysregulation in OCD
pathophysiology.
In PANDAS, obsessive-compulsive symptoms (OCS)
occur in the context of group A ß-hemolytic streptococcal
(GABHS) infection, in which anti-streptococcal antibodies
are believed to cross-react with epitopes expressed in
neuronal cells of the basal ganglia (particularly the caudate
and putamen), a key region involved in OCD expression
[4–6]. Adding to this hypothesis are studies using GABHS
exposure in animal models, which has shown to result in
multiple locomotor and cognitive deficits, including anxiety
and stereotyped behavior, and increased IgG antibodies
and receptors within the striatum, thalamus and
frontal cortex, all regions known to be involved in the
pathophysiology of OCS (for further details on this subject
see the work by Gerentes and colleagues [7] and Mora
and colleagues [8]). Although PANDAS might be of relevance
for only a minor proportion of OCD cases, this immune/
inflammation hypothesis may be significant given
the prevalence of OCS among patients with autoimmune
diseases [9].
In that regard, many reports on immunology and
OCD suggest an increase in proinflammatory markers
among OCD patients [7, 10–12], including within the
cortico-striatal-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) circuit [13],
although recent systematic reviews and meta-analysis
point in a different direction, with no differences between
OCD patients and controls in what concerns
levels of inflammatory cytokines and C-reactive protein
[14, 15]. This disparity is due to major methodological
differences across studies, with sample sizes, matching of
individuals, age of participants, presence of comorbidities
and medication status as key limiting factors [10, 14,
15]. Notwithstanding the conflicting literature on the
subject, the role of immune dysregulation in OCD
should not be overlooked since it might be an important
factor in a particular subset of patients, where autoimmunity
might be triggered by specific pathogenic
agents with similar surface epitopes in the central nervous
system (CNS), which may be the case, for instance
but not exclusively, of patients with prior history of
GABHS infection [16]. Additionally, it is possible that a
combination of etiological factors, with specific mechanisms
yet incompletely understood, is involved in the
development of OCD, and thus the possible involvement
of inflammation cannot be ruled out [2].
On this regard, in spite of the inconsistencies across
studies and following the hypothesis for the presence of
a pro-inflammatory state among OCD patients, we conducted
an exploratory study with a small subset of patients
by evaluating the levels of plasma neutrophil
gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL). NGAL is an
acute-phase pro-inflammatory protein [17] that is involved
in iron homeostasis [18] and in spine morphology
and neuronal excitability in the CNS [19]. Increased
levels of NGAL have been detected among multiple
sclerosis (MS) patients [20] as well as in heart failure,
stroke and coronary artery disease, where it has prognostic
significance [21]. It has also been associated with
depressive symptom severity [22, 23], although this later
finding remains to be proven [24]. In rodents, lipocalin-
2 (LCN2) – the analogous form of NGAL – has been
shown to be expressed in response to peripheral inflammation
[25], focal brain ischemia [26] and spinal cord
injury [27, 28]. It is also up-regulated during the active
phase of an animal model for MS [20] and seems to be
involved in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease
[29, 30] and Parkinson’s disease [31].
Most interestingly, a study using LCN2-null mice
showed these animals exhibit anxiety- and depressivelike
behavior and cognitive impairments in spatial learning
tasks that correlated with increased hypothalamicpituitary-
adrenal (HPA) axis activity and morphological
alterations within the hippocampus, specifically, an atrophy
of the dorsal hippocampus – which is involved in
memory and cognition – and a hypertrophy of the ventral
region – which plays a role in emotion. Furthermore,
neuronal morphology and dendritic spine density
within the hippocampus were altered in mutant mice
[32]. This is in accordance with previous studies suggesting
a role for LCN2 in the regulation of neuronal
morphology and excitability in both the hippocampus
and basolateral amygdala in response to stress [33, 34].
Further work with LCN2-null mice demonstrated LCN2
is involved in adult neurogenesis, differentiation and survival,
where impairments at this level translate into poor
performance in a hippocampal-dependent contextual
fear discriminative task [35].
It is noteworthy, however, that both the morphological
and behavioral changes observed in LCN-2 null mice are
in line with those observed in animals after chronic
stress exposure or prolonged administration of exogenous
glucocorticoids [36], which raises the question
whether or not LCN2 is also involved in the regulation
of the stress response, a feature that is known to be disrupted
in a number of psychiatric diseases, for instance,
OCD.
Methods
Subjects
A sample of 40 subjects (21 OCD patients, 19 controls)
without previous history of neurological disorders participated
in this study. OCD patients were recruited from
the Psychiatric outpatient clinic of Hospital de Braga,
Portugal, over a period of 3 months, and characterized
with a comprehensive clinical assessment. The diagnosis
of the disorder was established by experienced psychiatrists,
using a semi-structured interview based on Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-5). Severity of disease was assessed using
the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS)
[37, 38]. This clinical assessment allowed for the exclusion
of presence of other psychiatric diagnoses, particularly
depression and other anxiety disorders. Because
one female OCD patient was in clinical remission and
asymptomatic at the time of the analysis, this subject
was excluded from the study.
All patients were under current pharmacological treatment,
primarily a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
(fluvoxamine, sertraline or fluoxetine).
Healthy controls were recruited to match OCD patients
for age and gender.
Blood sampling and analysis
Serum samples were obtained according to standardized
protocols in the Hospital de Braga, Portugal, at the time
of recruitment. Human Lipocalin-2/NGAL Quantikine®
ELISA Kit (R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, USA) was
used according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, a 96-plate was incubated with 100 μL/per well of
Assay Diluent RD1–52, and 50 μL of sample was added
to each well. The plate was covered and incubated for 2
h, at 8 °C. Then, it was washed four times with Wash
Buffer (400 μL), and 200 μL of Human Lipocalin-2 Conjugate
was added to each well. After an incubation step
of 2 h (8 °C), the plate was washed four times. At the
end, 200 μL of Substrate Solution was added and incubated
for 30 min at room temperature, with the plate
covered to protect it from light. Finally, after adding
50 μL of the Stop Solution, all samples were quantified
by determining optical density in a spectrophotometer
set to 450 nm or 450(− 570) nm.
Data processing and analysis
Statistical analysis for sociodemographic and clinical
data was performed using IBM SPSS 27 software [39].
All hypothesis tests had a level of significance (p) set at
0.05. Shapiro–Wilk was used to test variables for normal
distribution. Since normality was not met, mean comparisons
were performed using Mann-Whitney test. Correlations
were performed using Spearman’s rank
correlation.
Ethics statement
This study was performed in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and was approved by Ethics Subcommittee
for the Life and Health Sciences of University
of Minho, Portugal, and by the Ethics Committee of the
Hospital of Braga, Portugal. All subjects were provided
with written informed consent following description of
the study goals and procedures.
Results
Socio-demographic and clinical characteristics
The groups were similar in respect to age and gender
[control group (CONT), n = 19; 10 females/9 males; median
and interquartile range (IQR) 28.00 (5) years of age;
OCD group, n = 20; 9 females/11 males; 30.00 (7) years
of age] (see Table 1 for further details).
Total Y-BOCS score ranged from 9 to 38 (n = 20,
mean ± standard deviation (SD) 26.10 ± 1.56, with scores
for compulsions and obsession subscales ranging from 4
to 18 and 5 to 20, respectively (compulsions mean score
11.50 ± 0.76 SD; obsessions mean score 14.60 ± 0.87 SD;
see Table 1).
Blood sample analysis
Serum NGAL analysis revealed significantly increased
levels among OCD patients relative to healthy participants
(OCD, n = 20, median (IQR) 91.130 (96.46);
CONT, n = 19, median (IQR) 60.300 (19.27), with female
patients presenting significantly higher levels than
female controls (U = 18.00; p < .05). No differences between
male and female participants were apparent
within each group (see Table 2 for further information).
No correlation was found between NGAL levels and
severity of symptoms among OCD patients (total YBOCS
score rs = .255 (p = .278); compulsions rs = .245
(p = .299); obsessions rs = .229 (p = .332)).
Discussion
Until today, the existing work focusing on the role of
lipocalin in psychiatric disorders include studies on depression,
especially late-life depression, and Alzheimer’s
disease. However, and although inflammation has been
proposed to be part of the pathophysiological mechanisms
behind OCD, with many studies assessing levels
of inflammatory markers in OCD patients, no studies to
date have included measurements of NGAL levels. In
this study, we proposed to assess NGAL levels among
OCD patients. So far, this is the first study to do so and
to report significant differences between OCD patients
and healthy participants, specifically an elevation of the
levels of NGAL among patients. We hypothesized
NGAL levels would correlate with severity of disease, as
it has been observed in studies on depression [23, 40].
However, our data revealed no such association. We
have also observed a significant difference in NGAL
levels between female patients and controls, but no differences
between genders within groups. There are reports
of gender differences in inflammatory markers,
although not including NGAL, in patients with depressive
symptoms and anxiety, which authors hypothesize
to be related with different behavioral and inflammatory
pathways and possibly with a difference in disease vulnerability
[21]. However, our results do not show a difference
between genders but a difference among women,
and there are no previous reports on gender specific differences
in NGAL levels among psychiatric patients. We
can only speculate on the variety of factors that might
be contributing for our result, for instance differences in
disease vulnerability, lifestyle or exposure to environmental
factors such as stress. Thus, further studies with
larger samples are needed in order to corroborate this
result.
Although our findings seem to differ from results from
animal studies, where it is the absence of lipocalin, not
the elevation, that is behind the abnormal phenotype
and neurochemical alterations [32, 35], it is possible that
the influence of NGAL follows a U-shaped curve [41],
with both the absence and the elevation of levels
explaining the behavioral and neurochemical changes.
This dual effect has been proposed regarding inflammatory
cytokines and their impact on sleep, but this model
is yet to be proven [42]. However, studies assessing
NGAL function have provided interesting results supporting
this notion, where both lipocalin deficiency and
overexpression are associated with behavioral impairments.
Thus, while a number of animal and human
studies have found elevated levels of lipocalin in disease
states such as depression [22, 40], schizophrenia [43],
multiple sclerosis [20], Parkinson’s [31] and Alzheimer’s
disease [29, 30], suggesting lipocalin overexpression
might play an important role in mediating the observed
deficits, other authors have reported findings such as
increased anxiety- and depressive-like behavior and
cognitive impairments displayed by LCN2-null mice [32,
33, 35, 44]. On the contrary, a recent study by Mike and
colleagues assessing the role of LCN2 on the neurobehavioral
manifestations of a mouse lupus model found
LCN2 deficiency in Sle1,3 mice attenuated the
depressive-like phenotype as well as memory impairments
that are characteristic of the model. Most notably,
LCN2-KO animals did not exhibit impairments in
exploratory behavior or motor coordination nor showed
deficits in the sucrose-preference, object recognition and
object placement tests compared to control animals [45],
which is in line with other reports where both LCN2 deficient
and wild type mice exhibited a similar behavioral
phenotype in response to liposaccharide injection [46].
Thus, it seems plausible to admit lipocalin may play different
roles according to the physiology or pathological
conditions [47, 48] and further studies are needed to
better understand its role in mediating disease states.
Most importantly, since lipocalin constitutes a marker
of inflammation not necessarily associated with infection
[48], our results highlight the importance of describing
the inflammatory profile of OCD patients, given this
might be of relevance for the understanding of the disorder
in patients other than those evidencing OCS in
the context of prior history of infection. Previous studies
have demonstrated how other immune abnormalities
might be related to glutamatergic dysfunction within the
CSTC circuit, the main pathway associated with OCD
development [16, 49]. Additionally, animal and human
studies have shown lipocalin to be expressed in a variety
of brain regions, including the striatum, thalamus and
prefrontal cortex [31, 50], regions that have been implicated
in OCD pathophysiology. The link between immune
dysregulation and OCD is yet to be unraveled, although
theories suggest glutamate might play a strategic role
given its presence within the CSTC circuit and its involvement
in regulating T cell function [51, 52]. Given the
hypothetical nature of such theory, further work is needed
in order to better understand the relative contribution of
immune dysregulation in OCD pathophysiology, with larger
samples, detailed clinical characterization of participants,
control for medication effect and rigorous selection
criteria as key points to have into account in future
studies.
Naturally, our study has some limitations. The use of a
small number of patients limits the generalization of results.
Additionally, whether the observed increase in
NGAL levels is a cause or a consequence of the disorder
remains to be defined and should warrant further investigation.
Future studies on this subject would also
benefit of a more detailed assessment of the inflammation
status of subjects, with inclusion of other markers
of inflammation and the determination of antistreptolysin
titers. Thus, it would be interesting to proceed with
studies on this subject not only by including larger, well
characterized cohorts, but also through the use of animal
models, which allow for the dissection of biological
mechanisms otherwise impossible to study in humans.
In conclusion, we herein report differences in NGAL
levels among OCD patients compared to healthy controls.
We offer additional evidence to the immune dysregulation
hypothesis of OCD by reporting elevated
levels of NGAL among OCD patients versus healthy
controls, with higher differences being found among
women.
However, while our results warrant further replication,
more research is needed in order to clarify the role of
NGAL in this neuropsychiatric disorder.