Background
Early-life experiences can have long-term effects on
health across the lifespan [1]. Sexual abuse and physical
abuse are strongly associated with depression [2–5].
These types of abuse are highly prevalent [6, 7] and are
associated with depression onset, suboptimal treatment
response and poor prognosis [8–12]. Current depressive
symptoms may magnify or otherwise alter the recall of
early events [13]. However, retrospective self-reporting
of abuse by adults has been found to be reliable [14].
Sexual abuse and physical abuse are not reported more
often during a depressive episode [14]. Despite extensive
literature documenting the association between childhood
sexual/physical abuse with adult depression, there
are relatively few studies on effects on individual depressive
symptoms and potential sex differences.
Previous studies have reported association between
abuse and suicidal behaviours in individuals with or
without depression [15–18]. Meta-analyses of adults and
young people report that sexual abuse and physical
abuse are associated with two- to three-fold increased
risk for suicide attempts [19, 20]. There are fewer studies
of associations between sexual/physical abuse and other
depressive symptoms. One study of homeless women
suggested that sexual and physical abuse are associated
with low self-esteem [21]. Evidence also suggests that
sexual and physical abuse are both associated with increased
appetite, weight gain, and hypersomnia in adults
[22]. Studies of individual depressive symptoms are lacking.
Studying symptom-level associations is important
because depression is a phenotypically heterogenous
condition. Symptom-level associations may provide clues
to mechanism of effect.
Depression is more common in women than men [23]
but the role of biological sex in the association between
sexual/physical abuse and depression is unclear. It is
possible that sex may have no mechanistic role beyond
higher rates of victimisation among females [24]. On the
other hand, it is possible that sex-specific physiological
responses to sexual/physical abuse may influence risk for
mental health disorders among adults [25]. For example,
stress-response pathways may not be the same in both
sexes such that the effects of immune activation may be
greater in women than men [26]. Revealing a common
pattern of sex-specific adversity-related symptoms may
be clinically beneficial when considering the most appropriate
treatment option for depression. We know of no
population-based studies examining associations between
sexual/physical abuse and individual depressive
symptoms in men and women. While a number of studies
from the UK Biobank have examined the association
between childhood adversity and depression [27–31], no
studies from this sample have investigated the effects of
childhood sexual/physical abuse on individual depressive
symptoms, and potential sex differences for these
associations.
Using the UK Biobank, we explored associations of
childhood sexual and physical abuse with individual depressive
symptoms in adults. In particular, we tested (i)
the strength of associations before and after adjusting
for potential covariates; (ii) the consistency and potential
sex differences in these associations by assessing the effect
of sexual and physical abuse in both men and
women; and (iii) we attempted to minimise the possible
impact of recall bias by controlling for current depressive
symptoms in associations between sexual/physical
abuse and lifetime depression.
Methods
Description of cohort and sample
The UK Biobank is a long-term UK-based study comprising
over 500,000 participants aged between 40 and
69 at baseline, recruited from 22 assessment centres
across the United Kingdom between 2006 and 2010 [32].
Informed consent was obtained from participants at
recruitment. The UK Biobank contains results of clinical
examinations, assays of biological samples, self-reported
health behaviour, genome-wide genotyping, and is
supplemented by linkage with electronic health records.
Details of the UK Biobank resource can be found at
www.ukbiobank.ac.uk. UK Biobank received ethical approval
from the National Health Service National Research
Ethics Service (reference 11/NW/0382). The
current analyses were conducted under approved UK
Biobank project no. 26999.
The risk set for our analysis comprised 155,223 unrelated
participants who answered questions regarding
childhood sexual and physical abuse in 2016–2017
(Fig. 1). Of these individuals, 152,447 had data on
current depressive symptoms and 151,396 participants
had complete data for exposure, outcome, and covariates.
The complete cases formed the basis of our main
analysis.
Assessment of childhood sexual and physical abuse
Childhood sexual and physical abuse were assessed in
2016–2017 using an online mental health questionnaire
which included information on childhood adversity.
Childhood experiences were assessed using the Childhood
Trauma Screener [33]. The questionnaire consists
of five-point Likert scale items: zero (never true), one
(rarely true), two (sometimes true), three (often true),
and four (very often true). We used threshold values derived
from the validation study [33] to define presence/
absence of sexual and physical abuse. Sexual abuse refers
to being sexually molested by someone and was defined
as: 0 = never true; and 1 = rarely/sometimes/often/very
often true. Physical abuse refers to being hit so hard by a
family member that it leaves bruises or marks and was
defined as 0 = never/rarely true; and 1 = sometimes/
often/very often true.
Assessment of current depressive symptoms in adulthood
Depressive symptoms over the past two weeks were selfassessed
in 2016–2017 using the Patient Health Questionnaire
(PHQ)-9 as part of the online mental health
questionnaire. PHQ-9 scores the nine DSM-IV criteria
for depressive symptoms (anhedonia, psychomotor
change, change in appetite/weight, fatigue, sleep disturbance,
low mood, concentration difficulties, low selfesteem,
suicidal behaviours) as zero (not at all), one (several
days), two (more than half the days) or three (nearly
every day) [34]. A binary variable was created for each of
the nine symptoms (0 = not at all/several days, 1 = more
than half the days/nearly every day) [34].
We summed the nine individual items to create a total
score (0–27) and used a cut-off score of 10 or more to
indicate current depressive symptoms [34, 35]. A metaanalysis
of over 17,000 participants found that the combined
sensitivity (88%; 95% CI = 83–92%) and specificity
(85%; 95% CI = 82–88%) of PHQ-9 for detecting major
depression was maximised at a cut-off score of 10 or
above [36]. Current depressive symptoms score was used
as the outcome measure in our analysis.
Assessment of lifetime depression
We defined adult lifetime depression as self-reported
probable moderate and severe major depression, as
previously used in UK Biobank [37]. Binary measures
of probable moderate and severe major depression
were derived from a touchscreen questionnaire
assessed at UK Biobank Assessment Centres at baseline
[37]. Table 1 demonstrates how (i) a single episode
of probable major depression, (ii) probable
moderate major depression, and (iii) probable recurrent
severe major depression were defined [37]. We
used lifetime depression as an alternative depression
phenotype (with depressive symptoms score as a
control).
Assessment of covariates
We adjusted for the following covariates: sex, age, ethnicity,
Townsend deprivation index (TDI), BMI, and childhood
sexual or physical abuse. All covariates were
recorded at recruitment (2006–2010), except childhood
sexual/physical abuse which were retrospectively reported
in 2016–2017.
Sex (female or male) was acquired from NHS records
but updated by participants in some cases. Age was
based on self-reported date of birth at recruitment. Age
(years) was calculated by subtracting year of birth from
2017, i.e. the last year in which online mental health
questionnaires were conducted. BMI was calculated as
body weight in kilograms divided by height in meters
squared. BMI measurements at recruitment (2006–2010)
and in 2016–2017 were strongly correlated (beta = 0.94;
SE = < 0.01; p = < 0.001). Age and BMI were used as continuous
measures.
Ethnicity was originally recorded as White, Mixed,
Asian/Asian British, Black/Black British, Chinese, and
Other. Given the relatively homogenous nature of the
sample, we used ethnicity as a binary variable (White or
any other ethnicity).
We included TDI as a proxy for socioeconomic status.
TDI is a continuous measure of material deprivation
which incorporates unemployment, non-car ownership,
non-home ownership, and household overcrowding [38].
These variables are measured in a given area, combined
and standardised to produce an overall score for that
area. Higher scores represent greater deprivation.
Statistical analysis
All analyses were carried out using R version 3.6.1. Regression
models were estimated before and after adjusting
for potential covariates. We examined potential sex
differences by: (i) stratifying the sample by sex, and (ii)
adjusting regression models for sex.
Associations with individual depressive symptoms and PHQ-
9 depressive symptoms score
The PHQ-9 current depressive symptoms score distribution
was skewed (skew = 2.4; kurtosis = 7.4) and could
not be normalised via transformation. We therefore used
current depressive symptoms as a measure using a cutoff
score of 10 [34–36] .
Logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios
(OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) for individual depressive
symptoms and current depressive symptoms
score. ORs represent the odds of the depressive symptoms
measure for individuals exposed to abuse compared with
unexposed. Holm-Bonferroni P-value correction was performed
to correct for multiple testing [39].
To test for interaction with sex, we ran adjusted logistic
regression with current depressive symptoms score as
the outcome and included interaction terms with sex for
all of the covariates and exposures listed in Table 2.
Sensitivity analysis: association between childhood sexual/
physical abuse and adult lifetime depression
To examine possible impact of recall bias, we controlled
for current depressive symptoms in logistic regression
models testing associations between sexual/physical
abuse and lifetime depression. In this way we considered
whether reported abuse was associated with later depression
and whether this was altered by considering current
mood i.e. depressive symptoms score.
Results
Characteristics of the sample
The total sample used for analysis (N = 155,223) predominantly
comprised individuals of White ethnicity
(97.2%) and low deprivation (TDI mean = − 1.7; SD =
2.8) (Table 2). Both childhood sexual and physical abuse
were experienced by 1.8% of the sample. Sexual abuse
was almost twice as common in women (11.1%) than
men (5.8%). Physical abuse was more common in men
(8.3%) than women (8.0%). Lifetime depression was
more common in women (24.5%) than in men (15.1%).
Current depressive symptoms score was also higher in
women (mean = 3.0; SD = 3.8) than men (mean = 2.4;
SD = 3.5).
There was evidence of interaction with sex for TDI
(p < 0.01) and BMI (p = 0.01). There was little evidence
of interaction with sex for other variables (age: p = 0.74;
ethnicity: p = 0.58; physical abuse: p = 0.41; sexual abuse:
p = 0.08).
Association between childhood sexual/physical abuse and
adult current depressive symptoms score
In the total sample (N = 151,396), sexual abuse was
associated with increased risk for current depressive
symptoms score after adjusting for potential covariates
(adjusted OR = 1.74; 95% CI = 1.63, 1.85)
(Table 3). In sex-stratified analysis, sexual abuse was
associated with current depressive symptoms score
in both men and women (Table 3). ORs were similar
between the sexes.
Physical abuse was also associated with current depressive
symptoms score in adulthood after adjusting for
potential covariates (adjusted OR = 2.17; 95% CI = 2.04,
2.31) (Table 4). Physical abuse as a child was associated
with current depressive symptoms score in men and
women (Table 4). ORs were similar between the sexes.
All associations were robust to Holm-Bonferroni P-value
correction for multiple testing (Table S1).
Association between childhood sexual/physical abuse and
adult individual depressive symptoms
In the total sample (N = 151,396), sexual abuse was
associated with all individual depressive symptoms
(Table 3). In women, sexual abuse was most strongly
associated with suicidal behaviours, concentration difficulties,
and psychomotor change, with adjusted ORs
ranging from 1.75 to 2.08 for women (Table 3). In
men, sexual abuse was most strongly associated with
suicidal behaviours, low self-esteem, and psychomotor
change, with adjusted ORs ranging from 1.84 to 2.46
(Table 3).
Physical abuse was also associated with all individual
depressive symptoms (Table 4). Physical abuse
was most strongly associated with suicidal behaviours,
psychomotor change, and low self-esteem in women,
with adjusted ORs ranging from 2.06 to 2.94. Physical
abuse was most strongly associated with change in
suicidal behaviours, psychomotor change, and low
mood in men, with adjusted ORs ranging from 2.15
to 3.01 (Table 4).
All associations remained after covariate adjustment
and Holm-Bonferroni P-value correction for multiple
testing (Table S1).
Sensitivity analysis: association between childhood
sexual/physical abuse and adult lifetime depression
In the total sample of participants with data on lifetime
depression (N = 40,829), sexual abuse was associated
with lifetime depression (OR = 2.12; 95% CI = 1.97, 2.29)
(Table 5). Evidence for this association remained after
adjusting for potential covariates including current depressive
symptoms score (adjusted OR = 1.58; 95% CI =
1.46, 1.72). In sex-stratified analysis, sexual abuse was associated
with lifetime depression in both men and
women even after adjusting for current depressive symptoms
score. ORs were similar between the sexes.
In the total sample (N = 40,829), physical abuse was associated
with lifetime depression (OR = 2.00; 95% CI =
1.85, 2.16) (Table 5). Evidence for this association
remained after adjusting for potential covariates including
current depressive symptoms score (adjusted OR =
1.45; 95% CI = 1.33, 1.58). In sex-stratified analysis, physical
abuse was associated with lifetime depression in
both men and women even after adjusting for current
depressive symptoms score. ORs were similar between
the sexes.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to explore the well-established
relationship between sexual and physical abuse and adult
depression at the symptom level. To our knowledge, this
is one of the first studies to consider the effect of childhood
sexual/physical abuse on multiple depressive symptoms
in both men and women. Our results indicate
three key findings. First, childhood sexual and physical
abuse were both associated with all depressive symptoms.
Second, childhood sexual and physical abuse were
particularly strongly associated with suicidal behaviours.
Three, the pattern of association, regarding ORs and effects
on depressive symptoms, was similar between the
sexes.
Recent UK Biobank studies have considered heterogeneity
within the depression syndrome in its association
with childhood sexual and physical abuse [27–31]. A
cross-sectional study suggested that atypical depression
(classed as hypersomnia and weight gain) is more
strongly associated with sexual and physical abuse than
typical depression [27]. This adversity-related subtype
also exhibited sociodemographic differences; atypical depression
was associated with female sex, earlier onset of
illness, and lower income [27]. Moreover, genetic studies
from the UK Biobank indicate that heterogeneity within
the depression syndrome is a function of environmental
exposures, such as childhood adversity [29, 30]. For example,
genetic contribution to depression appears to be
greater when childhood adversity is present [30]. We
have added to this literature by investigating sexual/physical
abuse, individual depressive symptoms and potential
sex differences.
Our results confirm that environmental factors, such
as childhood sexual/physical abuse, play an important
role in the onset of depressive symptoms [40]. We found
that both childhood sexual and physical abuse were
strongly associated with all depressive symptoms, particularly
suicidal behaviours. Consistent with our findings,
an observational study of adolescents found that
70% of participants who had experienced sexual abuse
and physical abuse also experienced suicidal thoughts
[41]. Experiences of childhood sexual/physical abuse
may lead to feelings of entrapment, habituation to pain,
and reduced fear for death which may result in greater
capacity for suicidal behaviours as a means of escape
[19]. A recent study has suggested that adverse social relationships
during childhood can also contribute to depressive
symptoms including suicidal behaviours [42].
For example, a study of 1277 students reported that violent
treatment of the mother is associated with almost
four-fold increased risk in attempted suicide [43]. Identifying
and treating adults and children who have experienced
sexual/physical abuse and other forms of adversity
may help prevent the onset of depressive symptoms including
suicidal behaviours. Adults with depression and
history of abuse often do not respond to combined treatment
with anti-depressant medication and psychological
therapy, but could be given more intensive alternative
interventions [12]. Children exposed to abuse could be
screened for symptoms and given appropriate support
and therapy [44], which may help to decrease the risk of
future adverse health consequences.
Childhood sexual and physical abuse may become
“biologically embedded” in the body via stress-response
pathways [45, 46]. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis dysregulation, leading to high cortisol reactivity,
may contribute to the somatic symptoms of depression.
For example, HPA axis dysregulation may
result in changes in appetite/weight via emotional eating
mechanisms that serve to dispel unwanted distress [47].
The psychological consequences of exposure to sexual/
physical abuse may lead to HPA axis dysregulation, inflammation,
and subsequent psychological depressive
symptoms [45–47]. Inflammation is implicated in
depression [48, 49], and may be particularly relevant in
the context of childhood adversity [50, 51]. For example,
reward sensitivity, a process facilitated by inflammatory
cytokines, is blunted by sexual and physical abuse [46,
52]. These types of abuse have also been associated with
blunted cortisol in children as well as alteration to immune
and inflammatory responses and increased risk for
infection [53]. Longitudinal studies that consider the
temporality of sexual/physical abuse, HPA axis dysregulation,
inflammation, and depressive symptoms are
required.
We found no evidence that the association between
childhood sexual/physical abuse and adult depressive
symptoms differs between men and women. This is
consistent with the idea that biological sex has no mechanistic
role other than higher rates of victimisation
among females [24]. Indeed, in our sample childhood
sexual abuse was almost twice as common in women
than in men. Depression has also been reported to affect
women twice as often as men [54]. Consistently, over
50% more women in our sample had lifetime depression
than men. A greater percentage of women in
our sample also experienced sleep disturbance, fatigue,
change in appetite/weight, low self-esteem, and
low mood. A recent study suggested that this disparity
in risk for depression between men and women
peaks in adolescence [55], although it is unclear how
much childhood sexual/physical abuse contributes to
this disparity. A study of adolescents reported that females
with a history of sexual/physical abuse were
more depressed than males with a history of sexual/
physical abuse [41]. Conversely, we found that odds
ratios for associations between sexual/physical abuse
and depression were generally larger (although not
significantly) for men than women. It is possible that
covariates explained a greater amount of the association
between childhood sexual/physical abuse and
depression in women than in men. Alternatively, this
finding might be a type one error.
A key limitation of this study is its cross-sectional
design. A longitudinal approach would have been
helpful to better understand trajectories from childhood
sexual/physical abuse to depressive symptoms in
adulthood. The nature of UK Biobank data collection
meant this was not possible. Furthermore, the use of
self-reported recall of childhood sexual/physical abuse
by adults could introduce some level of recall bias.
We attempted to minimise the impact of recall bias
by adjusting for current mood. We found that differential
recall of negative events by depressed individuals
was not the sole explanation for the association
between sexual/physical abuse and depressive symptoms,
but other factors could still contribute to bias.
Another limitation is that we did not take into account
the duration, frequency or severity of abuse;
longer periods of abuse may have a more profound
effect on specific depressive symptoms than single
events. In addition, the depressive symptoms assessed
could be part of medical or psychiatric conditions
other than depression. Finally, residual confounding
may still explain the association between sexual/physical
abuse and subsequent depressive symptoms.
Childhood sexual and physical abuse are both robust
risk factors for all depressive symptoms, regardless of
sex. Suicidal behaviours was particularly strongly associated
with these types of abuse. Longitudinal studies with
large sample sizes are required to investigate biopsychosocial
mechanisms affecting the relationship between
childhood sexual/physical abuse and depressive symptoms
in men and women.