Background
Radical prostatectomy is recommended as an effective
treatment for clinically localized prostate cancer [1, 2], and
used to cure patients with low/intermediate risk of disease
[3]. Based on the updated anatomy understandings, the approaches to preserve peri-prostatic nerves have undergone
many modifications from the conventional nerve-sparing
surgery [4]. Intrafascial technique was a kind of refinements, characterized by developing a dissection plane
medially/internally to the prostatic fascia, in order to maximally preserve peri-prostatic nerves and to enhance the
post-surgical recovery of continence and potency. This
technique is now applied worldwide in combination with
different surgical approaches and procedures [5, 6].
Controversy about the intrafascial nerve-sparing technique has persisted since its introduction [7]. Most doubts
were concentrated at its oncological safety, considering the
necessity of removing all fascial coverings of the prostatic
surface in resecting a tumor. It is generally recognized that
the greater extent of structures spared, the higher is the
risk of residual tumor; therefore, some surgeons would be
concerned that intrafascial dissection would compromise
its oncological safety and incur a risk of a higher rate of
positive surgical margins (PSMs) [8].
There were obvious variations regarding the oncological results reported by different surgeons, which may
be influenced by factors such as surgeon characteristics,
surgical procedures, patient inclusion criteria, and outcome assessment methods. The purpose of this study
was to critically summarize existing clinical trials and
provide a detailed and comprehensive assessment of the
oncological findings of intrafascial prostatectomy to
guide urologists in selecting the appropriate technique.
Methods
Inclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria were set according to PICOS (patients,
intervention, comparison, outcomes, and study design)
principle as presented in Table 1. This review included
trials designed as surgery series or controlled studies. Included studies had at least one arm that is performed
using intrafascial techniques, including veil technique
and other techniques approaching fascial planes close to
the prostatic capsule and internal to the prostatic fascia,
regardless of the types of surgery including retropubic
radical prostatectomy (RRP), laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (LRP) and robot-assisted laparoscopic radical
prostatectomy (RALRP). Study paralleling convetional
interfascial technique was included in the comparative
analysis as a control study. We excluded studies from
the comparative assessment, including extra-fascial or
wide-dissection or non-nerve-sparing prostatectomy,
and for these studies we only extracted data from the
intrafascial group.
Data sources and searches
Database searches were performed for published articles
till June 2018 on PubMed. The following keywords were
used across the “Title” and “Abstract” field including:
(“intrafascial” OR “veil” OR “curtain dissection” OR “incremental nerve sparing” OR “high anterior release”) AND
“radical prostatectomy”. Study characteristics were in accordance with our PICOS principle. There were no restrictions on the reporting characteristics of the publication
status or language. In addition, there were no restrictions
on the time of surgery or the date of publication. We
manually checked the reference list of the included studies
to further identify other relevant studies. Three reviewers
(JG, HC, XW) independently screened the titles, abstracts
and keywords of each search article. If the study met the
inclusion criteria, we screened the full text for further
evaluation. We excluded duplicate publications or superficially reported studies. Disagreements were resolved
through open discussion.
Data extraction and synthesis
Data were independently extracted by three reviewers
(JG, HC, XW) using standard formats, including study
characteristics, patient characteristics, surgical information and outcomes. The authors of the original study
were consulted for the missing data if needed. As surgical margins were confounded by patient selection, we
evaluated and scored the patients’ preoperative risk level
according to the nomogram of Partin tables [9] along
with D’Amico’s study [10]. The scoring scale shown in
Table 2 is stratified into 4 parts including clinical tumor
stage, preoperative PSA level, Gleason score and invaded
cores percentage. The scores of the 4 parts were
summed up to the Selection Score of Oncologic Safety
(SSOS). A high score indicated a more rigorous patient
selection criteria and low risk of extraprostatic extension
and margin involvement.
With regard to a comparative analysis of the PSM rate,
some studies had a selection bias between the intra- and
inter-fascial groups. As surgeons often doubted the
oncological safety of the intrafascial technique, they restricted the application of this technique to patients with
early-stage tumors and lower risk of extraprostatic extension, but employed the interfascial procedure in
high-risk disease. We considered this bias as a selection
imbalance and, if surgeons made no exception in the selection of patients, we judged this as selection balance.
Bias assessment
The Cochrane Collaborative Bias Assessment Tool was
used to assess the methodological quality of the included
control studies. The following items were evaluated: (1)
Adequate sequence generation? (2) Allocation concealment? (3) Binding? (4) Incomplete outcome data addressed? (5) Free of selective reporting? (6) Free of other
bias? Each question was rated as “low risk”, “high risk”
or “unclear” and three reviewers (JG, HC and XW) independently assessed each trial. We used the funnel plot to
evaluate publication bias. If there is a disagreement,
judgment was made through public discussion.
Data analysis
All data extracted from the intrafascial arms were pooled
using Open Meta-analyst software, stratified by surgical
type. We performed one-arm meta-analysis using random effects models, and heterogeneity in the studies
was assessed using Chi-square test and the I2 index.
Meta-regression analysis was performed with total PSM
rate as a dependent variable, including patient age, preservation techniques, pT2 cancer percentage, and SSOS
as covariate variables. An in-depth regression analysis
was performed by including each part of the SSOS and
excluding each part from the SSOS.
Comparative meta-analysis was conducted with the
Cochrane Collaboration Review Manager. Heterogeneity
among the studies was assessed using Chi-square test
and the I2 index statistic. When p > 0.1 and I2 < 50%,
fixed-effect models were applied for the calculation of
pooled effect index and only if p < 0.1 and I2 > 50%, the
random-effect models were used. A comparative analysis
of the PSM rates was performed by stratifying selection
balance as a subgroup.
Results
This review was performed according to the Preferred
Reporting Items of Systematic Reviews and
Meta-analysis (PRISMA) statement. A total of 117 records were retrieved after electronic search strategy,
which ultimately included 21 studies [6, 11–30]. Figure 1
present the PRISMA flowchart of literature searches and
Table 3 provided detailed characteristics of the included
studies. Among the 21 studies included, 15 were controlled studies and 6 were surgical series. Eight trials
paralleling conventional interfascial technique as controlled groups were included for comparative
meta-analysis. Additional file 1: Table S1 showed the risk
of bias in individual studies.
One-arm meta-analysis
Figure 2 summarized the prevalence of total PSMs recorded in the intrafascial group of the published surgical
series or controlled studies. The total PSM rate ranged
from 2.2 to 35%, with a pooled rate of 14.2% (498/3351,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 11.0–17.3%). It was possible to calculate the heterogeneity among the included
studies as I2 was 86.38%. Three studies showed significantly higher PSM rates than the pooled rate, which included the studies of Curto 2006 [11], Choi 2012 [18],
and Mortezavi 2012 [16], with a PSM rate of 30.8%
(127/413, 95% CI: 26.3–35.2%), 34% (17/50, 95% CI:
20.9–47.1%), and 35% (28/80, 95% CI: 24.5–45.5%), respectively, whereas the VIP team reported a notably
lower PSM rate of 1/46 [27]. No obvious differences
could be detected among the 3 surgery types of LRP,
RRP, and RALRP. PSM rates of intrafascial group stratified by pathological tumor stages could be found in
Additional files 2 and 3, which showed that the pooled
PSM rate was 9.7% (236/2423, 95% CI: 7.0–12.4%) in
pT2 cancers (Additional file 2: Figure S1) and 44.0%
(208/527, 95% CI: 34.9–53.2%) in pT3 cancer (Additional file 3: Figure S2). Overlapping higher rates could
be seen in terms of the PSM rate in pT2 cancer that the
studies of Curto (2006) [11] and Mortezavi (2012) [16],
which also reported a significantly higher PSM rate than
the pooled rate; however, this overlap was not observed
with regard to the PSM rate in pT3 cancer.
Meta-regression analysis
Table 4 summarized the result of meta-regression evaluating the impact of confounding factors affecting PSM rates.
Age, pT2 cancer percentage, and SSOS were significantly
associated with the total PSM rate, and age was the only
factor that affected the PSM rate in pT3 cancer. Regarding
the total PSM rate, the regression model demonstrated
that 1 more year to the mean age could increase the total
PSM rate by an average of 1.2%, while each 1 point of
SSOS could decrease it by an average of 1.3%. Moreover,
preservation techniques including D-fascia preservation,
puboprostatic ligament sparing, selective ligation of DVC,
had no significant influence on PSM rate. Figure 3
depicted the meta-regression plot to describe the effect of
the confounding factors of patient age, pT2 cancer percentage, and SSOS score on total PSM rate.
Comparative meta-analysis
As shown in Figs. 4 and 5, the I2 standing for heterogeneity among the studies was 39, 47, and 0% in the
meta-analysis of total PSM rate, PSM rate in pT2 cancer,
and PSM rate in pT3 cancer, respectively, therefore,
fixed-effects models were applied. None of the 3
meta-analyses demonstrated a significant difference between the intra- and interfascial groups. It is noteworthy
that, in the meta-analysis of total PSM rate (Fig. 4) and
PSM rate in pT2 cancer (Fig. 5a), under a balanced selection of preoperative oncologic risk, the interfascial
group had a numerically lower rate compared with the
intrafascial group, but interestingly, pooling the studies
without a balanced baseline resulted in an observable
significant difference in PSM rate in favor of the intrafascial group. This condition was not observed in the assessment of the PSM rate in pT3 (Fig. 5b), which
showed consistency between the balanced and imbalanced studies, both indicating that the intrafascial group
was associated with a higher PSM rate, although insignificant statistically. Table 5 provided characteristics of
studies included in comparable meta-analysis reporting
PSM and Additional file 4: Figure S3 showed the funnel
plots for assessing the publication biases.
Discussion
In this study we conducted a systematic review and
pooled analysis of oncological outcomes following intrafascial nerve-sparing prostatectomy. In 2012, a detailed
and in-depth systematic review summarizing all surgical
series of RALP between 2008 to 2011 was reported by
Novara et al. [31], wherein they indicated that the prevalence of PSM after RALP was, on average, 15% in
all-stage disease and 9% in pathologically localized cancer; PSM rates were similar following RARP, RRP, and
LRP. The authors proposed an average PSM rate of 15
and 10% could be expected for all-stage and pT2 cancers
after RALP, respectively. In this present meta-analysis,
we found that the pooled PSM rate in the intrafascial
group was, overall, 14.2% in all stages of prostate cancer
and 9.7% in pT2 disease regardless of surgery types,
which seemed to match the results of previous review.
Comparative analysis revealed no significant difference
in PSM rate between the intra- and inter-fascial groups,
which was consistent with a previous meta-analysis [32].
From this point of view, oncological outcomes of intrafascial technique seemed acceptable, or at least not
worse than with conventional approach. However, a
hasty conclusion of the oncological safety of this
technique should be avoided, as there are additional issues worthy of critical appraisal.
Extracapsular extension of carcinoma could lead to
higher PSM rate of radical prostatectomy compared with
that associated with a localized tumor. The mean percentage of pT2 cancer in the intrafascial studies included
in our present review was 84.5% (range: 58.6–98.1%),
which is significantly higher than that in the 17 surgical
series included in Novara’s review [31] (t-test of
independent samples: mean difference = − 7.91569, t = −
2.618, p = .014); this meant, surgeons selected more
patients with localized disease to perform intrafascial
approach, but only comparable total PSM rates were
gained. Moreover, according to the guidelines of the
European Association of Urology, radical prostatectomy
could be extended for indications such as patients with
intermediate-risk, localized prostate cancer with clinical
stage T2b–T2c, Gleason score = 7, or PSA 10–20 ng/ml
[3]. However, our review found that most surgeons applied more rigorous selection criteria against generally
recommended indications for radical prostatectomy. For
example, the VIP team in 2005 reported a notably low
PSM rate with a robot-assisted surgical system wherein
only 1 case of positive margin was detected from among
46 patients who underwent intrafascial RALRP [27].
With regard to their selection criteria, only patients with
clinical T1c stage cancer combined with a Gleason
score ≤ 6 and preoperative PSA ≤10 were selected for
the adoption of the intrafascial technique. Therefore, the
currently acceptable low PSM rate following intrafascial
prostatectomy could be attributed to more stringent
patient selection and, subsequently, a higher proportion
of localized disease; however, the oncological safety of
this technique could not be confirmed. If intrafascial dissection is carried out among patients with a high risk of
extracapsular invasion, the result may be unsatisfactory.
For example, in 2006, Curto et al. reported a contemporary laparoscopic surgical series wherein a surgical team
experienced in over 2800 LRP performed intrafascial
prostatectomies in patients with organ-confined prostate
cancer (including 3 cases of cT3a disease) without other
selection restrictions such as PSA level or Gleason score, for
control of preoperative oncological risk. Subsequently, the
percentage of pT2 cancer was only 58.6% and the
overall PSM rate in all-stage tumors was as high as
30.7% (127/413) [11].
With regard to our regression model, the percentage
of pT2 cancer was significantly associated with the total
PSM rate, and high proportion of pT2 disease led to a
low PSM rate. However, as preoperative pathological staging could not be obtained, the risk of extracapsular invasion was predicted on the basis of the patient’s
preoperative information. Clinical stage, PSA level, Gleason score, and positive biopsy cores could be used as independent predictors of this risk and, therefore, we
scored each factor and summed to SSOS to quantitatively evaluate this risk preoperatively. We identified a
significant correlation between the SSOS and pathological pT2 percentage (Pearson Correlation = 0.749, p
= .001). Moreover, an obvious association could be identified from our meta-regression model by including
SSOS as a confounding factor, indicating that, for intrafascial prostatectomy, stringent case selection was associated with low risk of PSM and quantitatively, each 1
point of SSOS could decrease the total PSM rate by
1.3% on average. Thus, based on our regression model,
the preoperative SSOS should be more than 7 points to
obtain a postoperative PSM rate of 15% on average and
SSOS more than 11 points meant a postoperative PSM
rate of 10%. Surgeons intending to adapt this technique
should take cautions when setting criteria for patient selection and we, for the first time, proposed the SSOS as
an indication of intrafascial prostatectomy.
SSOS had four components, by which we used to
evaluate the patients’ selection criteria for intrafascial
prostatectomy of the included studies. We performed
in-depth regression analysis setting total PSM rates as
dependent variable by including each section and excluding each section from SSOS (see Additional file 5:
Table S2). The result showed that section 1 (clinical T
stage) was the most influential factor, as only section 1
could significantly affect PSM rates and when excluding
section 1, the regression model became insignificant.
Thus surgeons should make clinical T stage a priority
when using SSOS as an indication.
A histological study by the VIP team indicated that 2/30
anterolateral zones of the prostate specimen after the Veil
technique revealed capsular incision, compared with 0/40
for the standard technique [33]. In pathologically localized
disease, the tumor does not invade beyond the limit of the
prostatic capsule; thus, only intracapsular incision will
lead to positive margins. Theoretically, intrafascial dissection should increase risk of capsular incision compared
with the interfascial technique and, subsequently, with a
localized tumor situated close to the capsule or having
large volume, is likely to lead to PSM. This can be inferred
from Curto’s surgical series [11], wherein investigators
found a higher PSM rate, especially for pT2c tumors, as
compared with the previous largest series; however, this
difference was not present for other pathological stages.
For comparative analysis, we only included parallel-group
studies including conventional interfascial nerve-sparing
prostatectomy as the control. Several studies compared the
outcomes of intrafascial prostatectomy with that of wide
dissection or non-nerve-sparing prostatectomy, but as reported in some of these studies, wider preservation of the
NVBs may be associated with a higher risk of PSM [34, 35].
Thus, for these studies, the oncological results could be
confounded by the nerve-sparing technique, and, therefore,
we did not include these studies in the comparative
analysis. In our meta-analysis comparing intra- and interfascial groups, we stratified studies according to patient selection balance; however, the overall pooled result
demonstrated there was no significant difference for PSM
rate in all pathological stages of disease. Notably, in the
study by Khoder et al. [12], patients were selected to
undergo intrafascial prostatectomy only if biopsy Gleason
scores were ≤ 6 and PSA ≤10 ng/mL with low tumor size;
patients with relatively higher Gleason scores and PSA
levels were allocated to the interfascial group, and this was
considered as selection imbalance. These researchers ultimately reported that PSM rates for pT2 stage and all pathological stages were lower in the intrafascial group compared
with the interfascial group; however, this advantage was not
reported for pT3 cancer. From the subgroup results in our
comparative analysis, a significantly lower PSM rate was
identified in favor of the intrafascial technique in pT2 and
all-stage disease for pooled studies with non-balanced selection criteria. All of these non-balanced studies applied additional more stringent patient selection criteria for the
intrafascial technique, as compared with patient selection
for the interfascial group. With regard to subgroup analysis
of balanced studies, pooled results revealed a higher
PSM rate, although statistically non-significant, with
the intrafascial technique for pT2 and all-stage cancers. The variance between subgroups of balanced
and non-balanced studies reconfirmed the crucial role
of patient selection in controlling the PSM rate. In
pT3 cancer, a higher PSM rate, although statistically
non-significant, was detected for the interfascial group
and may be attributable to insufficient sample size.
The PSM rate is known to be associated with
surgeon-related characteristics, with surgical experience being the most important factor. Surgeons experienced in
high-volume resections could decrease the PSM rate [36,
37]. A study evaluating the learning curve of radical prostatectomy indicated that increasing surgical experience was associated with substantial reductions in cancer recurrence:
however, for LRP, the learning curve was slower than for
RRP [38]. The relatively high PSM rate for LRP reported by
Choi et al. in 2012 can be attributed to the learning curve
[18]. In fact, the authors emphasized that, in the first 30
cases, the PSM rate was 51.7%, and then subsequently decreased to 9.5%. However, there are no published studies
reporting an evaluation of PSM with the learning curve of
the intrafascial technique.
Regarding on the dissection plane during procedure, surgeons supplied several technical variations, including VIP
technique and Leipzig technique. We included all the intrafascial surgeries in this pooled study regardless of the variable
techniques. Most authors described their dissection technique in the original manuscripts, but ignored pathological
evaluation of the specimen regarding whether the utilized
surgical technique was intra or interfacial nerve sparing.
Thus we can only judge the classification depending on the
authors’ description. As the PSM rates were affected by the
dissection plane, the quality of the original trials may confound our conclusion and this is a major limitation when we
included these trials in our pooled analysis.
In the present review, no obvious evidence indicative of
preserving technique, including D-fascia preservation,
puboprostatic ligament sparing, or selective/no ligation of
DVC, was detected in conjunction with increased PSM
rate. In a retrospective controlled study reported by Hoshi
et al. in 2013 [15], the authors reconfirmed that the DVC
preserving technique would not increase the PSM rate, as
compared with the conventional intrafascial technique.
Further, we could not conclusively determine any significant differences among the 3 surgical types of RRP, LRP,
and RALRP from our pooled results. Overlapping results
could be identified from the studies of Asimakopoulos
and Greco. Asimakopoulos et al. conducted a randomized comparison between LRP and RALRP and
found no statistically significant differences for the
PSM rate [21]. In the study of Greco et al. comparing
RRP with LRP, results demonstrated that both surgical
types had similar PSM rates [24]. In terms of our regression model, age was another relevant predictor of
the PSM rate, demonstrating that older patients had
higher PSM rates for pT3 and all-stage cancers.
Conclusions
In summary, intrafascial technique resulted in a total
PSM rate of 14.2% for all-stage cancer and 9.7% in pT2
disease. With stringent case selection and conducted by
experienced surgeons, intrafascial prostatectomy could
offer an acceptable or, at least, equivalent PSM rate compared with the conventional interfascial approach.
Current patient selection criteria are more stringent than
those indicated for radical prostatectomy by guidelines,
and we proposed SSOS as an indication of intrafascial
prostatectomy. Preoperative SSOS should be more than
7 points to obtain an acceptable postoperative PSM rate
of 15% on average.