Background
Armed conflicts are an unfortunate constant of human
civilization [1]. Most of the communities exposed to
Armed Conflict Experiences (ACE) live in low/middle-
income countries with limited resources for social
investment and mental health support [2]. Mental health
studies among people exposed to ACE have focused on
characterizing highly prevalent mental health disorders
(e.g. depression, anxiety) and/or their symptoms
associated with traumatic ACE, using grouping criteria
according to a legal frame (e.g. ex-combatants and victims)
[3, 4]. In this sense, Tobón et al. [5] and Sánchez-
Padilla et al. [6] characterized adult ex-combatants
and victims. They found that 39.9% of such population
described distress or anxiety and 39.3% showed sad feelings
together with recurrent crying. They also reported
diagnosis of depression (18.2%), acute stress disorder
(9.9%), and PTSD (8.4%). Additionally, mood and anxiety
disorders were larger for those living in rural (46%)
than in urban areas (34%) [5, 6]. Moreover, other mental
health dispositions such as empathy have also been evaluated.
Authors have found that different empathic dispositional
profiles (e.g., low empathic concern and personal
distress) were observed in ex-combatants when compared
to controls based on the Interpersonal Reactivity
Index (IRI) assessment [5]. They found that ex-combatants
and victims with low empathic scores showed lower
neuropsychological rates in working memory and inhibitory
control than those with high empathy [5, 6].
Other studies such as the Colombian Mental Health
Survey [7] used semi-structured surveys like the Self-
Reporting Questionnaire (SRQ) and socio-demographic
questionnaires in civilians [8, 9]. They evaluated the associations
between exposure to ACE and mental health disorders
and revealed that individuals exposed to ACE had
a higher probability of showing mental health disorders
when compared to non-exposed people [7]. Additionally,
other studies identified that civilians exposed to ACE
also experienced a higher prevalence of mental health
disorders with emotional and psychological affections [8,
10–12].
Colombia is a well-known world referent of a longterm
and low-intensity armed conflict with a wide impact
on the continent. Official entities for victims such as
RUV for its abbreviations I in Spanish (Unique Registry
of Victims) inform that 18.5% of Colombian population
has been a victim. Reported events were mainly forced
displacement (7,553,750), homicide (1,010,989), and
harassment (419,229) [13]. Moreover, according to the
Colombian Normalization and Reincorporation Agency
(ARN: Agencia para la Reincorporación y Normalización),
74,277 people left illegal armed groups between
2001 and 2019 [14]. In addition to these actors (victims
and ex-combatants), the Colombian armed conflict has
also impacted the general population. The latest mental
health survey in the country showed a prevalence of traumatic
events related to the armed conflict of 7.7% (95%
CI 6.9–8.5) in the general population between 18 and
44 years old [7, 9].
Government programs have prioritized individuals
identified as victims or ex-combatants based on the
evidence mentioned above. However, there is a limited
inclusive analysis of mental health outcomes in civilians
exposed to ACE [15]. Thus, related studies include civilians
(victims or not) and ex-combatants in a common
quantitative category due to the lack of validated measures
to control the level of ACE. These situations have
blinded the characterization of mental health outcomes
in populations exposed to ACE and have constrained the
evidence for developing public-health-based screenings,
assessments, and interventions focused on reducing the
burden of mental health symptoms [15, 16].
Classifying the population according to their level of
ACE allows tackling difficulties related to: (a) data quality,
by addressing populations at risk with ACE as a measure
of exposure; (b) ecological fallacy, by attributing effects
that occur at a macro level to individuals [17]; and (c)
the influence of ACE in different dimensions (i.e. social,
cultural, health) to characterize these events. Quantifying
the exposure to ACE will support establishing mental
health risks and, therefore, prioritizing key vulnerable
groups [18–20].
Previous studies in armed conflict and mental health
identified limitations in the reliability of scales and questionnaires
aiming to characterize relations between mental
health and levels of exposure to ACE [18, 20–22].
There are few instruments validated in Spanish used for
this purpose [23]. In this context, in Giraldo et al. [23]
we previously validated the Extreme Experiences Scale
(
EX2) with populations exposed to ACE in Colombia.
This instrument allowed us to enhance the reliability for
classifying individuals according to their ACE in terms
of levels of exposure (e.g. low or high). It was sensitive to
capture the chronic exposure to ACE expected in scenarios
such as the Colombian one. This instrument showed
content and face validity, and internal consistency (KR-
20: 0.80, 95% CI 0.76–0.84). A two-dimensional factorial
structure (direct or indirect exposure to extreme experiences)
with an adequate model adjustment was found
(CFI 0.91, TLI 0.90, RMSEA 0.05).
In the present study, we aimed to evaluate mental
health outcomes in a population with different levels
of ACE. Our hypotheses were: (a) EX2
will reliably discriminate
different levels of ACE in a sample comprised
of ex-combatants, victims, and general population (nonvictims);
and (b) populations with low and high ACE
have differential patterns related to mental health outcomes
(i.e., post-traumatic stress disorder, other anxiety,
and mood disorders, as well as in positive mental health
aspects such as variations in empathic dimensions).
We expect that this study will contribute with relevant
knowledge about the relation between mental health outcomes
and ACE, and that it will enhance the attention of
mental health services provided to these populations by
the local government agencies.
Methods
Participants
A sample of 220 adult subjects participated in this study.
35 of them were excluded because of missing data (we
excluded subjects if more than 5% of the items on the
EX2
and IRI scales were not answered). As inclusion criteria,
we considered subjects of 18 years old and above
who voluntarily agreed to participate. Exclusion criteria
were a history of brain damage, use of psychiatric/neurological
medication, or substance abuse that may interfere
with their ability to complete the questionnaires. All participants
were evaluated by a trained psychologist using
above mentioned criteria. To reach a heterogeneous
sample, we invited different populations with potential
exposure to direct or indirect experiences related to the
Colombian armed conflict, i.e., we used a convenience
sample.
Ex‑combatants
This sample consisted of 78 Colombian ex-combatants
from illegal armed groups (52 men and 26 women; mean
age 35.6 years, SD 8.6 years; mean education 9 years, SD
3.6 years) that were active in their reintegration route,
provided by the ARN [14]. Each participant was contacted
by the ARN professional who oversaw his/her
process.
Additionally, we invited participants from the general
population and people legally declared as victims.
This sample was recruited through an open invitation
posted in public schools, governmental institutions, and
churches of two selected municipalities of Antioquia,
Colombia (see below). We used public schools as meeting
points for people interested in participating in the study.
Antioquia has been one of the Colombian regions historically
most affected by the armed conflict, with actions of
different legal and illegal armed actors [24–26]. Moreover,
between 2004 and 2009 Antioquia was the second
region with higher homicide rates (16,137 homicides)
[26]. The two chosen municipalities differed in indicators
of displacement, homicides, and actions related to the
conflict. This difference aimed to find variability in levels
of exposure to ACE. Between 1990 and 2013, in the first
municipality, the reported average homicide rate was 125
per 100,000 inhabitants and the average displacement
rate was 105.9 per 10,000 inhabitants. For the same
period, the second municipality had an average homicide
rate of 65.6 per 100,000 inhabitants and an average displacement
rate of 25.2 per 10,000 inhabitants [27].
Victims
We embraced the status of victim of the armed conflict
defined in Law 1448 of the Colombian Constitution [28],
in which a victim is someone who suffered an individual
or collective damage from events related to armed conflict
(i.e., kidnapping, forced disappearance), including
his/her permanent companions and first-degree relatives,
from January 1, 1985 to present date. This sample consisted
of 50 subjects (4 men and 46 women; average age
39.7 years, SD 13.1 years; mean education 10.5 years, SD
3.1 years).
General population (civilians not identified as victims)
A group of 57 volunteers that manifested not being
exposed to ACE throughout their lives formed this
group (18 men and 39 women; average age 35.4 years,
SD 15.2 years; mean education 10.8 years, SD 3.6 years).
They informed of not having a criminal record and were
not directly involved in the armed conflict (either as victims
or combatants).
Figure 1 presents the sample used in this study. Our
final sample consisted of 185 participants that accomplished
the minimum sample criterion by item (10 participants
per variable) to apply the logistic regression
used for the statistical analysis [29, 30]. The participants
were divided in two groups: (a) population with low ACE,
and (b) population with high ACE. These levels were
based on the EX2.
Scores above 2.5 represent the high
exposure group and scores below 2.5 represent low exposure.
However, the cut-off point < 2.5 does not indicate
absence of exposure. This group includes people who
report less than three ACE; that is, they could be exposed
to the conflict but to a lesser degree. This cut-off point
was previously validated with populations exposed to
the Colombian armed conflict (i.e. victims and ex-combatants)
[23]. With this sample criterion we were able to
evaluate the population according to their ACE level.
Table 1 presents descriptive information of the EX2
groups (high and low) for the variables: sex, age, and
years of education.
Assessment instruments
Extreme Experiences Scale (
EX2)
The EX2
is a questionnaire adapted from the Extreme
Experiences Inventory [31] and validated for the Colombian
armed conflict contexts by Giraldo et al. [23]. It consists
of 18 items and two dimensions: (a) direct extreme
experiences (e.g., suffering death threats, assaults, or
beatings) with 12 items, and (b) indirect extreme experiences
with 6 items; that is, those that occur to another
person with whom strong coexistence ties are generated,
such as family and friends (e.g., murder of a close relative
or friend). The EX2
scale was a validated to be used in
the characterization of extreme experiences in contexts
of armed conflicts. The scale has yes/no response options
where affirmative answers have a value of 1. The scale
score is computed as the sum of its items, it ranges from
0 to 18. The questions inquire if the individual or his/her
relatives suffered death threats, aggressions, kidnapping,
beating, or any other event considered as exposure to
ACE.
The scored 2.5 cut-off point mentioned above was
reached through a ROC analysis. Such analysis suggests
that individuals under this value experienced less situations
associated to armed conflict that those with values
higher than 2.5. Ex-combatants and victims commonly
have scores over 2.5. In practice, both groups (high vs.
low) have exposure to ACE; but this cut-off point is sensitive
to discriminating them. Additionally, people with
high ACE (score > 2.5) tend to show a higher frequency of
events related to the direct dimension [23]. The scale has
a good internal consistency (KR-20: 0.80, 95% CI 0.76–
0.84) and demonstrated fit for the two-dimensional models
(CFI 0.91, TLI 0.90, RMSEA 0.05—IC90% 0.04–0.07).
It has a 90% capacity to differentiate individuals between
low and high exposure to ACE [23]. With the sample of
the present study, we found an excellent reliability of the
EX2
scale (KR-20 0.80, 95% CI 0.76–0.84).
Mini‑International Neuro‑Psychiatric Interview Version 5.0
The MINI [32] is a structured interview designed to evaluate
Axis I diagnoses based on the criteria of DSM–IV
[33], assigning a value of 1 for affirmative diagnoses and
0 to the absence of diagnoses. The interview reliability
has presented a kappa coefficient ranging from 0.88 to 1.0
and a good test–retest diagnosis, with a kappa between
0.76 and 0.93 [34]. This instrument has been used in
populations exposed to war and armed conflicts such as
war veterans and refugees [35, 36]. The MINI was used
to assess symptoms and mental health diagnoses such as
mood disorder, anxiety disorder, alcohol abuse, psychotic
disorder, antisocial disorder, PTSD and Suicide risk summarized
in Tables 2 and 3.
We evaluated the reliability of the MINI in our sample
and found a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.83 (95% CI 0.79–0.86).
Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI)
This scale was created by Davis [37], adapted to its
Spanish version by Mestre et al. [38], and validated for
a sample of Colombian ex-combatants by Garcia et al.
[39] and Pineda et al. [40]. This is a 28 item self-report
instrument. Nineteen of the items were written in a positive
sense and nine in a negative one. It has five-answer
options on a Likert scale being the first option “it does
not describe me well” and the last one “it describes me
very well.” IRI is divided into four dimensions defined
as Fantasy (FS), which explores the way that the subject
self-identifies with fictional context and characters in stories
such as novels, books, or movies; Empathic Concern
(EC) evaluates the responses of compassion or sympathy
considering misfortunes toward others; Personal Distress
(PD) evaluates the response of the subjects under
stressor circumstances for themselves and other people;
and Perspective Taking (PT), which assesses the ability
to consider someone else’s points of view through other
people’s experiences and dispositions. The reliability of
this scale was validated for Colombian ex-combatants
with an Alpha coefficient of 0.76 [39, 40].
For the IRI scale, we found good reliability in our data
with a Cronbach’s Alpha of 0.72 (95% CI 0.66–0.78).
Procedure
This is a cross-sectional study that explores the relationship
between exposure to ACE in Colombia and mental
health outcomes. Initially, participants were informed
about the purpose of the study, questionnaires, scales,
privacy, confidentiality of data management, and the
implications and benefits of participating in this study.
Individual acceptance was supported by signing the
informed consent. This document was approved by University
of Antioquia, (Medellín, Colombia) Medicine
School Ethics Committee. Afterwards, they were evaluated
by a trained psychologist through an individual
interview, in which they were inquired about the presence
of neurological or psychiatric conditions and their
possible exposure to ACE.
Statistical analysis
Data analysis started with data cleansing of outliers,
missing data, and inconsistent information. For each
variable (
EX2, MINI, and IRI), we accepted a maximum
of 5% of missing data and replaced these values with the
median; variables above this percentage were eliminated.
Only item 28 of the IRI (translated from Spanish: “Before
criticizing someone, I try to imagine how I would feel if
I were him/her”) surpassed 5% of missing data. It presented
33.5% of missing data and was thus eliminated.
Considering the context of the participants evaluated
in this study, we decided to analyze the IRI based on
the theoretical model reported by García et al. [39]. To
guarantee the reliability of the IRI scale without item 28
and to verify the consistency of the 17 items model, we
performed a Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) excluding
item 28 to identify changes in the data structure. The
analysis suggested that there were no structural changes
for the confirmatory model by excluding this item. The
complete analysis is available in Additional file 1.
After the preliminary analysis and data cleansing,
we evaluated the bivariate association between ACE
(obtained with EX2)
and clinical diagnosis (MINI). We
established a chi-square association test. The significance
of the analysis was given by a p-value < 0.05.
Finally, we explored the EX2
level of ACE as a key factor
to explain changes in mental health outcomes of populations
affected by the armed conflict. To determine the
relative weight of ACE, we used a Binary Logistic Regression
(BLR) and a Linear Regression Model (LRM), with
levels of ACE as the independent variable and mental
health outcomes (e.g., depression, anxiety, empathy-fantasy
dimension) as dependent variables. We used BLR to
analyze clinical diagnoses given the dichotomous nature
of the MINI. The outcome variable was 1 (presence of
diagnosis) or 0 (absence of a diagnosis), e.g., presence (1)
or absence (0) of depression. We used LRM to analyze
empathy outcomes given the continuous nature of the
IRI. In this case, the outcome variable was the score of
each IRI dimension.
Both models were adjusted for demographic variables
that might interfere, such as age, years of education, and
sex. To observe significant associations in the model BLR
between ACE and clinical diagnosis (MINI) outcomes,
we estimated the odds ratio with a confidence interval
of 95%. To observe significant associations in the model
LRM between ACE and empathy outcomes, we estimated
coefficients with a confidence interval of 95%.
In both models, the statistical modeling process was
carried out using the enter selection method. We used a
Hosmer Lemeshow criterion to enter in the multivariate
models, variables that passed a bivariate association with
a p-value > 0.25. For all models, a p-value < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant. We specified 95% of confidence
in the analyses. All the analyses were performed
with SPSS 23rd version [41] and Stata 14th version [42].
Results
Table 2 shows Pearson chi square test or Fisher exact
statistic bivariate analyses to explore the associations
between ACE levels and the mental health outcomes
evaluated in this study. We found significant differences
characterized by a large proportion of anxiety disorders
(22.2%) in the high ACE group, particularly in PTSD
(14.4%) and suicide risk (17.8%). We also evaluated the
crossover of some of these diagnoses. Although we did
not observe statistical differences, we did find a trend
with a high percentage of the following combinations:
anxiety disorder and mood disorder (10.9%), anxiety with
suicide risk (7.6%), and mood disorder with suicide risk
(6.7%).
Table 3 shows the BLR model exploring the relation
between exposure to ACE and mental health outcomes
evaluated in this study. The BLR analysis was adjusted
by age, sex, and years of education. The model explored
ACE through the EX2
scale and mental health outcomes
through the MINI scale.
We found that the group with high ACE had more
probability of presenting clinical mental health outcomes.
Additionally, the probability to have an anxiety
disorder in the sample with high ACE was 2.34 times
higher than in subjects with low ACE. Moreover, subjects
with high ACE presented higher odds to develop PSTD
(OR 5.63; CI 95% 1.24–25.67) and suicide risk (OR 3.28;
CI 95% 1.25–8.63).
Table 4 presents the influence of ACE in cognitive and
affective dimensions of the IRI scale adjusted by age, sex,
and years of education. Results show that a high ACE
only influences the Fantasy dimension (β = 1.77, 95%
CI 0.28–3.26) when adjusted by other variables in the
model. For other cognitive and affective empathy dimensions,
ACE did not present significant differences.
Discussion
This study aimed to evaluate mental health outcomes in
a sample with different levels of ACE calculated by the
EX2
scale, a variable that we hypothesized influences the
appearance of mental health outcomes (measured by the
MINI and the IRI scale). We found that the group with
high exposure to ACE presented higher probability of
anxiety disorders, PTSD, and suicide risk. Additionally,
we found that a high level of ACE explains changes that
occur in IRI-fantasia scores, adjusted with age, sex, and
educational level, suggesting that this relation is crucial
to program the socio-affective response.
Our study was supported by a previous validation of
the EX2
scale [23]. This allowed us to suggest that the
EX2
cut-off point of 2.5 is sensitive and reliable to discriminate
mental health outcomes according to the low
or high level of exposure to ACE. A similar cut-off point
was previously reported for traumatic events (not only in
armed conflict contexts) by Cherewick et al. [43], where
scores for potentially traumatic events were 2.2 and 2.3
for males and females respectively [43]. This may contribute
on reducing gaps presented in previous studies that
did not classify the level of ACE [18, 20, 22, 23, 44, 45],
for example with our finding of a relation between high
levels of ACE (through the EX2
scale) and mental health
disorders (anxiety, PTSD, and suicide risk). Moreover,
although the construct of ACE is recent, this finding
complements the information reported in other works
that evaluated mental health outcomes in different populations
exposed to ACE [19, 20, 46, 47] but were focused
in only one group (e.g., veterans) or measure (e.g., PTSD).
Regarding the relation of ACE and the IRI scale, our
work provides a quantification of the exposure to ACE
associated to empathy with similar results than categorical-
variable-based studies. Previous research focused on
Colombian ex-combatants identified different empathic
profiles [48–50]. One of these profiles was effectively
characterized by high scores in cognitive dimensions (i.e.,
FS, PT), suggesting that people exposed to ACE may tend
more frequently to assign potential fictional or imaginary
explanations to interpret unfortunate situations. Similar
results were reported by Agaibi et al. [44], where people
exposed to extreme stress and trauma experienced
different patterns of coping styles, changing their socioaffective
and mental health responses. Empathic dimensions
such as fantasy allow creating coping strategies to
face traumatic situations in terms of religiosity, or high
expectations about how things will get better in a near
future. Furthermore, such relation of ACE and fantasy
might influence their perception of affective and cognitive
states, and the response of their social context as previous
studies reported [51].
No other relations were found between ACE and mental
health outcomes derived from MINI and IRI. To our
knowledge, this is one of the first approaches that relates
mental health outcomes (such as clinical conditions and
empathy dimensions) with the exposure to ACE. In summary,
our study suggests that the EX2
cut-off point found
in Giraldo et al. [23] may be used as a predictor to explore
mental health outcomes (e.g. mental disorders) in people
classified with high levels of ACE.
Furthermore, the regression model was relevant to
identify the relations between mental health outcomes
and different levels of ACE (calculated from the EX2
scale). This model advanced in the identification of (a)
the influence of the exposure to ACE on the appearance
of mental health disorders; and (b) the relation between
ACE and changes in empathic dispositions (i.e., fantasy).
This model improves the quality of information used to
identify risk and protective factors.
A key novelty of our work with respect to previous
studies comes from the way that we classified our sample,
as other works traditionally use criteria based on a
legal framework (i.e. victims, ex-combatants, and refugees)
[14, 52]. In this study, we propose a novel analysis
of mental health outcomes for individuals exposed to
ACE without considering their legal status. Additionally,
instead of considering only their mental health diagnosis,
we also considered the use of socio-cognitive instruments
to evidence social and affective aspects of mental
health, such as it is presented in empathy dimensions. We
expect that this approach will improve the effectiveness
of the attention to screen, assess, intervene, and potentially
prevent outcomes in populations affected by these
events.
Although our sample size was small when compared to
previous studies [6], our statistical model guaranteed: (1)
the reliability of the results, because the regression model
is a robust model adapted for small sample sizes; (2) we
found no differences in socio-demographic variables that
commonly work as confounding; and finally, (3) our findings
are aligned with previous studies that used larger
samples [8, 19, 20]. Additionally, studies on mental health
of populations affected by armed conflicts have shown
limitations in the reliability of the questionnaires to
measure the exposure to ACE [2, 20, 22]. Our study controlled
this by using a validated instrument (
EX2) [23].
The results of our study represent an important piece
of evidence for mental health professionals, especially
to direct their efforts on strategies oriented to screen,
assess, and implement effective interventions required
in populations affected by armed conflicts. Moreover,
we suggest the importance of considering not only the
aspects reported in this study but also other elements of
their particular social context (e.g., access to health and
educational services). We expect that future studies could
develop two lines of actions: (a) to perform a systematic
characterization of the samples based on reliable inventories
such as EX2
in populations affected by ACE; and
(b) to implement evidence-based interventions focused
on enhancing social abilities, responding to particular
contexts and beliefs as reported in previous studies
[8, 49, 53]. This would contribute to integrate different
approaches such as public health strategies and, therefore,
developing cost-effective models to assess mental
health risks across populations exposed to ACE.
Such intervention might enhance the sensitivity to
evaluate mental health outcomes in armed conflict
contexts, providing new evidence to transfer to epidemiological
and clinical fields [33, 53]. We envisage that the
replication of our results will inform mental health public
policies adapted to populations exposed to ACE. We
expect that future studies will promote the use and transference
of these associative models, not only to communities
chronically exposed to armed conflicts but also
populations with extreme vulnerability experiences, such
as refugees and people affected by forced displacement.
Additionally, we expect further advances in the study of
mental health outcomes and coping strategies observed
in populations exposed to ACE [10].
Conclusion
This is one of the first studies focused on classifying people
exposed to ACE in terms of low or high levels of exposure
and establishing an association with mental health
outcomes such as anxiety, risk of suicide, PTSD, and fantasy.
The EX2
is one of the first instruments, which allow
classifying populations based on the exposure to ACE,
avoiding the use of legal labels (e.g., victim, military,
or ex-combatant). It contributes with new evidence to
improve characterization and potential evidence-based
intervention programs.