Intellectual disability describes a range of neurodevelopmental
disorders that impair intellectual and adaptive
functioning with onset during childhood [1]. People
with an intellectual disability experience higher rates of
mental health problems compared to the general population,
including higher rates of risk factors for suicide [2,
3]. Australian researchers have found that while disability
workers note suicidal behaviour amongst their clients
with intellectual disability, few disability services utilise
suicide risk assessment tools [5].
Despite a higher prevalence of mental health problems,
people with an intellectual disability seek professional
help at lower rates than the general public, and even
fewer people receive mental health support from services
that are specifically for people with an intellectual
disability [6, 7]. A number of barriers to accessing mental
health services have been identified, including lack of
availability of professionals with necessary training and
diagnostic overshadowing (symptoms being attributed to
the disability rather than to the mental health problem)
[8]. Furthermore, symptoms may manifest differently
than in people without an intellectual disability [10, 11].
For these reasons, it is important that people who work
or live with people with an intellectual disability know
how to recognise symptoms of mental health problems
(to avoid diagnostic overshadowing and misattributing
signs of mental health problems), have the skills to provide
appropriate support, and encourage mental health
help-seeking. These are the keys skills when providing
mental health first aid. Mental health first aid is defined
as the help offered to a person developing a mental health
problem, experiencing a worsening of an existing mental
health problem or in a mental health crisis [12]. The first
aid is given until appropriate professional help is received
or until the crisis resolves.
Mental Health First Aid (MHFA) Australia has developed
training courses that teach mental health first aid
skills to the public. People who receive MHFA training
have increased mental health knowledge, fewer stigmatising
attitudes and show increased supportive behaviours
toward individuals with mental health problems
[13, 14]. MHFA courses are informed using a series of
mental health first aid guidelines developed using the
Delphi expert consensus method [15].
The aim of this study was to develop guidelines for
how a family member, friend, concerned community
member or disability worker without specialist mental
health qualifications should give initial assistance (mental
health first aid) to a person with an intellectual disability
who may be experiencing mental health problems or
in a mental health crisis. The guidelines will be used to
inform a Mental Health First Aid for Intellectual Disability
course.
Methods
The Delphi expert consensus method was used to develop
the guidelines [15]. This particular Delphi methodology
has been used to develop a number of similar mental
health first aid guidelines [16]. It involved five steps: (1)
Literature search (2) Survey development (3) Recruitment
of expert panels (4) Data collection and analysis
and (5) Guidelines development. The methodology is
briefly described below and a more detailed description
of the Delphi methodology can be found in the article by
Bond and colleagues [17].
Literature search
A systematic search of grey and academic literature was
conducted (including websites, books and academic articles)
to collect information about how to offer assistance
to someone with an intellectual disability who is experiencing
a mental health problem or in a mental health
crisis. The grey literature was included because it reflects
the wide range of people’s beliefs about intervention and
care.
The search terms were (how to help someone with
mental illness OR depression OR anxiety OR psychosis
OR suicidal thoughts OR self-injury OR alcohol abuse
OR drug abuse OR bipolar OR traumatic event OR eating
disorders AND intellectual disability OR developmental
disability OR mental retardation OR learning disability)
and (first aid for someone with mental illness OR depression
OR anxiety OR psychosis OR suicidal thoughts OR
self-injury OR alcohol abuse OR drug abuse OR bipolar
OR traumatic event OR Eating disorders AND intellectual
disability OR developmental disability OR mental
retardation OR learning disability). The top 50 websites,
books and journal articles for each search was reviewed
(see Fig. 1 for results).
Survey development
The first survey (Round 1) contained statements from the
literature search about how a family member, friend, concerned
community member or disability worker without
specialist mental health qualifications can assist a person
with an intellectual disability who may be developing a
mental health problem or is in a mental health crisis. The
items were drafted by FAC and KSB and then the working
group (authors of this paper including Delphi method
experts, mental health first aid experts and experts in the
field of mental health and intellectual disability) reviewed
them to finalise the survey. Survey Monkey was used to
administer all surveys (see Additional file 1).
Panel formation
As per other similar Delphi studies [17] participants were
recruited from high-income, western countries that have
a Mental Health First Aid program. Participants had to
be 18 years or older, be able to read and write in English,
and meet the following criteria:
• Have experience in caring (unpaid) for or providing
day-to-day support to an adult or adolescent
with an intellectual disability who has experienced
mental health problems AND have had current or
past engagement in activities that give you a broader
exposure to the experiences of people with an intellectual
disability and mental health problems, e.g. are
a member of a carer support group, through a professional
role, or carer advocacy organisation.
• Be a mental health professional, disability professional,
educator or researcher with at least 3 years’
experience in the area of intellectual disability and
mental health.
OR
• Have at least 3 years’ experience working or volunteering
for an advocacy organisation in a formal role
as an advocate for people with intellectual disability.
A panel of at least 23 has been found to yield stable
results [18] and the study aimed to recruit at least 30
to each of the three expert panels (carer, mental health
professional or advocate) to allow for attrition. The number
of participants recruited to each panel was less than
this target. Therefore, all participants were combined
into one panel, a reasonable strategy given that the panels’
Round 1 responses were moderately to highly correlated
(see Table 1) and the Delphi method aims to
recruit panel members who represent a diverse range of
relevant expertise [15]. Other similar Delphi studies have
employed this strategy as well [17, 19].
Data collection and analysis
Participants rated the aforementioned statements over
three rounds using a 5-point Likert scale: ‘Essential’ to be
included in the guidelines; ‘Important’ to be included in
the guidelines; ‘Don’t know/depends’; ‘Unimportant’; or,
‘Should not be included’ in the guidelines. The specifics
of the analysis can be found in the article by Bond and
colleagues [17].
Guidelines development
The first author drafted the guidelines document using
the endorsed items and the working group reviewed and
finalised the guidelines document. It was given to the
expert panel for final approval.
Results
Participants
A total number of 79 people were recruited, with 53
completing all three rounds (67.1% retention rate). Participants
who completed all three rounds were 60.3%
female, 39.6% male and 0% other. They had an average
age of 51.2 years (12.36 SD, range 28–84). Participants
were from Australia (28.3%), the UK (24.5%), the United
States (13.2%), New Zealand (11.3%), Ireland (11.3%),
Canada (9.4%) and Sweden (1.9%). Seven (13.2%) participants
were MHFA Instructors and the sample had a varied
amount of experience with intellectual disability (see
Table 2).
Item ratings
A total of 202 items were rated over the three rounds
to yield a total of 170 endorsed items and 74 rejected
items (see Additional file 2 for a list of the endorsed and
rejected items). Figure 2 presents the information about
the total number of items rated, endorsed and rejected
over the three rounds. There was a strong positive correlation
between the experts in the percentage endorsement
for whether items should be included in the
guidelines, see Table 1.
Participant qualitative responses
In Round 1 participants were given the opportunity to
provide qualitative feedback that was used to modify or
create items to be included in the Round 2 survey. This
qualitative feedback highlighted particular areas of concern
that needed to be addressed in the guidelines. The
complexity of recognising and addressing mental health
problems in people with an intellectual disability was
highlighted in participant comments, e.g. “Due to complexity
of disability and mental health issues, separating
and acknowledging both is important.”
Participants felt it was important to emphasise that the
person has the same rights as anyone else with a mental
health problem. One participant said, “A person with an
intellectual disability has the same right to privacy as all
others which is only waivered- as for all persons- when
harm to self or others is presumed.” As a result of comments
like this, the following item was endorsed and
included in the guidelines: “The first aider should know
that the person’s right to privacy should not be waived
simply because they have an intellectual disability.”
The participants also highlighted the importance of not
making assumptions about the attribution of the person’s
behaviour. This was reinforced in the qualitative data as
well, e.g. “Changes in behaviour may also be related to
physical health issues” and “Also important that changes
in behaviour are not assumed to be mental health problems—
could be, for example, expressions of pain or discomfort
arising from physical health problems.” Thus, the
guidelines advise that the first aider “encourage the person
to seek medical advice.”
Finally, the guidelines give practical advice for specific
situations, something that was highlighted as
important by some participants, e.g. “These are important
practical steps for a person on the ground working
with someone.” For example, advice is given on:
• How to include others (e.g. family members, carers,
legal guardians) in a conversation while still maintaining
the centrality of the person and their needs.
• Difficulties the first aider may encounter such as
aggressive behaviours or sexually inappropriate
behaviours.
• What to do if the person is engaging in self-injury,
experiencing abuse or trauma, or is suicidal.
• Encouraging appropriate professional help.
• Enhancing communication and comprehension.
Guidelines development
The endorsed items formed the basis of the guidelines
(Considerations When Offering Mental Health First Aid
to a Person with an Intellectual Disability). The following
describes sections and content of the guidelines:
• Knowing about and recognising the signs of mental
health problems in people with an intellectual disability.
• Information about specific mental health problems
and how they manifest in people with an intellectual
disability, including anxiety, hallucinations and delusions,
eating disorders, substance use problems and
dementia.
• Communicating with the person, including information
on enhancing comprehension, engaging others
in the conversation, and talking about emotions and
mental health problems.
• Supporting the person, including respecting their
rights and supporting them to use of self-help strategies.
• Difficulties the first aider may encounter including
aggression, sexually inappropriate behaviour and
managing personal boundaries.
• What to do if the person is engaging in self-injury, or
experiencing abuse or trauma.
• How to encourage professional help.
• What to do in a crisis situation.
There is also specific information for disability workers
and what to do if the person needs to be taken to hospital.
The expert panel did not offer any additional comments
or suggestions for edits on the guidelines document.
Discussion
The aim of this study was to develop guidelines for how
a family member, friend, concerned community member
or disability worker without specialist mental health
qualifications should give initial assistance (mental health
first aid) to a person with an intellectual disability who
may be experiencing mental health problems or in a
mental health crisis. These guidelines are being used to
form the basis of an MHFA Australia course for members
of the public and people who work with people with an
intellectual disability, e.g. volunteers, disability carers and
advocates. These guidelines and the resultant course will
provide clear information on recognising and addressing
mental health problems in people with an Intellectual
disability.
Providing training on how to recognise and discuss
mental health problems with people with an intellectual
disability will empower them and those who support
them to seek appropriate mental health care. The
course may reduce the risk of symptoms being dismissed
by workers and carers and diagnostic overshadowing [8]
as specific changes and symptoms that indicate a mental
health problem can be better recognised and communicated
to health professionals.
The guidelines give advice on respecting the rights
of the person while engaging with them and their legal
guardian. Specifically, the importance of recognising the
person’s right to make decisions about their needs (selfdetermination)
is highlighted. Research indicates that
self-determination in people with an intellectual disability
leads to better quality of life, well-being and improved
mental health [20, 21].
These guidelines are to be used in conjunction with
other mental health first aid guidelines, including the
guidelines for depression [22], suicidal thoughts [23],
psychosis [24] and drug and alcohol use problems [25,
26]. In conjunction, the reader is provided with clear,
actionable and practical advice on how to support a person
with an intellectual disability who is experiencing
any number of mental health problems. Furthermore, the
course that will be developed using the guidelines will
complement the suite of training that is available through
Mental Health First Aid Australia, e.g. Mental Health
First Aid for young people, older people, people experiencing
suicidal thoughts.
Strengths and limitations
This Delphi study is limited in similar ways to other
recent Delphi studies [19, 27], specifically that participants
may have been asked to comment on items that
were outside their area of expertise and, because there
was no opportunity for discussion among participants,
biases may remain unchallenged. However, in contrast
to this limitation, by eliminating ‘consensus by discussion’,
all voices equally influence the endorsement process.
This is a major strength of this study.
Another limitation was that it was difficult to recruit
enough participants to allow for three separate expert
panels, as has been used in other recent Delphi studies
[16]. However, it is more important that participants
have a diverse range of expertise and, given almost half of
participants had experience in two or more of the areas
of expertise (professional, unpaid carer, advocate) and
given the high inter-panel correlations, this limitation
was minimised [15].
Conclusion
People with an intellectual disability experience mental
health problems in similar ways to the general population,
however they experience significant barriers to
professional help. The mental health first aid guidelines,
Considerations when offering mental health first aid to a
person with an intellectual disability, offer advice on how
to recognise when a person with an intellectual disability
may be experiencing mental health problems, offer
support and encourage professional help. The guidelines
were developed using the consensus of 79 experts. They
will form the basis of a course that teaches the skills to
assist a person with an intellectual disability and mental
health problems. It is anticipated that the guidelines and
resultant course will be a valuable resource to disability
carers, disability workers and members of the public.
Future research direction could include evaluation of
the course that is based on these guidelines (currently in
development) and its impact on course participants and
the recipients of mental health first aid.