Background
Inhibitory control (IC) is thought to be a core component
of executive function (EF), a set of higher-order cognitive
processes involved in the conscious control of thought,
emotion, and action [1]. IC develops most intensively
during pre-school age [2], but its further development
also occurs in middle childhood and is believed to continue
during adolescence [3]. Contributing to developmental
changes and individual differences in a wide
spectrum of cognitive and social outcomes (for a review,
see [4]), IC (among the other components of EF) is found
to be associated with numerous biological and socioenvironmental
factors. One of the significant variables in
the latter group is the quality of the parent–child attachment
relationship. Some studies of early childhood have
shown that there are positive and direct links between
children’s secure attachment to parents and their IC [e.g.5, 6]. These links are explained mainly by pointing out
that competent caregivers provide well-tuned external
regulation [e.g. 7]. However, it cannot be precluded that
the quality of attachment is associated with children’s IC
not only directly but also through other factors. One factor
might be the child’s verbal ability. The mediating role
of this factor in the relationship between attachment and
EF is suggested by results revealing a link between attachment
and verbal ability [e.g. 8] and between verbal ability
and EF [e.g. 9]. However, little is known about the links
between those variables in middle childhood. Therefore,
the purpose of our study was to examine whether there
is a relationship between attachment and IC in children
during this period of development and to what extent
verbal ability mediates this relationship. In our study, we
focus on IC as a central feature of the development of EF
in childhood [e.g. 4] and one of the essential components
of EF, and its cool and hot aspects. The development of
the latter aspect occurs mostly in middle childhood, a
relatively uninvestigated period when it comes to the
relationship between attachment and IC.
Executive function and inhibitory control
Despite some discrepancies regarding the way the construct
of EF should be defined, most factor analyses indicate
that it has a componential structure. Components
of EF that have been identified include working memory,
attentional flexibility, and inhibitory control [10]. Based
on the results of neuroscience research, Zelazo and Müller
[11] distinguished two different aspects of EF. The relatively
“cool” control processes are associated primarily
with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and are
evoked under relatively abstract, non-affective situations.
On the other hand, the relatively “hot” top-down control
processes are subsumed primarily by ventral and medial
regions of the prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and operate in
motivationally and affectively significant situations. The
existing evidence suggests that although cool and hot EF
are related [1], their unique aspects differentially predict
emotional and behavioural characteristics across childhood
[e.g. 12].
One of the essential components of EF that emerges in
all factor analyses of EF tasks is inhibitory control (IC).
IC is defined as the ability to inhibit or suppress mental
processes that are not relevant to the current goal or task
[e.g. 10, 13]. IC is thought to be a key construct in the
domain of self-regulation [14], as it underpins an extensive
range of domains of functioning such as emotion
regulation [e.g. 7], theory of mind [e.g. 15] and academic
achievement [e.g. 16] across childhood and adolescence.
Existing evidence suggests that in middle childhood, the
maturation of hot IC is relatively more protracted and
lags behind the development of cool IC [1].
From a neuroscience perspective, the development
of EF is thought to be a result of the maturation of the
prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex [17, 18]. However,
in the past decade, a growing interest in social factors
related to individual differences in EF has emerged. Several
variables pertaining to family background, including
socioeconomic status (SES) [19], and mothers’ parenting
practices, such as scaffolding [e.g. 20] or autonomy support
[e.g. 21], have been implicated in EF development.
Although there has been substantial research on predictors
of EF in young children [for a meta-analysis, see
22], external factors relating to EF in older children have
been explored far less. Moreover, research including both
facets of EF—hot and cool—is still limited. Meanwhile,
there are also notable developmental changes in EF during
middle childhood that are likely to be influenced by
the social environment [1].
It should be noted that IC also can be considered in the
temperament-based framework, in which the term effortful
control (EC) is used to describe the multidimensional
construct consisting of “the efficiency of executive attention,
including the ability to inhibit a dominant response,
to activate a subdominant response, to plan, and to detect
errors” [3, p. 129]. Therefore, the core function of EC is
the use of attentional processes to regulate one’s emotional
arousal, motivation, and behaviour. However, as
some researchers claim [24–26], IC focuses primarily on
top-down, volitional control of attention and cognitive
self-regulatory processes (slower, relatively more effortful
and deliberate), whereas EC includes primarily quick,
automatic or nonconscious aspects of emotional reactivity
and regulation. Therefore, in our study we adopt the
distinction between hot and cool IC, which is rooted in
the cognitive approach to self-regulation, and we consider
IC from the cognitive perspective, as the core component
of EF.
Attachment and cognitive development
Child-parent bonds constitute the most intense and
enduring relationships across childhood, and thus they
are likely to be one of the prime candidates to account
for environmentally-driven individual differences in children’s
EF [5]. Child-parent attachment, as an important
aspect of a caregiving relationship, is considered to be the
main regulator of emotional, cognitive, and neurophysiological
processes [27]. Therefore, the experience associated
with this relationship is likely to be the basis for the
self-regulating abilities in children.
From attachment theory, several hypotheses concerning
the effects of child-parent attachment on the child’s
cognitive development can be derived [28]. Given the
objectives of the present study, one of these hypotheses
seems to be of key importance. This is the social-network
hypothesis [28], which predicts that secure children are
more motivated to engage in frequent harmonious social
interactions and to openly communicate with other
people compared with insecure children. In a direct or
indirect way (e.g. by contributing to the development of
the child’s verbal ability), this stimulates cognitive development
[28]. Moreover, parents of securely attached
children tend to develop responsive and open communication
with their offspring [29], and this was shown
to engage the child in active construction of meaning,
stimulate language development, and thus support the
development of cognitive control [e.g. 30]. Given that in
middle childhood parents still remain the child’s primary
attachment figures [31] and considering the fact that
it is a period of further significant growth in language
skills (and a large part of children’s interactions with
their parents is verbal), it seems reasonable to expect
that language in this period is an important tool of EF
development.
Interestingly, the role of child–father attachment in EF
development is still mostly unexplored territory compared
to child–mother attachment. On the other hand,
a growing body of research suggests that attachment to
the father is a significant factor in determining individual
differences in specific domains of the child’s development
[e.g. 32]. Moreover, some evidence suggests that there
is a distinct change in importance of the father as a parent,
especially concerning the support of exploration in
middle childhood [33, 34]. According to some authors,
fathers contribute to their children’s sense of security
mostly by providing them with sensitive support during
explorative and gently challenging play, whereas mothers
contribute mainly by providing comfort when the child
is in distress [35], and thus fathers are thought to play a
more crucial role than mothers in the development of
children’s exploration, autonomy and relationships with
peers [33]. Some researchers claim that in the domain of
cognitive activities, this specific paternal function results,
for example, in higher levels of paternal than maternal
demands in problem-solving tasks [36, 37, p. 992]
and children’s academic performance [38]. Therefore, it
seems that considering not only the child–mother but
also the child–father attachment relationship is necessary
to understand how attachment bonds with parents
are organised in their potential influence on children’s EF
development across childhood.
Attachment as a predictor of executive function
Previous research on the links between children’s attachment
and EF relates almost exclusively to early childhood.
Bernier and colleagues [5] found that more
securely attached children at 15 and 24 months of age
showed a higher level of cool EF at 3 years of age, and this
relationship remained significant even when the child’s
language development, family SES, and maternal sensitivity
were controlled. In a follow-up study, Bernier and colleagues
[39] found that secure child–mother attachment
at 2 years of age still remained a significant predictor
of cool aspects of working memory, IC, cognitive flexibility,
and planning ability in children 5‒6 years of age.
The link between child–mother security and cool IC in
pre-schoolers was also found by Heikamp and colleagues
[40]. In turn, the longitudinal study by Low and Webster
[41] showed that in comparison to secure attachment,
disorganised attachment to the mother at 3 years was
related to lower IC and planning ability at 6 years.
Regarding research on the links between attachment
and hot EF, Mittal and colleagues [42] found that 2- and
3-year-olds with a secure or avoidant attachment to
their mothers were able to control impulses more effectively
than their ambivalently attached peers. Research
has also shown that in comparison to children with disorganised
attachment, secure children at 2 years of age
achieved significantly higher scores at age 6 on a delayed
gratification task [43]. Also, Moore and Symons [44] in
their longitudinal study found that children who were
securely attached to their mothers at age 3 were more
likely to patiently wait for a prize at age 4 than their insecure
peers. Finally, a positive relationship between secure
attachment to the mother in children aged 6‒10 and the
ability to delay gratification was also found by Marchetti
and colleagues [6], the only study to date concerning
middle childhood.
Attachment as a predictor of verbal ability
Several authors suggested that the quality of parent–child
relationships plays a formative role in the development
of verbal ability, both in their receptive and expressive
aspects [e.g. 45]. Although the association between
attachment and verbal ability has been studied relatively
rarely, existing studies show that indeed this link is quite
strong (for a meta-analysis, see [28]). Child–mother
attachment was found to be associated with language
performance not only during infancy and pre-school ages
[e.g. 46] but also during middle childhood and adolescence
[e.g. 47]. However, in most of the existing studies of
this type, child–father attachment is rarely included.
Meanwhile, some authors consider that fathers might
play an even more significant role than mothers in children’s
linguistic development, as they act as “a kind of
linguistic bridge between the child’s familial environment
and the outside world” [37, p. 999]. Existing research
has shown that fathers placed higher language demands
on their children (for a meta-analysis, see [48]). In fact,
significant effects of child–father attachment security
(measured observationally) on children’s receptive
language skills were found in infancy [49]. Moreover,
self-reported attachment security with fathers was found
to be the unique predictor of school children’s language
mastery [37].
In explaining the associations between attachment and
verbal ability, several hypotheses are relevant [28]. First,
secure children might be more willing to communicate
with their parents, and therefore they might be more
exposed to adult language competence compared with
insecure children [28]. Second, in secure dyads, parental
responsiveness during teaching and conversations might
enhance children’s communicative behaviour and linguistic
ability. Furthermore, secure children have relatively
more positive relationships outside the family, which in
turn provokes a richer language environment.
On the other hand, Di Folco et al. [33] found that
unlike attachment with the mother, narrative measures of
attachment with the father were not related to the 6-yearold
children’s verbal IQ. As those authors note, a possible
explanation may be that compared to mothers, fathers
use less supportive but more directive and informative
language when interacting with their children. Hence, the
socioemotional context evoked by the narrative measures
probably elicits different linguistic skills, depicting these
differences in the communicative context of the relationship
to each parent [33, p. 728].
Verbal ability and executive function
The role of language in EF is emphasised by both classical
and contemporary theories of cognitive development
[50]. Vygotsky [45] claimed that language is a necessary
tool to verbally mediate one’s own behaviour and to solve
problems. According to him, children learn vocabulary
through verbal exchanges in social interactions, primarily
with adults. Therefore, his theory provides the developmental
mechanism for how social interactions might
affect children’s higher-order cognitive processes through
the mediating role of verbal ability.
Similar ideas are also present in more contemporary
theories. According to Zelazo et al. [51], the development
of cognitive control results from age-related increases in
the ability to reflect on the rules children formulate and
represent during problem-solving (see also [52]). In this
context, language allows one to become aware of those
rules. Also, labelling per se facilitates redirecting attention
to crucial aspects of the task and thus directs selfreflection,
which in turn promotes increased flexibility in
thinking and acting [53]. All these claims are supported
by numerous studies revealing significant links between
children’s expressive or receptive verbal ability at varying
ages and their performance on both cool and hot EF tasks
[9, 53–55].
Although empirical research has begun to confirm the
proposed importance of parent–child relationships in
children’s EF development, the potential mediating role
of verbal ability remains underexplored. To our knowledge,
only one study has addressed this problem so far.
In their longitudinal investigation, Matte-Gagné and
Bernier [56] found that children’s expressive language
mediated the relation between maternal autonomy support
assessed in infancy and hot EF at the age of 3, above
and beyond the child’s previous EF and SES. However,
no such mediating role of language was found for cool
EF. According to the authors, one explanation for these
results is that maternal autonomy support had a direct
influence on the development of cool EF. On the other
hand, they claim that their hot EF task might be mediated
by more simple forms of language compared with more
complex cool EF task. Given the lack of replication studies,
at the current state of research, it is not possible to
rule out any of these potential explanations.
Of note, the mediating role of language in the relation
between the children’s family environment and
EF is also suggested by research focusing on aspects of
that environment other than attachment bonds, such as
parental behaviour and family SES. For example, Noble
et al. [57] found in a sample of first-grade children that
controlling for language ability eliminated the significant
association between family SES and children’s cognitive
control, raising the possibility that language mediates the
link between those variables. In a study by Catale et al.
[58], the relationship between parental educational status
and children’s EF (aged 6–7 and 10–11) was partially
mediated by children’s language skills. Recently, Lee et al.
[59] showed that preschoolers’ language ability partially
mediated the link between one aspect of parental scaffolding
(adjustment of levels of support to create an optimal
challenge for the child) and children’s EF.
Summary
As our short review indicates, most of the current
research on the links between child-parent attachment
and EF is related to early childhood, ignoring the fact
that EF continues to develop during middle childhood.
Most of this research has focused on only one aspect of
EF, but the question arises whether attachment security
has the same consequences for EF in both cool and hot
contexts. Finally, the weakness of previous studies is that
they rarely consider the role of the father–child relationship.
Meanwhile, as some authors indicate [e.g. 35], the
relationship between the child and the father has slightly
different characteristics than that with the mother. More
specifically, mothers are preferred as a safe haven for
soothing the child’s distress, while fathers are preferred
as the secure base for exploration. The consequence of
these differences might be distinct patterns of relationships
between attachment to mothers and fathers and the
two aspects of children’s EF.
Nevertheless, the mechanism through which attachment
affects children’s EF has yet to be investigated.
Evidence suggests that verbal skills are one of the most
significant factors in EF development [e.g. 9]. Considering
that verbal skills stem notably from parent–child
interactions [45] and that child-parent attachment as the
essence of a caregiving relationship is considered to be a
significant factor in determining individual differences in
child’s verbal ability [28], it seems reasonable to expect
that there are indirect associations between child-parent
attachment and children’s EF. Since our review of studies
has shown that verbal ability and EF are to some extent
related to family SES, we decided to control this variable
in our study to see how specific the potential links
between attachment, verbal ability, and EF are.
The current study
Despite the growing interest in the role of child-parent
attachment in EF development, little is known about how
the attachment is related to individual differences in EF
in middle childhood. Accordingly, the first purpose of
this study was to examine the concurrent associations
between attachment security with both parents and hot
and cool EF in middle childhood (Objective 1). We also
aimed to check the potential mediating role of the child’s
verbal ability in those links (Objective 2). In our study,
we focus on a crucial component of EF—inhibitory control
and its cool and hot aspects. The development of the
latter aspect occurs mostly in middle childhood—a relatively
unknown period as far as the link between attachment
and EF is concerned.
We expected that higher attachment security with parents
would be related to the child’s better performance
on hot and cool IC tasks (Hypothesis 1). We also predicted
that those links would be mediated by the child’s
verbal ability (Hypothesis 2). As the role of child–father
attachment in children’s EF has not been researched
much before, the potential differences in links between
IC and child–mother vs. child–father attachment was an
exploratory part of this study.
Method
Participants
The final sample consisted of 160 children aged 8
to 12 years (M = 123.29 months, SD = 16.53, range
96‒152 months; 51% girls). An additional five children
took part in the study, but they were excluded from the
analysis due to a large (> 25%) number of omission errors
in the go/no-go task (one child), a lack of data due to the
child interrupting this task (two children), or the loss of
data due to a computer system error (two cases). Families
lived in one of the large metropolitan areas in Poland,
and their parents had higher (65% of mothers, 62% of
fathers), secondary (30% of mothers, 32% of fathers), or
basic education (5% of mothers, 6% of fathers).
Materials and procedure
Attachment security
Children’s perceptions of attachment security were
assessed using the Polish version [60] of the Attachment
Security Scale [61], separately for child–mother
and child–father relationships. The Attachment Security
Scale is a self-report measure consisting of 15 items,
which are rated using the Harter’s [62]) “Some kids…, but
other kids…” format, and the children were asked to indicate
which of four responses they would be most likely to
make (“sort of like me” or ‘‘really like me”). The items tap
the child’s belief in the responsiveness and availability of
the attachment figure, the child’s use of the attachment
figure as a safe haven, and the child’s reports of open
communication with her or him. Scores across items
were summed so that the higher scores on the Attachment
Security Scale reflect greater attachment security
with the given parent (range: 15‒60).
Previous research has demonstrated the validity of this
measure [61, 63] with good internal consistency (for an
overview, see [64]). The scale has significant associations
with other attachment measures such as the ACSQ, Separation
Anxiety Test (SAT), and caregiver sensitivity [64].
Furthermore, the Attachment Security Scale also showed
significant associations with developmental correlates of
attachment, such as school adaptation, emotional and
peer social competence, self-esteem, and behavioural
problems [63, 65]. The one-factor structure of the Polish
version of the Attachment Security Scale was confirmed
[60], and Cronbach’s alphas in the present study
were 0.75 and 0.76 for security with mothers and fathers,
respectively.
Cool IC
A computerised version of the go/no-go task [66] was
used. In this task, the participant was required to respond
to certain stimuli and to refrain from responding to others.
The stimuli were the letters P and R. The participant
saw on the computer screen an array (2 × 2) consisting
of 4 squares, with one asterisk in each square. The letters
were displayed serially in a random order in one of
the four squares at the point where an asterisk was. The
stimulus display time was 500 ms with an inter-stimulus
interval of 1,500 ms. The task consisted of two parts, each
involving 100 trials. In part 1, the target stimulus was the
letter P, and the non-target stimulus was the letter R. In
part 2, the response rule was reversed, so the participant
was required to respond to the letter R and refrain from
responding to the letter P. In each part of the task, the
ratio of trials with the letter P to trials with the letter R
was 80: 20. Before each part of the task, an instruction
was displayed, which was also read aloud by the experimenter.
The test trials in each part of the task were preceded
by 10 practice trials. During the practice trials but
not the test trials, participants received feedback on their
reactions. The indicator of task performance was then
the average proportion of no-go trials from both parts
of the task in which the participant correctly refrained
from responding (range 0‒100). The higher the score,
the better the child’s inhibitory control. The duration of
the go/no-go task was approximately 10 min, including
task instructions and practice trials. The task reveals an
acceptable test–retest reliability [67].
Hot IC
The delay discounting task, modelled on the temporal
reward discounting procedure [68], was utilised as
a measure of hot IC [1]. In this task, participants made
choices between less valuable rewards (0.20, 0.40, 0.80, 1,
2, 3, 4, and 5 zlotys), which they could receive immediately,
and a more valuable reward (6 zlotys), which they
could get later (after 2, 5, or 7 days). For each delay, the
large constant reward was paired with each of the small
rewards and presented as a choice, e.g. “Would you prefer
1 zloty now, or 6 zlotys in 7 days?” Each small immediate
reward was paired twice with every delay for the
large reward, resulting in a total of 48 choice trials. To
encourage participants to take their choices seriously,
they were informed that after the completion of the task,
one of their answers would be randomly drawn, and the
amount of money indicated in the answer would be converted
into a real prize (stationery item, mini-game, or
key ring) and delivered to them after the time that was
indicated in their response had elapsed. Based on the
participant’s choices, for each of the three delay periods,
an indifference point between two rewards—immediate
and delayed—was estimated. To determine the indifference
point for a given delay, the first trial always started
with the test question about the participant’s preferences
for the amount of 1 zloty available immediately and 6
zlotys available after a delay. Depending on the participant’s
response, on the next trial, the amount of money
offered immediately was decreased to the subsequent
amount in the set (if the participant previously chose
the immediate reward) or increased (if the participant
already chose the delayed reward). Decreasing or increasing
the amount of money was continued until a change
in preferences, which meant that the indifference point,
had been attained. Based on the indifference point data,
the discount rate k was calculated for each delay period
using the following formula: k = (A − V)/VD, where
A = the value of the delayed reward, V = the value of the
reward available immediately, and D = the delay [69]. The
higher the discount rate, the stronger the tendency to
lower the value of the reward over time, and the preference
for the immediate reward. The dependent variable
was the average value of discount rates for the three delay
periods of 2, 5, and 7 days. To obtain an increasing index,
the average discount rate was multiplied by − 1. Thus, the
higher the value of this index, the better the child’s hot
IC (range: − 16.58‒0). The task presents adequate test–
retest reliability across a 1-week interval [70].
Verbal ability
The vocabulary subtest from the Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children (WISC-R; [71]) in Polish (adaptation
by Matczak and colleagues [72]) was applied. The child’s
task in this test is to explain the meaning of a word given
orally by the experimenter. The test measures verbal
understanding, the ability to reproduce acquired knowledge,
and the scope and adequacy of defining concepts.
Estimates of split-half reliability for the Polish version
of the Vocabulary subtest are similar in magnitude to its
original version and range from 0.85 to 0.91 [72]. In the
current study, due to time constraints, a version shortened
to the first 20 items of the test was used. The indicator
of verbal ability was the sum of points for answers
(range 0‒40). The higher the score, the higher the level of
the child’s verbal ability. The interrater reliability for the
overall test score in the present study was high (Kendall’s
W = 0.97; χ2 (24) = 89.96; p = 0.002).
Procedure
After approval by the local ethics committee and permission
from the local schools’ principals, invitation
letters were sent to parents. They were invited to participate,
provided that they had a child participant in
the aforementioned age range who was living with both
biological parents. Given also that EF is sensitive to neurological
perturbations, such as, e.g. ADHD and learning
disabilities [e.g. 68], children with those difficulties were
excluded. The screening was based on the short sociodemographic
questionnaire. Children were recruited
with parental written informed consent; 1,000 families
were asked, and 165 (17%) consented to their children’s
participation.
Children were assessed individually by a female experimenter
in a quiet room in the school they attended for
two sessions about one week apart. In the first session,
the following tasks were administered in a fixed1 order:
go/no-go, and the Attachment Security Scale (child–
mother version). In the second session the tasks were
following: delay discounting task, Vocabulary test, and
Attachment Security Scale (child–father version). The go/
no-go task was presented using a laptop computer with
a 15-inch screen, and the distance of the child from the
screen was about 75 cm. The delay discounting task was
presented in the paper-and-pencil form. The short demographic
questionnaire was completed by the mothers of
the children. As this study was part of a larger research
project examining attachment, EF, and theory of mind,
in addition to the above, several other tasks not related
to the current study were administered. Upon completion
of the study, children received small gifts (candy and
stickers).
Data preparation and analysis
Several preparation analyses were conducted on the go/
no-go data to ensure reliable and valid estimates of the
response parameters derived from this task. Similar to
Bezdjian and colleagues [73], the accuracy and latency
of responses were screened. Trials with response times
shorter than 120 ms on the nth trial, combined with no
reaction on the previous (n − 1th) trial (
Rn−1 = no), were
treated as missing and not taken into account in the
analysis (n = 24). Children who did not respond to more
than 25% of the Go trials (errors of omission) were also
excluded from the analysis on account of having too few
data points (n = 1).
Next, we analysed distributions of all our variables and
screened them for extreme scores. No multivariate outliers
were found, and the distributions of attachment security
and the child’s verbal ability were within bounds of
acceptable levels of skewness and kurtosis < ± 1.00 [74]
except for our cool (skewness = − 2.51; kurtosis = 8.72)
and hot (skewness = − 5.76; kurtosis = 45.73) IC measures.
Therefore, data from the go/no-go task were transformed
by squaring the scores, which improved their
parameters to the bounds of acceptable moderate normality
(skewness = − 0.69; kurtosis = 0.68). Data from
the delay discounting task were transformed by square
rooting, which also improved their parameters (skewness
= 0.54; kurtosis = 1.22). The transformed data were
used in subsequent analyses.
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version
25. Descriptive statistics were calculated to summarise
the data, and Pearson correlations were computed to
compare relationships between the main variables with
demographic variables as well as to determine their role
as covariates.
A hierarchical multiple linear regression (MLR) analysis
was performed to examine whether attachment security
uniquely contributed to the outcome after accounting
for covariates. MLRs were performed separately for the
child–mother and child–father attachment. For each
step, we report the increment in variance accounted for
by the variables entered in that step, the standardised
beta weights, and the squared semi-partial correlations
(sr2).
According to the current approach to mediation analysis,
which is related to the criticism of the classic Baron
and Kenny [75] procedure [e.g. 76], a mediator variable
can be intervening between predictor and outcome variables
even if the latter two do not initially appear associated,
as the total effect is a sum of many different paths,
and some absent direct effect could result in significant
indirect effects working in opposite directions [77].
Therefore, we tested the indirect effects using a non-parametric
resampling bootstrap approach, as this method
tends to have the highest power, the best Type I error
control, and provides more accurate results than traditional
tests with relatively small sample sizes [78]. We
applied Model 4 of the PROCESS macro [79] with 20,000
resamples drawn with replacements from the original
sample (n = 160) to derive the confidence interval (CI) for
the unstandardised regression coefficient of the indirect
effect. The indirect effect through verbal ability was considered
significant when the CI did not include 0.
Results
Preliminary analyses
First, descriptive statistics and Pearson zero-order and
partial correlations (controlling for age) for key study
variables were calculated (see Table 1). We then examined
the associations between both aspects of the child’s
IC and demographic variables (child’s age, sex, and family
SES), as well as the child’s performance on the verbal
ability task.
As displayed in Table 1 (below the diagonal), zeroorder
correlations revealed that cool and hot IC were
positively and weakly related to each other. Furthermore,
children’s verbal ability was positively linked to both hot
and cool IC. Age was positively related to both aspects
of IC and verbal ability. Sex (dummy coded) was related
to cool IC only, with girls superior to boys. However, sex
was not related to attachment security. Perceptions of
attachment security to both parents were positively and
moderately related. However, there were no significant
differences in attachment security between child–mother
and child–father attachment security, F(1, 159) = 1.20,
p > 0.05, ηp
2 = 0.01. Finally, SES was positively related only
to the child’s verbal ability.
After controlling for age (see Table 1 above the diagonal),
almost all the relations mentioned above did not
change substantially in their strength and direction. In
light of these results, in the further regression analyses
with cool IC as an outcome variable, age and sex were
controlled. Since family SES was not significantly associated
with the outcome variables, there was no reason
to include it in the regression analyses. In turn, in the
regression models with hot IC as an outcome variable,
only age was covaried.
Objective 1: links between attachment security
with parents and IC
Cool IC
Table 1 presents Pearson’s zero-order and partial correlations
(controlling for age) between the child-parent
attachment and both aspects of the IC. Regarding relations
between attachment security with mothers and cool
IC, we found no significant correlation between this variable
and the child’s cool IC.
Regarding attachment to fathers, we found a weak
association between attachment security and cool
IC, which nevertheless did not approach significance,
r(158) = 0.14, p = 0.07. However, since there was a
significant correlation between cool IC, age, and sex
that could suppress the correlation between IC and
father–child attachment, we checked whether the latter
variable would significantly predict cool IC when
taking into account both age and sex. To this end, we
ran a hierarchical linear regression analysis (Table 2).
When the child’s age and sex were entered in the first
step, they accounted for 11% of the variance in go/
no-go task scores, F(2, 157) = 9.38, p < 0.001, with age
and sex contributing uniquely (ps ≤ 0.01). After controlling
for the covariates, attachment security with
fathers became significant, β = 0.15, p < 0.05, and predicted
an additional 2% of variance in cool IC, F(3,
156) = 3.77, p = 0.05. The entire model fit was good,
F(3, 156) = 7.62, p < 0.001, and explained 13% of the
cool IC variance. A similar analysis for mother–child
attachment has shown that this variable remained a
non-significant predictor of cool IC when both age and
sex were taken into account, β = 0.04, p = 0.59; F(3,
156) = 7.15, p < 0.001.
Hot IC
There were no significant correlations between child–
mother or child–father attachment security and children’s
hot IC even when age was taken into account
(Table 1), so there was no basis for conducting a similar
regression analysis for hot IC as an outcome.
Objective 2: mediating role of verbal ability in the links
between attachment security with parents and IC
In the next set of analyses, we tested whether children’s
verbal ability served as a mediator in the links between
attachment security and both aspects of IC (the hot and
the cool). First, we examined associations between our
potential predictors (i.e. attachment variables) and the
potential mediator (i.e. verbal ability) and between the
mediator and a given aspect of IC as an outcome [77].
In cases where these associations were significant, we
examined a mediation model with attachment security
as a predictor, children’s verbal ability as an intervening
variable, and a given aspect of IC as an outcome using
bias-corrected bootstrapping. Regarding the number of
analyses (two) for each aspect of IC, we used α = 0.02
(following Bonferroni’s correction: 0.05/2 = 0.02) for all
regression analyses of mediation.
Correlation analyses controlling for the child’s age (see
Table 1 above the diagonal) revealed that security with
both mothers and fathers was related to our potential
mediator. In turn, children’s verbal ability was linked to
both cool and hot IC. Recall that correlation analysis
indicated that our attachment variables were associated
with neither hot nor cool IC. However, considering that
an indirect link can still be present despite a seemingly
absent association between two variables [78], we investigated
the indirect effects of our attachment variables on
both aspects of IC.
Cool IC
For cool IC as an outcome variable, all mediation analyses
were carried out with age as a control variable. Among
the two mediation models tested, none of them were significant,
suggesting that children’s verbal ability did not
mediate the links between attachment security and cool
IC (see Table 3).
Hot IC
Regarding the two mediation models tested with hot IC
as an outcome variable (controlling for age; see Table 3),
the results suggest that attachment security, both with
mothers and fathers, had an indirect effect on children’s
IC. In both cases, full mediation occurred through children’s
verbal ability.
Supplementary analyses
To ensure the specifics of the results we had obtained,
in supplementary analyses we explored whether perceptions
of attachment security with parents have an integrative
effect on IC. To this end, we averaged the security
scores with both parents and then examined the effect
of general perceived attachment security (M = 47.59,
SD = 5.52; skewness = − 0.38, SE = 0.19; kurtosis = 0.37,
SE = 38; range: 29–60) on IC. Hierarchical linear regression
analyses revealed that the effect was significant
neither for cool IC, β = 0.11, p = 0.15; F(3, 156) = 2.97,
p = 0.05, controlling for child’s age and sex, nor for hot
IC, β = 0.05, p = 0.54; F(2, 157) = 7.84, p < 0.001, controlling
for child’s age, thus confirming our previous results
that perceived attachment with the father had a unique
effect on the child’s cool IC.
Analogically, to explore whether perceptions of attachment
security with parents have an integrative effect on
IC via verbal ability, in the additional analyses, we examined
the indirect effect of general perceived attachment
security on hot and cool IC through verbal ability. However,
those effects were also not significant (for cool IC
95% CI = [− 0.001; 003]; for hot IC 95% CI = [− 0.107;
0.009]), indicating that the intervening effects were independent
for attachment with the mother and the father as
predictors.
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to examine the concurrent
links between children’s attachment security with parents
and two aspects of IC, along with the intervening role of
children’s verbal ability in those links. It was expected
that higher attachment security with parents would be
related to better hot and cool IC (Hypothesis 1). We also
predicted that those links would be accounted for by
the mediating role of children’s verbal ability (Hypothesis
2). The results only partially lend support for these
hypotheses.
First, after accounting for the child’s age and sex, we
found that there was a direct relationship between perceived
attachment security with the father and cool
IC. Namely, we observed that children with relatively
higher attachment security with fathers had better cool
IC. However, perceived security with the father did not
directly predict hot IC. At the same time, there were no
significant direct links between attachment security with
the mother and both aspects of IC. Furthermore, our
supplementary analysis also revealed that the effects of
general perceived attachment security on cool and hot
IC were not significant, confirming that perceived attachment
with the father had a unique direct effect on the
child’s cool IC.
Second, after accounting for the child’s sex, verbal ability
mediated the links between attachment security with
both parents and hot IC. Consistent with this, we found
that children who were more secure with both parents
had a higher verbal ability, explaining their greater hot
IC. Furthermore, the indirect effects of general perceived
attachment security on hot and cool IC through verbal
ability were not significant, indicating that the observed
intervening effects were independent for attachment
with the mother and the father as predictors.
Our results seem to mirror the strong theoretical
claims that the parent–child relationship plays a formative
role in the child’s language and cognitive control [45].
However, the design of our study was correlational and
cross-sectional; thus, longitudinal studies are needed to
provide more reliable evidence suggesting a directional,
and potentially causal, link between the attachment security
and the child’s verbal ability and hot IC. Only such an
approach would support the notion that secure attachment
is associated with children’s verbal ability, thereby
fostering their ability to inhibit impulsive responses [28,
29]. On the other hand, it is also worth noting that developing
verbal skills per se might play a significant role in
the process of forming and reconstructing working models
of attachment [33], as the more advanced the child’s
verbal ability, the better the ability to represent attachment
relationships. This formative role of language is
best reflected in attachment narrative measures, employing
communication of emotions and needs and representational
structure of memories [34]. Thus, the links
between attachment and verbal ability may be bidirectional
in their nature.
Our findings also seem to be in line with the well-established
theoretical and empirical links between children’s
verbal ability and cognitive control [e.g. 53] and especially
with other research evidence that children’s receptive
vocabulary and verbal self-instruction were related
to the strategies used for waiting in delayed gratification
measures [e.g. 80]. However, in the present study, we can
only give post-hoc explanatory hypotheses for the mediational
models found here. Given that the factors underlying
the relationship between attachment and children’s
verbal ability might be multiple and diverse (e.g. responsive
and open communication of secure dyads or higher
openness of secure children to social interactions) [28],
the detailed mechanism of the impact of attachment on
language development in middle childhood has yet to be
investigated.
The findings also reveal that not only mothers but also
fathers play a significant role in the emergence of individual
differences in children’s language ability [e.g. 37] and
in hot IC. Poor and superficial verbal exchanges during
interactions with parents caused by their unavailability,
unresponsiveness, or disapproval appear to undermine
both the child’s verbal ability and impulse control.
In sharp contrast to the intervening effect of the child’s
verbal ability on attachment security and hot IC, the analyses
for cool IC suggest that children’s verbal ability did
not mediate the relations between attachment security
with parents and cool IC. The different patterns of links
between attachment security and the two aspects of IC
found in our study correspond to the findings of Matte-
Gagné and Bernier [56]. They observed that children’s
expressive language mediated the relation between
maternal autonomy support in infancy and hot EF at
the age of 3. In contrast, autonomy support was directly
related to cool EF (unfortunately, paternal autonomy support
was not included in this study). This finding seems
to support the idea about the partial separateness of hot
and cool IC (those two aspects of IC were positively but
weakly correlated in our study) and the potentially different
mechanisms underlying individual differences in hot
and cool IC [56]. Regarding the fact that the maturation
of hot IC lags behind the development of cool IC and that
it develops rapidly in the transition to adolescence [1],
one should consider the possibility that communication
with parents might be more significant for the development
of hot than cool IC in middle childhood. Another
possibility might be that aspects of children’s language
other than semantic are essential for cool IC in this developmental
period.
Regarding the direct links between attachment to
fathers and children’s cool IC, some evidence suggests
that fathers’ involvement with their children increases
as the offspring grow older (while mothers’ involvement
is rather constant) [81], and that there is a distinct
change in importance of the father as a parent, especially
concerning the support of exploration in middle
childhood [33]. Fathers are thought to play a more crucial
role than mothers in the development of children’s
exploration, autonomy, and relationships with peers, and
some researchers claim that this specific paternal function
results in higher levels of paternal than maternal
demands in problem-solving tasks. Thus, one possible
explanation for this finding might be that secure children
have confidence in their fathers’ closeness and availability,
which makes them feel freer to engage in an exploratory
activity [27]. This kind of activity, in turn, might
create for the child an opportunity to exercise their skills
in planning and self-monitoring their actions and flexibly
modifying them [28, 82]. Moreover, Grossmann et al.
[35] propose that fathers contribute to children’s sense of
security mainly by providing them sensitive support during
explorative and gently challenging play. In contrast,
mothers contribute primarily to providing comfort when
a child is in distress. Hence, another possibility is that
child–father interactions in middle childhood, especially
those in the context of explorative and gently challenging
play [35], might be particularly significant for shaping
the child’s psychobiological mechanisms necessary to
effectively control their behaviour and successfully solve
the “cool” problems [83]. It is also possible that those specific
patterns of links between security with the father
and IC might be somewhat culture-specific. Lubiewska
[84] pointed out that due to the fast cultural changes in
Poland in the last decades, there exist micro-cultural
discrepancies between relatedness-oriented mothers
and their autonomy-oriented children. Therefore, as Polish
fathers might be less overprotective and collectivistic
in their socialisation goals than mothers, they might
become primary attachment figures in the transition to
adolescence. In turn, interactions with fathers might
be more salient for child IC. However, longitudinal and
culture-oriented explorations are needed to verify that
hypothesis. It would be informative to also include some
measures of both mother and father parenting and sensitivity
in middle childhood for a more comprehensive
comparison.
Finally, regarding the potential mechanisms including
the role of verbal ability in the elaborated links, it cannot
be excluded that more complex forms of language might
mediate performance on our cool IC task compared with
our hot IC task. This issue needs further investigation.
Nevertheless, the fact that only attachment security with
fathers (but not with mothers) predicted cool IC in middle
childhood seems to suggest that the significant family
contexts of IC development in middle childhood are the
father–child interactions.
A large body of research reveals that SES is positively
associated with language development [85], IC [86] and
parental sensitivity [87]. The latter is thought to be one of
the key feature of caregiver–child interactions, as it refers
to the parent’s ability to notice the child’s signals, interpret
them accurately and respond to them appropriately
[88]. High maternal sensitivity has been proven to foster
secure attachment in children, while lower maternal
sensitivity has been linked to attachment insecurity [e.g.
63]. Maternal sensitivity is also associated with higher
levels of language development and academic achievement
[89, 90]. Life stress associated with low SES might
result in household chaos, instability, parental depression,
and more negative, punitive, and authoritarian
parenting, which in turn leads to adverse developmental
outcomes such as insecure attachment and disadvantages
in language development [91]. As a result, one can argue
that both SES and parental sensitivity may confound the
results obtained in our study. However, as far as SES is
concerned, we would like to note that SES in our study
correlated weakly and insignificantly with attachment
security with the mother (r = 0.07, p = 0.41) and with the
father (r = 0.01, p = 0.83) as well as with cool (r = 0.08,
p = 0.19) and hot (r = 0.16, p = 0.61) IC. SES was significantly
correlated with verbal skills (r = 0.29, p = 0.001)
only. This pattern of correlation precludes SES from
explaining the relationship between attachment security
and verbal abilities, as well as between verbal abilities
and both cool and hot IC measures. Thus, the fact
that SES was not controlled in the mediation analysis is
justified by the fact that it did not significantly correlate
with either the independent or dependent (outcome)
variables. When it comes to parental sensitivity, we did
not control for it in our study, so we cannot exclude its
confounding role in our results. For example, attachment
security might mediate the link between parental sensitivity
and both the child’s verbal abilities and IC. Another
possibility is that SES might moderate the links between
attachment, verbal ability, and IC, with stronger links
between those variables among children from low SES
families. Future studies should control for both parental
sensitivity and SES in order to exclude those other potential
explanations.
Limitations and future studies
In providing a novel link between attachment to both
parents and hot and cool IC in middle childhood, the
present study has some limitations. First, the magnitude
of the significant correlations are quite small; however,
they are comparable to some other studies, which are
based on similar samples, fairly homogeneous in terms of
the family environment, and utilising behavioural measures
of EF [e.g. 39–41]. In those studies the magnitude
of the significant links between attachment and EF was
0.08–0.31. Marchetti and colleagues [6] in their sample
of school children also found a weak but significant
link between attachment and hot IC (as measured with
the delay discounting procedure, which was also used in
our study), however this link became insignificant after
accounting for the child’s age. On the other hand, there
are some studies in which somewhat higher correlations
between attachment and EF have been found [e.g. 5].
However, in most of those studies, composite scores of
EF performance were analysed. Thus, one possible explanation
is that these discrepancies might be due to attachment
and EF measurement issues (see further discussion
below). Another possibility is that the links between
attachment and IC might weaken as children grow older
so that some other (social) factors may contribute to individual
differences in cognitive development. As far as
the links between verbal ability and both age and hot IC
are concerned, they are similar to those found, for example,
by Carlson and Wang [7], with a moderate magnitude
of relation between age and verbal ability (r = 0.54
vs r = 0.53 in our study), and quite comparable links
between verbal ability and hot IC (r = 0.33 vs r = 0.27 in
our study). Finally, links between the variables of interest
might be moderated by SES, with stronger links in low
SES families. Those alternative explanations should be
explored in future studies.
We used a self-report measure to assess children’s
attachment. There are some concerns about the validity
of self-report measures, such as difficulties in conscious
access to internal working models, the risk of response
bias, and social desirability [e.g. 93]. Furthermore, using
self-report measures of attachment to both parents could
affect the results by shared method variance. Finally, it
should be noted that attachment measures rely quite
strongly on the child’s verbal skills [33, 34]. This fact
raises the question of whether the observed link between
attachment security and verbal ability is a function of the
reliance on a questionnaire assessment [64]. Lab-based
protocols, such as semi-projective story stems, observational
codes, or attachment interviews may be more successful
in assessing unconscious attachment processes.
Therefore, following the recent suggestions [e.g. 93],
future studies should adopt a multi-method approach
to attachment measurement in order to corroborate the
findings obtained.
Another limitation of our study is that the verbal ability
index, based on the WISC vocabulary subtest, may
reflect not only the level of verbal ability, but also of general
intelligence. Therefore, it could be argued that what
underlies the relationship between attachment measures
and the Vocabulary subtest is not verbal ability but
general intelligence. In fact, such an interpretation cannot
be completely ruled out. However, some arguments
speak against such an interpretation. First, as shown in
the meta-analysis by van IJzendoorn et al. [28], the relationship
between attachment and IQ is much weaker
(r = 0.09) than that between attachment and linguistic
competence (r = 0.28). Second, the Verbal IQ of the
WISC-R correlates strongly (r = 0.70, p < 0.001) with the
Linguistic Expression score of the CELF-R [e.g. 94]. Similar,
and even stronger, correlations are noted between the
WISC-R vocabulary subtest itself and the PPVT-R (e.g.
r = 0.79, p < 0.001 [95]). This indicates that the WISC-R
Verbal Scale, including the Vocabulary subtest, is strongly
saturated with the language ability factor. This is in line
with the opinion of Flanagan et al. [96] that the WISC
vocabulary subtest poses strong language demands.
Third, although it is widely believed that performance on
EF tasks is related to general intelligence, research shows
that such a relationship occurs primarily in the case of
tasks measuring cold EF, in particular those that require
updating working memory [cf. 97]. On the other hand, a
weaker relationship is found between general intelligence
and hot EF, including tasks measuring inhibition and setshifting
[97]. For example, in the only study known to us
that used both the go/no-go and delay discounting tasks
on a group of children aged 7 to 12 [98], weak and insignificant
associations were found between full IQ and both
of these tasks (r = − 0.05 in both cases), as opposed to the
Digit Span task which correlated significantly (r = 0.22,
p < 0.01) with the full IQ. Fourth, according to some theories
of cognitive development [e.g. 51, 52], the growth
in IC results from increasing capacities in the semantic
aspect of verbal skills (i.e., verbal labelling, conceptual
reasoning, and representation of the complex rules).
And probably, that is why in most studies on EF, verbal
skills were assessed with vocabulary tests. Nevertheless,
other measures and other aspects of children’s language
(e.g. self-directed speech or communicative competence)
should be considered further to examine the links of
interest. The data mentioned above make highly probable
interpretation that not general intelligence but verbal
ability underlies the relationship between the Vocabulary
subtest and hot IC found in our study. To confirm
this interpretation, future research should utilise a purer
measure of linguistic ability than the WISC vocabulary
subtest used in our study, and also control general intelligence,
preferably with a non-verbal test.
Next, as we have already mentioned earlier—when a
predictor, mediator, and outcome variables are measured
simultaneously, other models would explain the data
equally well (e.g. children’s verbal ability and IC might
both influence the scores on attachment measure), and
it is difficult to distinguish these alternatives without further
investigation [77]. Furthermore, the study’s crosssectional
design did not allow us to examine whether
there is developmental continuity or discontinuity in
the patterns of the links between attachment to parents,
verbal ability, and IC across middle childhood and other
developmental periods. Therefore, systematic longitudinal
research is needed to confirm the mediational links
observed in our study and to clarify whether (and if so,
how) those patterns of association change across different
ages and which factors account for the potential
change. Extending this investigation across and beyond
the middle childhood years would also help to elucidate
the causal processes underlying the development of individual
differences in IC that are suggested by the current
study.
Another limitation of the present study is its quite
small sample size, which limits the generalisability of the
results. In replication studies, more participants should
be involved in each age group. Furthermore, the families
were generally middle class, with most of the parents
having a college degree. Hence, those results cannot be
generalised to lower SES families. It is essential to replicate
those results in more ethnically and economically
diverse samples. Additionally, as we discussed above,
family SES along with parental sensitivity may be confounding
factors when studying the links between attachment,
verbal ability and IC in children. Hence, in future
studies not only SES but also parental sensitivity should
be controlled.
Finally, given the well-documented low commonality
of individual EF tasks [1, 12], it should be noted that the
results of the present study might not be generalisable
to other tasks measuring IC or to other EF components.
Hence, future studies should include additional measures
of IC and other components of EF, such as working memory
and attentional flexibility. This approach would help
us to answer whether the links observed in our study are
EF-component-specific or more general.
Conclusions
Taken together, our study was the first to investigate the
links between attachment security both with mothers
and fathers and the two aspects of IC in middle childhood.
It adds to the existing body of research in several
regards. First, it demonstrates the importance of child–
father (in addition to child–mother) attachment in
explaining both verbal ability and individual differences
in IC in middle childhood. Second, our study suggests
that there are different mechanisms in middle childhood
through which attachment explains cool vs hot IC;
namely, attachment security with the father is directly
linked to cool IC in children, but there are no direct
links between attachment security with the mother and
IC. Verbal ability mediates the links between attachment
security with parents and hot, but not cool, IC. Thus,
our study provides some support for the notion that parent–
child relationships may be an important factor contributing
to individual differences in the child’s IC. More
specifically, the results suggest that attachment security
with the father may be more relevant for the development
of cool IC than both attachment security with the
mother and the child’s verbal ability. Besides, attachment
with both parents seems to play a significant role
in the child’s verbal functioning. The suggestion that the
establishment of a secure parent–child relationship may
be one of the mechanisms promoting the child’s cognitive
development provides some encouragement to put
strong emphasis on engaging both mothers and fathers in
stimulating the development of children’s language and
cognitive control. Regarding the well-documented capacity
to improve the parent–child attachment relationship
through some therapeutic interventions [e.g. 76], it
seems reasonable to use the family context as a target of
intervention to improve IC not only in younger children
[5] but also in those in middle childhood.