Background
The social nature of human beings manifests itself as
a basic need to belong [1], which, if not satisfied, may
induce experiences of loneliness. To most people, loneliness
is an aversive state of mind prompted by a discrepancy
between the desired and actual quality of one’s
interpersonal relationships [2]. Loneliness is subjective
or individual, as objectively socially connected people
may still feel lonely [3]. Numerous studies focusing on
different age groups (for reviews see [1, 4, 5]) report an
association between loneliness and different negative
affective conditions. Among young adults, this raises
awareness of loneliness as a risk factor for later negative
affective problems [6], such as depression or anxiety [3],
and eventually suicidal ideation as well as parasuicide [4].
Moreover, long-lasting loneliness may trigger additional
problems such as stigmatization and social isolation [3]
and may affect an individual’s cognition and behavior
towards their social environment in a way that maintains
feelings of isolation [7].
An interesting phenomenon is that not all chronically
lonely people develop depression or anxiety, or
develop other functional problems related to maladaptation.
Some come to terms with their way of existence
and may have adapted reasonably well. The present study
examined this perspective by including variables that are
protective of mental health.
Several concepts may be helpful in this regard. One is
resilience as this research area delineates a range of factors
that may promote adaptation and protect health
despite exposure to adversity or hardships [8]. One may
thus assume that well-adjusted lonely people may have
more or better mental health protective factors available
in their life. A relevant instrument in this regard is the
Resilience Scale for Adults (RSA) [9], which the present
study used.
The construct Sense of Coherence, as conceptualized
by Antonovsky [10], is strongly related to positive mental
health and adaptation in general and is a concept,
which provides a cross-culturally validated comprehensive
measure of positive mental health. According to
Antonovsky [11], it represents” a generalized orientation
toward the world which perceives it, on a continuum, as
comprehensible, manageable and meaningful”. An individual
with a high SOC has the capability to find meaning
and purpose in life despite adversity. As such, it represents
a general adaptation measure of stress. Moreover,
high SOC persons have a positive expectation that new
situations or challenges by conceiving them as comprehensible
and manageable. The operationalization of
the construct into the SOC-13 measure has been translated
to more than 40 languages showing strong crossculturally
validity [12]. Given the considerably strong
relationship with positive mental health as well as stress
dampening effect of high SOC, we included the SOC-13
measure.
As a Danish version of the RSA is not yet tested or validated,
the second aim of this study was to validate the
original RSA. By added a measure of SOC to the study,
we could learn both more about the association between
SOC and RSA, and compare the RSA with a well-validated
instrument.
Resilience
The construct of resilience has been conceptualized in
multiple ways, including the measurement of resilience
[13]. Traditionally, resilience has been conceptualized as
a certain outcome, e.g., ‘normal development under difficult
conditions’ [14]. Such definitions may cause discussions
about what constitutes ‘normal development’.
Measurement of precursors of such end states may
instead be more fruitful by providing knowledge about
factors that promote favorable outcomes, which should
be more valuable within a preventive or a clinical health
perspective. The measurement of protective factors, as
representative of this approach, may be preferable.
A review of existing self-rating resilience measures,
[15] revealed no gold standard of measurement; yet,
the RSA by [9] was positively rated. The RSA is a selfrating
resilience measure that assesses protective factors
across three broad classes: individual or personal,
family, and social resources. These extra-individual factors
as part of the RSA makes it well suited to examine
loneliness as a social construct. The RSA was originally
developed in Norway by [9]. Numerous later studies on
Norwegian samples support its reliability and validity
[16–22]. The cross-cultural validity is also accumulating,
showing adequate support in for example in Peru
[23], Pakistan [24], India [25, 26], Iran, [27], Frenchspeaking
Belgian [28], Brazil [29], in Lithuania [30]
and in English with a sample from Australia [24]. An
investigation of the psychometric properties of the RSA
in a Danish sample has not yet been made, which was
another impetus of the present study.
Loneliness, resilience, and sense of coherence
Research on relationships between resilience and loneliness
is so far sparse. Some loneliness studies on the
elderly [31–34], young homeless people [35, 36], and
on students [34], showing that resilience may protect
and even mediate relationships between loneliness and
health-related outcomes. We, therefore, expect similar
favorable effects of adding the RSA to the current study
of relationships between loneliness and mental health.
The Sense of coherence scale comprises three components
that are combined in a single index: comprehensibility,
manageability, and meaningfulness, which
indicates a person’s global approach towards challenges,
stressors, or adversities in their life. Antonovsky
[10] argues that a person with a high SOC will more
quickly analyze, understand, spot solutions, identify
ways of appropriate coping, as well as finding meaning
in dealing successfully with the implied challenges,
which ultimately, improves that person’s general adaptability.
It has been considered a part of protective factors
that contribute to resilience and is negatively
associated with loneliness [37, 38].
The present study examined the psychometric properties
of the Danish translation of the RSA. The test
score reliability was expected to be adequate. We also
expected the RSA to correlate in expected directions
variables related to loneliness and mental health (anxiety
and depression), thus supporting convergent validity.
Moreover, since the RSA is presumed to assess
protective factors that in theory should dampen any
negative health effects of risk variables, such as loneliness,
we additionally expected the RSA to moderate (or
dampen) any negative relationship between loneliness
and mental health.
Method
Subjects
Participants were recruited from the UCL University
College in Odense, Denmark. Data were collected via
an online survey, which was distributed to 575 university
students. The response rate was 73.4% as 422 students
completed the survey (136 male-32%, and 284
female – 68%). The sample consisted of first-year students
studying pedagogics (36%), nursing (16%), biomedical
laboratory science (12%), teaching (3%), or the
full-degree business academy program (33%). Their age
ranged from 19 to 56 years (M = 25.4, SD = 6.18) with
females 25.4 years in average (SD = 6.48) and males
being 25.6 years (SD = 5.57).
Procedures
The initial contact was to the headmaster at each
department, explaining the aim of the study and the
procedure. Hereafter, the students could access the
questionnaire through their online student platform.
All students were explained the purpose and confidentiality
of the study, and that participation was voluntary.
Data was collected from August 2018 to December
2018.
Demographics
Information about the students’ gender, age, and marital
status were gathered. Race, ethnicity, and income
were not covered.
Instruments
UCLA loneliness scale
The Three-Item Loneliness Scale (T-ILS) is a short version
adapted from the standard measure of loneliness,
the Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale. The short version
of the scale has demonstrated concurrent validity
and good internal consistency [39]. The T-ILS
includes three items: “1) How often do you feel left
out?”, “2) How often do you feel that you lack companionship?”,
and “3) How often do you feel isolated from
others?” Responses are scored on a three-point scale
ranging between 1-“hardly ever”, 2-“some of the time”
and 3-“often”. A principal component analysis of this
scale in the present study yielded an eigenvalue of 2.27
(R2 = 76%), clearly supporting the adequacy of creating
a general loneliness index as the average of these three
items (higher scores indicating more loneliness).
Resilience scale for adults (RSA)
The RSA [9] is a 33 item self-report scale developed
for measuring protective resilience factors among
adults. It assesses an individual’s available resilience
resources across an intrapersonal domain (perception
of self, perception of future, social competence and
having a structured style), and across a focal interpersonal
domain (i.e., cohesion in the family) and a more
distal interpersonal domain (i.e., extra-family social
resources). The instrument uses a seven-point semantic
differential scale in which each item has a positive and
a negative attribute at each end of the scale [17]. Half of
the items are reversely scored to reduce acquiescencebiases.
In the questionnaire, the items constructing the
five subscales are mixed. An example of an item is ‘My
family is characterized by’: where one end of the scale
goes from Healthy cohesion to Disconnection.
Higher scores indicate higher levels of protective resilience
factors with an adequate measurement reliability
(alpha ranging between ~.70 and ~ .85 [40, 41];. The construct
and cross-cultural validity of the RSA is well documented,
and it is a recommended resilience scale [15].
The Hopkins symptom check List‑25 (HSCL‑25)
We used a Danish version of the instrument HSCL-25
[42], a self-report instrument that measures psychopathological
symptoms (i.e. depression, anxiety, and
total distress). It contains 13 depression items, 10 anxiety
items, and 2 somatic items. All items have a Likert scale
with four categories (“Not at all,” “A little,” “Quite a bit,”
“Extremely,”), where higher scores indicate higher levels
of psychiatric or affective symptoms. HSCL-25 is one of
the most widely used screening instruments for psychopathologic
symptoms [43] with reports of good internal
consistency (standardized Cronbach’s α) generally, α > .90
for the total score, and α > .80 for anxiety and depression
[44]. It has been found to be a valid screening instrument
in both Western and non-Western populations [45–47]
with some exceptions [48].
Sense of coherence (SOC‑13)
The SOC-13 is a brief version of the SOC-29 self-report
questionnaire [49]. The instrument measures Sense of
Coherence, which has been associated with resilience,
thus indicating that it is a factor in determining one’s
ability to cope with harsh events [50]. In addition, the
instrument has in former studies demonstrate significant
positive correlations with RSA [16].
SOC-13 measures psychological constructs that comprise
Sense of Coherence, namely: comprehensibility
(cognitive), manageability (instrumental/behavioral), and
meaningfulness (motivational) [51]. We have used the
adapted SOC-13, which has been translated into Danish.
The scale is introduced, as “Here is a series of questions
relating to various aspects of our lives”. Each question
has five possible answers [52]. Higher scores indicate
higher levels of SOC and thus a higher level of individual
adjustment.
The Sense of Coherence (SOC-13) a reliable instrument
for measuring the individual’s potential adjustment and
rehabilitation to stressful life experiences [51, 53]. Exemplar
items are: 1) “Do you have the feeling that you are
in an unfamiliar situation and don’t know what to do?
(Comprehension), 2) “How often do you have feelings
that you’re not sure you can keep under control?” (Manageability),
and 3)“How often do you have the feeling that
there’s little meaning in the things you do in your daily
life?” (Meaningfulness).
Statistics
SPSS 25 and Mplus 7.4 [54] was used for all inferential
and confirmatory factor analyses (CFA), respectively.
In Mplus, the robust ML (maximum likelihood) estimator
was used to adequately adjust for non-normal
item score distributions. As the chi-square absolute
fit measure is sensitive to large sample sizes [55], the
root-mean-square error of approximation (RMSEA)
and the non-normed fit index (NNFI) were additionally
consulted. RMSEA values < .06 are preferable [56],
while values for NNFI should minimally pass > .90 [57]
or preferably > .95 [58]. Standardized root mean residuals
should ideally be less than < .08, which represents the
average size of the residual item correlations after fitting
the factor model.
The regression analyses were bootstrapped using 1000
resamplings in order to produce confidence intervals and
significance tests less biased by non-normally distributed
scores, as was the case for the HSCL depression and anxiety
scores.
Beta coefficients with p-value < .05 was deemed as statistically
significant. The regression models were conducted
in steps. All continuous variables were grand
centered, and dichotomous variables were dummy coded
(0 versus 1). In the first step, we entered loneliness, thus
yielding its crude or unadjusted relationship with anxiety
or depressive symptoms. In the second and third step,
the resilience variables and the SOC measure was added,
respectively. In the final block, their interaction terms
were additionally included (loneliness × RSA or loneliness
× SOC) along with a final adjustment by including
the covariates (e.g., age, gender, and education). The performance
of these models was gauged with the adjusted
R-square index (range 0–1) indicating the degree of variance
explained by the model.
Results
Descriptive statistics
The score range, means (or proportions), standard deviations
of all variables, as well as the reliability coefficients
of the measurement scales, are presented in Table 1.
The interrelationships between these variables are given
as Pearson correlation coefficients. The psychometric
properties of the RSA, the HSCL-25, and SOC-13 were
adequate.
The reliability coefficients for the subscales of the RSA
were acceptable as the Cronbach’s alphas varied in the
range between .81–.87 for the subscales planned future,
family cohesion, social resources, personal competence,
and social competence (in falling order). The subscale
“structured style” was however in the sub-optimal range
(α = .66).
Loneliness was in general strongly associated with
higher levels of anxiety and depressive symptoms. Moreover,
loneliness correlated significantly and negatively
with most facets of the RSA, except for the subscales of
family cohesion and structured style. The strongest correlation
was the negative one between loneliness and SOC,
thus indicating that people feeling lonely also experience
their life as less meaningful, comprehensible, and manageable.
Moreover, the RSA and the SOC were strongly
positively correlated, as has been previously reported
[19].
Confirmatory factor analysis
The fit of the six-factor RSA measurement model was
examined in a confirmatory factor analysis, which confirmed
adequate fit in terms of a low degree of model
misspecification (RMSEA = .052, CI.95 .048–.056;
SRMR = .066), whereas the relative fit was mediocre
(CFI = .898, TLI = .888). The modification indices indicated
that one item originally belonging to the social
resource factor (becoming informed if a family member
experiences a crisis) loaded strongly on the family cohesion
factor (λ = .65). Switching this item to the family
cohesion factor, which is reasonable given the overlap in
semantic meaning, improved absolute fit (RMSEA = .049,
CI.95 .045–.054, SRMR = .063) and relative fit (CFI = .909,
TLI = .900). The standardized factor loadings are given in
Table 2.
The relationship between loneliness and mental health,
and the contributing role of RSA and SOC as protective
factors (or moderators)
Loneliness was regressed upon depression (Table 3)
and anxiety (Table 4) and stratified to retain genderspecific
effects. As a single variable (crude effect),
loneliness had the highest association with depressive
symptoms in men (R2 = 41%), thereafter depressive
symptoms in women (R2 = 38%), and then anxiety in
both men and women (R2 = 20 and 21%, respectively).
Adding resilience to the equation in the second block
explained substantially more of the variance in mental
health, thus validating the Danish version of the RSA
as a significant contributor in explaining mental health.
Adding SOC in the third block, explained a substantial
extra amount of the variance in the HSCL, as expected.
In the final block, RSA and SOC were added as moderators
of the relationship between loneliness and
HSCL in order to examine if these two respective was
associated with an extra layer of protection in addition
to their compensatory main effects. The RSA contributed
significantly as moderators of depressive symptoms
in men (notably, the subscales of perception of
self and family coherence) and anxiety symptoms in
men (RSA perception of self). Similar protective effects
against depressive symptoms were not observed in
women, whereas SOC was associated with a protective
role against depressive symptoms in women. These
findings indicated that both RSA and SOC showed
compensatory (main) and protective (moderator)
effects. The latter effects were more pronounced for the
RSA measure.
Discussion
The current study showed that loneliness was related to
both anxiety and depression and that all facets of resiliency
were negatively related to loneliness, where higher
loneliness was associated with lower resiliency, indicating
that young adults who show a high degree of resilience
also tended to feel less lonely. The relation between levels
of loneliness and resilience is particularly interesting as it
has not previously been reported, but it also supports the
construct validity of the RSA.
A possible explanation for the relation between levels
of resilience and levels of loneliness is that resilience
represents the presence of both intra- and interpersonal
resources that improve the adaptation to a more lonely
existence. Similarly, situational characteristics, such as
having few social resources, shallow or non-existing
interpersonal relationships, are hypothesized as a predisposing
factor for developing loneliness [59].
Thus, higher scores on loneliness, indicating the
absence of social resources, would thus be expected
to be associated with lower scores related to social
resources such as resilience. Social resources are
thought to be essential in mental health as researchers
highlight that healthy adaptation is a process [8, 15, 60].
More specifically, it can be defined as a transactional
process where resilience is developed through the individuals’
dynamic interaction with their environment. It
may also be described as the individual’s ability to navigate
between available resources [61].
Based on the narrow definition and measurement of
loneliness in the present study, we cannot ascertain to
what extent lonely people have or use social resources
despite observing a strong negative correlation between
loneliness and social resources. According to the model
of loneliness on cognition [7], feelings of loneliness are
maintained through the individual’s interaction with his
or her social environment. Feelings of loneliness change
cognitive expectations that may reinforce maladaptive
behavior, e.g., hesitance, submissiveness, or withdrawal
related to perceptions of the social sphere as threatening
that also shapes memories of social interactions as more
negative as compared to non-lonely people [7].
Loneliness as a subjective experience is typically distinguished
from e.g. social isolation, which describes
social circumstances more objectively. Future studies into
the association between loneliness and resiliency could
therefore benefit from a multi-dimensional approach to
the study of loneliness encompassing both subjective and
objective dimensions [62].
Furthermore, this study illustrated, that loneliness was
strongly associated with worse mental health, and in particular,
depression. This association between loneliness
and other mental health problems adds to an understanding
of loneliness as a complex phenomenon [6] associated
with a range of challenges. This finding has also been
replicated elsewhere in the literature, where loneliness
seems to correlate with other mental health problems in
reciprocal relationships [3, 63, 64].
However, this study showed that resilience, specifically
the facets of perception of self and family coherence,
could explain a substantial amount of the variance associated
with symptoms of depression in relation to loneliness,
and the facet of perception of self was associated
with anxiety in relation to loneliness.
The measure of RSA and the SOC are positively correlated
which indicates that they both measure individual
resources. The design of the study makes it impossible
to detect any causal relation between the two or a causal
relation between loneliness and SOC. The study can
only report on a negative correlation between SOC and
UCLA, which we can discuss from a theoretical perspective.
The negative correlation is indicating that people
feeling lonely also experience their life as less meaningful,
comprehensible, and manageable. The social nature
of humans makes relationships and the sense of belongingness
a core component of how creates meaning in
our lives. A key channel for humans to make lives understandable
and comprehensible is to discuss, engage, and
interact with other humans. In his original work from
1979, Antonovsky [65] argued that life experiences shape
the sense of coherence and that SOC is a stable entity
around the age of 30. Since then a number of studies have
shown that interventions can influence SOC levels and
interventions focusing on strengthening SOC make be
an important element in the effort to combat loneliness
[66]..
The psychometric properties of the Resilience Scale for
Adults (RSA) were supported with support for the existing
six-factor structure and good reliability in a Danish
sample, which indicates that this Danish version may be
interesting when exploring levels of resilience. Further,
the study explored the construct validity of the RSA.
Since this is the first study reporting on the validity of
the RSA in a Danish population, it is noteworthy that
the overall results (Table 1) indicate that the construct
validity of the RSA is supported. The significant positive
correlations with Sense of Coherence, which measures
adaptation in general, supports the construct validity of
the RSA. As previously reported [9, 19] the magnitude of
the correlation between the SOC and the individual RSA
factors vary, indicating that different RSA factors relate
differently to SOC and do not overlap. The construct
validity is further supported by the significant negative
correlations with the Hopkins Symptom Check List and
thus levels of anxiety and depressive symptoms.
Limitations
One limitation of the present study is the young age of
the participants. In addition, all participants were university
students and the majority were young women.
This implies caution concerning generalization, as this
sample is not representative of the general adult population
in Denmark. Further validity studies of the RSA on
more heterogeneous samples in terms of age and occupation
may address this uncertainty. However, given the
ever-growing base of studies confirming the validity of
the RSA, we except it to generalize beyond this university
sample.
A second limitation is that the study applied a crosssectional
design, and therefore our hypotheses direction
and causality between loneliness and possible protective
factors needs to be examined in future studies. Especially
studies using longitudinal designs with repeated measures
that would allow more causally related inferences as
well as the identification of various trajectories of lonely
people related to their mental as well as somatic health.
Age was adjusted for in the current study and as the
adjusted statistical effect of loneliness became rather
small or non-significant after adding the other covariates,
and in particular sense of coherence, any further nuanced
analyses of age should be of minor importance. However,
given that, loneliness is manifested differently among
young and older adults, further studies are called for, in
order to shed some light upon a more comprehensive
understanding of the implication of age.
Conclusion
The current study showed that loneliness measured by
the UCLA was negatively related to all facets of resiliency
measured by the RSA. The psychometric properties of
the RSA were supported in a Danish sample reproducing
the original factor structure. As specific aspects of the
RSA could explain a substantial part of the variance in
anxiety and depressive symptoms associated with loneliness,
resiliency may be an important concept to consider
in the loneliness research. The need for additional
research is especially evident in relation to interventions
targeted loneliness among young people, as interventions
aimed at reducing loneliness levels have showed only
negligible effects [6].
As the concept of resiliency can inspire interventions
targeted prevention or reduction of mental health problems
[58], we encourage future studies to examine more
closely how resiliency factors and resilience may moderate
the association between mental health problems and
loneliness.