Background
Researchers and clinicians agree that the course of alcohol
dependence is better characterized as a widely varying
process with varying consequences than as a uniform
pattern of steadily declining health and functioning.
Differences in the course of alcohol problem use and
dependence have been identified and characterized via
work on subtypes, etiology, treatment, and trajectories
of alcohol use disorders [1–6]. For example, this research
group has previously examined Vietnam Veterans with a
lifetime diagnosis of alcohol dependence (AD) and found
that only 8% of these men indicated their drinking had
not changed significantly throughout their adult years
[7, 8]. Instead, the drinking course of these veterans with
alcohol dependence over a 25-year period involved an
average of 4.2 drinking phases each lasting an average of
8.22 years, with both increases and decreases in severity
and consequences. Differences in pattern, severity,
and consequences appear to be the rule, not the exception.
To capture this variation, a developmental view of
alcohol dependence has gained increasing support [9],
and the National Institute for Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA) [10, 11] has emphasized examination
of alcohol use disorders within a developmental, life
framework of intersecting biological and environmental
vulnerabilities.
Although the prevalence of alcohol use disorders
(AUD) is highest during adolescent and young adult
years, treatment seeking for AUD is twice as likely to
occur after age thirty [10], and more studies are needed
that extend examination of alcohol use into the later
decades of the lifespan. It is important to identify what
proximal and distal influences account for remission
of drinking (whether through treatment or not) and to
identify the predictors of subsequent relapse to problem
drinking if that occurs. Twin research had indicated
that differences in remission phenotypes are largely due
to environmental effects [12]. Remission from drinking
has been associated with the recent onset of drinking
problems; receiving greater social support; having
friends who disapprove of drinking; experiencing more
positive and fewer negative life events; gaining stronger
coping behaviors; increases in meaning in life; experiencing
less temptation to drink; having higher self-efficacy;
and having fewer psychiatric or psychological disorders
[13–15]. It has been found that premorbid social stability
(especially stable employment history) predicts long term
abstinence [16]. In contrast, relapse, not surprisingly,
seems most common in individuals who had more severe
alcohol use problems, for example, with higher rates of
past alcohol use and more lifetime symptoms of alcohol
dependence [17]. When considering more psychological
risk factors, relapse following treatment has been found
to be predicted by experiencing negative emotional and
interpersonal problems [18] and reduced participation
in outpatient treatment or Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) meetings [16]. Also, similarity has been identified
between factors predicting the initiation of problem
drinking and factors predicting relapse or patterns
in use across time. These include having a family history
of or genetic risk for alcohol dependence [1, 5, 19], lower
family-of-origin socioeconomic status (SES) [20], certain
personality and individual difference variables (e.g., being
high in sensation seeking and disinhibition) [21, 22], perceived
peer alcohol and drug use, difficulties with major
role transitions (e.g., marriage, occupational changes)
[23, 24], and having a comorbid psychiatric disorder
(including both conduct problems and depression diagnoses)
[25, 26]. Not only is there a wide cross-section of
factors that appear to influence the course of alcohol use
problems, similar factors may predict increasing alcoholrelated
difficulties at various stages, and other factors
may predict decreasing difficulties in the overall course of
alcohol dependence.
Moving beyond association studies of specific milestones
in alcohol use are studies of the rate of progression
from one stage of use to another. In such models,
risk factors would be those influences that accelerate
a person’s progression to the next stage and protective
factors would be those that delay progression. Evidence
shows that different psychiatric and psychosocial factors
increase (or decrease) the rate of progression through a
specific stage [27–29]. As would be expected, these factors
are reasonably consistent with the factors identified
in association studies focused on initiation, continued
drinking, AD diagnosis, and varying trajectory severities.
A key limitation of association studies is that the predictors
of any given milestone will necessarily include the
predictors of all preceding milestones. That is, the predictors
of AD will also include the predictors of initiation
of drinking since initiation always precedes AD. Studies
that model the rate of progression though a series of distinct
sequential periods defined as beginning at one milestone
and ending at another can isolate predictors of each
transition. Survival analysis, which can examine the time
it takes to experience a given event and what predicts a
quicker or slower progression, is one such model. For
example, in a study of young adults, Sartor et al. [29] used
conditional survival analysis to examine risk factors associated
with years to first drink and years from first drink
to AD. Results indicated that although conduct disorder
was a consistent predictor of both the progression to initiation
and progression from initiation to AD, other factors
predicted only one transition or the other (attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, parental AD, male gender,
and parental divorce for initiation of drinking compared
to nicotine dependence, cannabis abuse, and generalized
anxiety disorder for subsequent progression to AD). This
study was the first to differentiate between risk factors in
the timing of their impact on progression. Subsequently,
Haber et al. [30] examined both protective and risk factors
on years to initiation of drinking, years from initiation
to at-risk drinking, and years from at-risk drinking
to AD in females. Risk factors included childhood psychiatric
disorders (both externalizing and internalizing
disorders), family risk history, and traumatic events; protective
factors were dimensions of religion and spirituality.
Results indicated that both risk and protective factors
influenced initiation of alcohol use but that they were differentiated
in their influence on the latter two developmental
stages with protective factors slowing transition
to at risk drinking and largely risk factors accelerating
transition to AD. Unfortunately, few association studies
have included later stages of remission and relapse in
midlife in the course of alcohol use disorders. The current
study addressed this need by examining onset of, remission
from, and relapse to alcohol problem use through
the 40’s and 50’s.
Specifically, the current study examined predictors
associated with the duration of different stages in
the progression of alcohol use in a sample of male veteran
twins with AD history. After examining risk factors
for age of first drink, the three successive transitions of
onset, remission, and relapse were examined for both
heavy drinking and AD. Thus, seven survival analysis
models examined significant predictors of the time function,
which permitted identification of risk and protective
factors that accelerated or delayed the rates of transition
through each distinct developmental period. The current
study examined psychiatric variables, family history of
AD, personality traits, alcohol expectancies, and drinking
motives as possible predictors of transitions. Prediction
from heavy drinking to remission was of particular
interest for clinical treatment, as physicians and counselors
could benefit from knowing which factors are most
influential in supporting treatment success, especially if
such predictors can be modified via therapy. We had the
following general hypotheses, which are exploratory in
nature but are based on patterns seen in past research on
predictors of different aspects of alcohol use:
1 The same risk factors associated with initiation of
drinking will also be associated with progression to
heavy drinking and progression to AD (the three
“onset” transitions).
2 Factors associated with remission from heavy drinking
and remission from AD will be different from
those predicting initiation and progression, with psychosocial
factors being prominent influences.
3 Factors associated with relapse will be similar to
those associated with onset and progression of heavy
drinking and AD.
Methods
Participants
The participants in this study were twin veterans who
were members of the Vietnam Era Twin (VET) Registry,
although the twins were treated as individuals
in the study. The VET Registry has been described in
detail elsewhere [31–34], so only salient aspects will be
described here. This national military twin registry comprises
male twin pairs born between 1939 and 1957 in
which both members served in the United States military
between May 1965 and August 1975. In 1987, registry
members completed a mailed questionnaire about their
military experience, general health, marital and family
history, etc. [31, 33] In 1992, a psychiatric interview was
administered by telephone to twins who completed the
questionnaire, assessing a range of psychiatric disorders,
including alcohol and drug use disorders [34]. Information
from the 1987 and 1992 assessments was used to
design two offspring-of-twins studies that provided the
current sample: one that began in 2000 focused on alcohol
dependence history (Children of Alcoholics Study,
COA [35]) and another that began in 2003 focused on
drug dependence history (Twins as Parents Study, TAP
[36, 37]). Equivalent procedures and identical assessments
were used in both studies that permitted the
planned combining of data across the two samples. In
both the COA and TAP studies, eligible twin pairs were
drawn from the VET Registry using an algorithm based
on the following criteria: (a) both twins completed the
1987 and 1992 surveys; (b) at least one twin reported
having children; and (c) at least one twin met criteria
for a lifetime diagnosis of alcohol dependence (for COA
Study) or drug dependence (for TAP Study), based on the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Third Edition, Revised
(DSM-III-R [38]). This high-risk sampling plan identified
1062 VET Registry pairs, where cases with comorbid
drug and alcohol histories represented the higher end
of the substance dependence severity continuum. Both
samples also included non-dependent cases with and
without substance abuse histories to represent the lower
end of the severity continuum. Although selection was
based on pairs, each twin was individually contacted for
participation, and twins were not excluded if a co-twin
declined to participate. Concerted attempts were made to
locate and enroll every individual selected for the studies.
In the COA, 83% (n = 1295) of the individual twins
were interviewed; while the comparable rate for TAP was
81% (n = 725). This resulted in 1774 individual veteran
twin cases and 1769 cases met minimum data requirements
for the current study. Information provided from
previous interviews with the VET Registry twins was also
combined with the COA/TAP collected data and used in
data analyses. Thus, the predictor variables used in the
analysis were collected at various timepoints and did not
necessarily occur prior to the age of event; although we
refer to predictors for increased or decreased time-toevent,
it is important to note that the risk and protective
factors are associated with, rather than causally related
to, the speed of transition.
Assessments
Procedures for obtaining verbal informed consent were
approved by institutional review boards. Data collection
was conducted by the Institute for Survey Research at
Temple University. Interviewers, who were blind to the
twin’s substance use history, used a computer-assisted
telephone interview system with standardized interview
questions and probes. After personal identifiers were
removed by the VET Registry, data were released to the
investigators. Interviews for the twin fathers in COA/
TAP included a lifetime drinking history (LDH) assessment
[39, 40] that was modified to include DSM, Fourth
Edition (DSM-IV [41]) alcohol use disorder symptomatology.
This assessment yields retrospective information
about different phases of drinking across the life course,
defined by the interviewee as a time when drinking frequency
or quantity changed. To get information about
their drinking life, the participants report starting and
ending ages for each time period of different drinking
pattern as well as other information about drinking during
each phase including quantity/frequency of drinking
and alcohol abuse and dependence symptomatology.
These data provided the information we needed for the
transitions of interest: age of onset for alcohol use and
dependence diagnosis and ages for the changes in the patterns
of drinking that indicate remission and relapse. Age
of first AD was defined as the age at which DSM-IV criteria
for AD were first met (i.e., yes to at least three of the
DSM-IV criteria occurring within the same 12 months).
The remission ages were derived from the age of the start
of the first phase a given individual no longer met the AD
criteria, and age of relapse was the age at the start of the
first phase after remission where criteria were again met.
The same rules were followed for heavy drinking age patterns,
where heavy drinking was defined as a quantityfrequency
index (QFI) score greater than or equal to 60
(quantity of drinks per occasion times the number of
times drinking per month), which for men would be 14
drinks per week which is the cut-off for NIAAA’s [42]
definition of “at risk/heavy” drinking. In survival analyses,
individuals who do not meet criteria for a particular
event (e.g., never reporting a change in drinking from AD
diagnosis to remission) would be included as censored
cases (indicating the event has not happened up to the
individual’s current age). Studies investigating the reliability
and validity of the LDH have supported its use to
measure drinking patterns over time [39, 43, 44]. Family
alcohol history was assessed by asking the men about
their mother’s, father’s, and co-twin’s “excessive drinking”
with a yes or no response. Sociodemographic covariates
were collected in 2000 and included the veteran’s current
age, highest educational attainment (in years), and
income (in 19 categories).
Each veteran’s other lifetime psychiatric diagnostic
information was obtained from their 1992 interview
using DSM-III-R criteria. Nicotine dependence was used
as a risk factor. Additionally, both externalizing and internalizing
factors, which are dimensional measures used as
alternatives to categorial diagnoses [45, 46] were created
to index overall aspects of psychiatric risk. An externalizing
risk variable, to index outward conflict, was created
by the average of the z-scores for the symptom counts
for antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) and other
drug dependence (DD). An internalizing risk variable,
to index internal distress, was created by the average of
the z-scores for the symptoms counts for panic disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), and major depression disorder
(MDD). Although other mood and anxiety disorders also
fall under the internalizing spectrum [45], other diagnoses
were either not assessed or were uncommon (e.g.
dysthymia).
Individual variable data, collected via a self-report
mailed questionnaire in 2000, included the big five personality
traits (extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
openness, and neuroticism) assessed with the
revised NEO Personality Inventory [47, 48], seven alcohol
expectancies (risk and aggression, tension reduction,
sociability, sexuality, liquid courage, cognitive and
behavioral impairment, and self-perception) assessed
with the Comprehensive Effects of Alcohol scale [49],
and four drinking motives (social, coping, conformity,
and enhancement) with the Drinking Motives Questionnaire
[50]. Sample sizes for these individual variables are
smaller than for the psychiatric variables as the mailed
questionnaire was only returned by 77% (n = 1001 of
1295) of the COA sample and was not completed by the
TAP sample. Missing data for various items and scales
also led to smaller sample sizes for some variables.
Data analysis
Survival analyses were completed in SAS [51] using Proc
PHREG. The dependent variable in each of the seven
stages was the number of years between successive
events. The first transition was the number of years to the
first full drink. Then onset, remission, and relapse transitions
were examined for heavy drinking. Thus, the second
transition was the period in years from the first drink to
the start of the first heavy drinking period, the third transition
was the number of years of heavy drinking to starting
remission, and the fourth transition was the years in
remission until relapse to heavy drinking levels. Then, we
repeated examination of the same onset, remission, and
relapse periods but with respect to AD diagnosis; that
is, fifth was the number of years from the first drink to
the start of the first phase the veteran was given an AD
diagnosis; sixth, years from AD to the start of remission;
and seventh, years in remission until relapse to next
phase AD diagnosis was met. Only individuals who had
experienced the prior event were included in the analysis
for the next transition, where they either experienced
the subsequent transition after a certain period of time
or were a censored case (e.g., only if an individual had an
age of first AD diagnosis were they included in the analysis
for remission from AD).
The predictor variables included a range of demographic,
psychiatric, and individual variables derived
from various VET Registry assessments. The basic
demographic variables were entered first in each model
(age of interview, age of event, highest education level,
and income). The demographic variables that were significant
predictors of the time lapse variable were then
also included in each subsequent survival analysis as
covariates. Otherwise, first five different analyses for
a transition stage were completed, each including one
set of predictors: (a) the three psychiatric risk variables,
(b) the three family history risk variables, (c) the
five personality traits, (d) the four drinking motives,
or (e) the seven alcohol expectancies. Once predictors
were identified within each of the five domains, two
across-domain survival analyses were completed for
each transition stage to see which predictors remained
significant across domains: one model included the
significant psychiatric and family risk factors together
(domains a and b; labeled “Clinical Risk”) and one
included the significant individual predictor variables
together (domains c, d, and e; labeled “Individual Predictors”).
It is these across-domain model results that
are presented here; the results from the within-domain
models can be found in the Additional file 1: Table S1.
Models were analyzed as described above to accommodate
dataset limitations and to maximize power in
sets of analyses. Specifically, because a subset of the
sample completed the mailed survey that provided the
data for the individual personality predictors (domains
c, d, and e), these domains were run separately so sample
size for the psychiatric predictors was not reduced.
The hazard ratios presented in the tables for dichotomous
variables indicate the risk of transition for those
with the variable (e.g., a 1) as being x% of the risk for
those without the variable, after controlling for the
other variables in the model. For continuous variables,
the interpretation changes, such that when subtracted
from 1 and multiplied by 100, it gives the percent of
change in risk for each one unit increase in the variable
score [52, 53]. Thus, for onset and relapse transitions
(e.g., the time from first drink to first AD),
hazard ratios over 1 indicate a shorter time of transition
(increased risk), while hazard ratios under 1 indicate
a longer time of transition (protective delay). In
contrast, for remission (e.g., time from AD to remission,
where shorter times are better outcomes), hazard
ratios under 1 indicate a risk factor and hazard ratios
over 1 indicate a protective factor. To correct for the
many comparisons made in the models, we present all
findings significant at p < .05 in Table 2 but focus our
discussion and explanation on the predictors significant
with a stricter p < .01 level so as to not over-interpret
effects.
Results
Sample characteristics
This sample of 1769 COA/TAP male-male twin veterans
had a mean age of 51.8 years (SD = 2.9, range 43–63), had
13.7 (SD = 1.8) years of education on average, and had a
mean household income of about $54,000 per year. This
high-risk sample had a substantial family history of heavy
alcohol use in that 49% reported that their father, 11%
that their mother, and 48% that their twin brother had a
history of excessive drinking. In terms of lifetime psychiatric
history, 12% met criteria for PTSD, 11% met criteria
for MDD, 5% met criteria for ASPD, 3% met criteria for
GAD, and 2% met criteria for Panic Disorder. Concerning
lifetime substance history, 56% met criteria for nicotine
dependence, 47% for AD, and 22% for DD.
Table 1 reports the descriptive statistics for onset,
remission, and relapse variables. Concerning the progression
of alcohol use, 98.2% of the entire sample (1738 of
1769 cases) endorsed having a first full drink. Of those
who initiated drinking, 74.5% (1295) had a period of
heavy drinking, 72.0% (932) of heavy drinkers remitted,
and 16.8% (157) of remitters relapsed back into
heavy drinking. Of those who initiated drinking, 36.9%
(641) became alcohol dependent, 81.7% (524) of those
with AD remitted, and 13.0% (68) of remitters relapsed
back into AD. Individuals who had not yet experienced
an event (for example, the 31 men who had not yet had
a full drink) are censored in survival analysis, with the
logic that it is possible the individual will in the future
experience the event but at his current age had not yet
done so. The average number of years between the transitions
ranged between 5.3 years (for first drink to first
heavy drinking) and 11.5 years (for first heavy drinking
to remission).
Hypothesis testing
Table 2 gives the hazard ratios for the risk and protective
variables across all drinking transitions. Of note, the
size of the reported effects, although significant, were
generally small. As reminders, the table indicates level
of significance with superscripts but only variables significant
at the p < .01 level will be interpreted and results
controlled for significant covariates as well as the age of
the previous stage. The “Clinical Risk” model included
all psychiatric and family history risk variables in one
analysis (for each transition) and the “Individual Predictors”
model included all personality, drinking motives,
and expectancy variables. As stated above, hazard ratios
greater than one reflect “risk” for onset and relapse outcomes
but “protection” for remission outcomes.
Hypothesis 1 examined the consistency of factors
predicting the three transitions of onset of alcohol use
problems: years to first drink and subsequent years to
either heavy drinking or AD. Four risk factors were
identified as being associated with accelerating all three
onset variables (hazard ratios greater than 1.0): nicotine
dependence (ORs = 1.19–1.40), externalizing disorders
(ORs = 1.14–1.41), cotwin drinking history (ORs = 1.28–
2.22), and the alcohol expectancy of risk and aggression
(ORs = 1.08–1.14). Another risk factor, the drinking
motive of enhancement, predicted both earlier onset of
heavy drinking and of alcohol dependence (ORs = 1.05,
1.04). Significant consistency was evident across these
three transitions in risk, but four single-stage specific risk
and protective factors were also identified. For drinking
onset, both agreeableness (OR = 0.97) and neuroticism
(OR = 0.98) were protective factors that delayed years
to first drink. The unique association for years from first
drink to onset of heavy drinking was the risk factor of
a tension reduction expectancy (OR = 1.10). For years
from first drink to first AD, the specific risks of internalizing
disorders (OR = 1.38), father drinking history
(OR = 1.30), and coping drinking motives (OR = 1.05)
were related to quicker transition.
Hypothesis 2 evaluated factors associated with remission
in contrast to the various transitions of progression
towards higher levels of use. Those factors that
were related to accelerated remission were considered
protective factors; those connected to delaying remission
were risk factors. For years to remission of heavy
drinking, significant risk for delayed remission came
from externalizing disorders (OR = 0.89), the personality
trait of extraversion (OR = 0.97), and the three drinking
motives of enhancement (OR = 0.97), social (OR = 0.97),
and coping (OR = 0.97) while significant protective factors
accelerating remission were internalizing disorders
(OR = 1.16), the traits of agreeableness (OR = 1.03) and
conscientiousness (OR = 1.02), the drinking motive of
conformity (OR = 1.05), and the expectancy of cognitive
and behavioral impairment (OR = 1.14). Many fewer
significant predictors of years to remission of AD were
found but they were the same as the predictors of remission
from heavy drinking: coping motives (OR = 0.95)
again delayed remission and agreeableness again accelerated
remission (OR = 1.03); externalizing was a risk
factor only at the p < 0.05 level, although with the same
effect size as for heavy drinking. In comparing predictors
across remission and onset transitions, there were seven
significant predictors of either remission variable that
were unique and not shared with the onset risk and protective
factors, while three factors were consistent across
the two remission transitions and also significant for at
least one onset transition (the risk factor of externalizing,
the risk factor of coping motives, and the protective factor
of agreeableness).
Hypothesis 3 compared the predictors of onset transitions
(first drink, heavy drinking, and AD) with the factors
associated with relapse after remission. Few factors
predicted remission with a significant effect: only the
risk factor of social drinking motives (OR = 1.10) and
the protective factor of expectancy of liquid courage
(OR = 0.74) for heaving drinking and the risk factor of
coping motive (OR = 1.15) and protective factor of conformity
motives (OR = 0.86) for AD. Of these, only two
worked in similar ways during other transitions: social
motives had also delayed remission of heavy drinking
and coping motives had also accelerated initiation and
slowed remission of AD. Surprisingly, the major onset
risk factors of externalizing and cotwin drinking history
predicted relapse of AD and predicted relapse of
heaving drinking only at a p < .05 level.
Discussion
Using conditional survival analysis, the current study
examined the amount of time between transitions in
the progression to initiation of drinking, heavy drinking,
and diagnosis of alcohol dependence, and then
further examined two later transitions, remission and
relapse, thus characterizing the natural course of an
alcohol use trajectory. This unique, time-based research
method examined the predictors identified in current
alcohol use disorder literature and their consistency
in predicting progression from one transition to the
next. Unlike other event-based research methods, this
method examined each transition independent of earlier
effects, thus providing a more precise characterization
of factors relevant to that timeframe alone. Results
will be discussed in terms of the hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1 was supported in that there was consistency
across predictors of the three onset transitions
(years to first drink, years from initiation to first
heavy drinking, and years from initiation to first AD)
with four risk factors associated with acceleration to all
three onset transitions and one consistent across the
two more problematic drinking transitions. Of note,
however, is that some overlap in significant predictors
may not be surprising because some of the same
cases would be included, albeit with potentially different
years-to-event, in the heavy drinking and AD
models (for the 1295 heavy drinking cases, 620 of them
were also in the 641 heavy drinking cases, with a correlation
between age of onset for heavy drinking and
age of onset for AD of 0.51). The first two predictors
were psychiatric variables that are comorbid with alcohol
use: nicotine dependence and externalizing disorders.
Research supports the idea that not only is there
overlap between the occurrence of problematic use of
nicotine and alcohol, but that common genetic underpinnings
underlie risk for nicotine, alcohol, and other
drug use [54, 55]. In fact, the entire spectrum of externalizing
disorders, including alcohol and drug use but
also other aggressive and disinhibitory disorders and
personality traits, has been shown to share genetic and
biological vulnerability [56, 57]. Past research has also
found that externalizing problems predicted subsequent
alcohol use in adolescence and early adulthood
[58, 59].
The third predictor was a family history variable:
co-twin’s history of drinking. A substantial literature
documents the role of family history in alcohol use [1,
5]. These outcome patterns likely arise from common
variance shared by alcohol dependence and concomitant
disorders that is substantially genetic in nature,
and therefore is shared by twins, is stable across time,
and is transmitted to offspring as familial resemblance
[19, 60, 61].
Fourth, and turning to psychosocial influences, current
findings implicated the alcohol expectancy of risk
and aggression as a factor accelerating onset progression.
In a sample of men, Patrick and Schulenburg [62] found
that individuals who expect that alcohol use will increase
their dominance and toughness were likely to start using
or increase their use more quickly than men without this
expectation. Risky behavior is not always viewed as a
negative side effect of drinking, and it appears that those
who favor risk and aggression will more quickly progress
to alcohol use onset.
Fifth, current findings implicated the drinking motive
of enhancement as associated with accelerated progression
toward heavy drinking and AD onset transitions.
Enhancement motives have been shown to predict
increased drinking quantity and drinking misuse from
adolescence to middle-adulthood [63]. Given that the
average age of first transitions to heavy drinking and AD
is in adolescence and early adulthood, it is not surprising
that positive feelings of enhancement and enjoyment predict
accelerated transition to greater alcohol use.
Taken together, these findings demonstrate the consistency
of five well-recognized onset predictors of accelerated
progression toward three key onset transitions:
years to first drink, years from initiation to heavy drinking,
and years from initiation to first AD. These results
confirm and clarify current models of problem alcohol
use etiology using a more precise methodology, and
results at least partially confirm hypothesis 1 that onset
risk factors are similar across the three onset variables.
However, there were some stage-specific risk and protective
factors as well. For example, the alcohol expectancy
of tension reduction was related to accelerated progression
to heavy drinking but not initiation or AD. Patrick
and Schulenburg [62] used growth models to show that
adolescent binge drinking was related to avoiding boredom
and that early adult binge drinking was related to
getting away from one’s problems, findings that suggest
a tension reduction expectation specific to heavy drinking.
Other transition-specific factors were the protective
personality factors of agreeableness and neuroticism for
delayed first drink; although research suggests [1, 21, 64],
as discussed further below, that agreeableness should be
protective against alcohol use, neuroticism is generally
found to be a risk factor for drinking and not a protective
factor. Further research could investigate the effect of
personality on various aspects of drinking onset to examine
potential differential prediction.
Hypothesis 2, that the predictors of delayed remission
would be different than the predictors of accelerated
onset and would likely be more psychosocial in nature,
was supported. Of the five onset risk factors identified
above, only externalizing disorders and the drinking
motive of enhancement affected remission from heavy
drinking while none affected remission from AD. There
were a few other risk factors that delayed remission that
were not consistent onset risk factors: namely the personality
trait of extraversion and the social and coping
drinking motives.
Additionally, five other variables were identified as protective
factors that were not significantly related to onset
transitions. Thus, it was other aspects of our measured
domains that had important connections to a quicker
decrease in alcohol use. First, in terms of clinical variables,
internalizing disorders speeded progress toward
remission of heavy drinking. Internalizing disorders are
well-substantiated risk factors that are central to the
internalizing, negative affect pathway to alcohol use [4,
65]. Thus, it was surprising to find internalizing disorders
associated with shortened remission. The currently
observed effect may be masked in standard association
studies because later milestones necessarily include
influences on earlier milestones which can swamp proximal
effects. Given the precision of the current model, it
appears that after one achieves a heavy drinking pattern,
the sedating effect of alcohol may dissipate while leaving
an increasing depressive effect that in turn prompts a
desire for remission. Although reasonable, this is admittedly
an unusual finding. Some researchers have found
links between depressive disorder and more excessive
drinking trajectories as opposed to recovering drinkers
[3], while others have found no systematic link between
episodes of emotional dysregulation and episodes of alcohol
problem use, as to whether the emotional regulation
issues preceded, co-occurred, or followed the alcohol use
[66] and no link between having (or not having) depression
and anxiety disorders and remission from alcohol
dependence [15]. The inconsistencies here deserve further
study and investigation with respect to potential
moderators or interaction effects in the internalizing—
alcohol use relationship.
The other four factors related to accelerated remission
were psychosocial in nature. Beginning with personality,
agreeableness was found to accelerate remission from
heavy drinking and AD and conscientiousness was found
to accelerate remission from heavy drinking. The general
personality profile associated with alcohol dependence
is low agreeableness, low conscientiousness (related to
impulsivity and disinhibition), and high neuroticism [1,
21, 64], a pattern otherwise known as (reversed) stability
[67]. The increased maturity seen in personality, based
on these traits, seen in early adulthood corresponds to
a decrease in general prevalence of alcohol problem use
and it is suggested this maturation continues through
later life [68]. Current findings for remission are consistent
with this profile.
Remission from heavy drinking was also accelerated
by the drinking motive of conformity. Remission
generally occurs later in one’s drinking career, whereas
enhancement (enjoyment) motives may be most apparent
at earlier ages and stages (as it was with onset of
heavy drinking and AD in our sample), drinking motives
change over time [50]. In the current sample, relapse
occurred, on average, at age 37. It may be that, in midlife,
greater maturity is associated with greater interpersonal
responsiveness (“conformity”) that may, in turn,
encourage remission (as seen here). Similarly, concerning
alcohol expectancies, the anticipation of cognitive
and behavioral impairment was also found to be related
to accelerated remission from heavy drinking. It may
be that a good dose of “reality” is important for change,
and awareness of the negative impact of excessive alcohol
use on one’s mental functioning and behavior may, in
turn, accelerate remission [69]. The impact of these personality,
motive, and expectancy variables on remission
is noteworthy because psychosocial factors are much
more amenable to treatment compared to clinical disorders.
The current findings suggest that treatment may be
enhanced by interventions that encourage development
of prosocial behaviors including agreeableness, conscientious
behavior, social support, and awareness of risks of
alcohol impairment.
Hypothesis 3 turned to the predictors of relapse, with
the hypothesis that the factors associated with relapse
would be similar to those associated with onset and progression
of heavy drinking and AD finding little support.
In the current data, after remission had been achieved,
findings implicated that few, if any, of the consistent risk
factors for onset were also risks for the relapse transitions.
Externalizing disorders and co-twin history were
surprisingly not strongly predictive, being significant only
at the p < .05 level, although sample size (as discussed
below) was problematic for relapse transitions and could
have affected significance levels. The other consistent
onset risk factors of cotwin nicotine dependence, risk and
aggression expectancies, and enhancement motives were
also not significant for relapse. Instead, there were four
predictors for relapse transitions that were not consistent
onset predictors.
One of these was the risk factor of social drinking
movies for accelerated relapse of heavy drinking.
It appears that social drinking motives are not what is
needed when one is in remission from an alcohol use
disorder. The social aspect of drinking is potentially
central to the ongoing debate between those who argue
that moderation of drinking is the best path to recovery
and Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) that insists on
complete abstention from alcohol use [70]. Social needs
are a part of the human experience, but when a person’s
social circle uses drinking as a central activity, it
can be difficult to remain abstinent. An essential part
of the AA program is the required attendance at meetings
with fellow sober and clean AA members who are
in recovery [71]. Given that research has found involvement
in AA and 12-step programs is a positive predictor
of recovery trajectories [2, 72], the role of social
structure and support in sustaining recovery is evident.
Thus, the tendency toward social drinking may
be problematic in this situation, and this effect is confirmed
in these data.
The factor that was found to be significantly related
to accelerated relapse to AD was the drinking motive
of coping. The results related to the risk factor of coping
were interesting, in that coping was a consistent risk
factor for all AD transitions (a trigger for onset, a delay
in remission, and a speeded relapse) though not a significant
predictor for most heaving drinking transitions
(except remission). This finding underscores the greater
risk of “coping by drinking” for those who have met criteria
for AD and who are probably later in their alcohol
use career. Other research has also found that drinking
to avoid problems was related to heavier drinking in later
early adulthood (age 22–30) [62]. The current data suggests
a close relationship between alcohol dependence
and alcohol coping.
For protective factors against relapse, the expectancy
of liquid courage for heavy drinking and the motive of
conformity for AD were fairly unique to these transitions.
Of these, recall that a conformity motive was related to
accelerated remission from heavy drinking. It may be that
greater age and maturity increases interpersonal responsiveness
(“conformity”) that, in turn, encourages both
remission (from heavy drinking) and the delay of relapse
(back to AD).
In addition to the support found for hypotheses 1 and
2 and lack of support for hypothesis 3, another comparison
in the current data could be interesting. Although we
thought that more psychosocial variables would affect
remission more than onset and relapse (part of hypothesis
2), which has some support, the data also suggested
that there were more individual psychosocial predictors
for first drink and heavy drinking transitions than for AD
transitions. It is possible that more individual or cultural
motives and expectancies could drive drinking frequency
and quantity while more physiological components of
addiction (e.g., tolerance, withdrawal, craving) may be
predictive for diagnosable drinking issues. The conclusion
here is tentative, given the smaller sample size for
the AD transitions, but may be of potential interest for
further investigation.
This study was not without its limitations. The current
sample included only men so it is unknown if the same
variables would be associated with transitions in women:
Research has suggested that late-life transitions of alcohol
use may differ in timing for women compared to men
[73]. The sample was also a veteran sample, thus also
limiting generalizability to the extent that veterans differ
from the general population (e.g., higher rates of PTSD
or other mental health issues) [74, 75]. The retrospective
nature of the drinking assessment is limited by memory
issues of past drinking patterns and behaviors. However,
as cited above, research studies have shown the LDH
to be a reliable and valid way to derive drinking history.
The retrospective design and VET Registry assessment
timeline provided a lot of information across many variables
of interest. A limitation of this assessment protocol,
however, was that the predictor variables were not always
assessed prior to the age of initiation, remission, or
relapse. A time-varying approach to the predictors would
be useful for future research, where the exact timing of
events could be delineated for each individual to more
clearly indicate prediction of a transition. Sample size
was also an issue for the relapse variables, where many
men had not (yet) experienced the transition. The number
of men who had experienced relapse of AD was especially
small (N = 68), and this could be one reason we find
so few significant risk and protective factors for relapse of
AD as compared to relapse of heavy drinking. Additionally,
the limited data for the individual predictors from
the self-report mailed questionnaire made comparisons
across domains problematic. The use of a large number
of predictor variables could also be an issue. Although
the point of the analyses was to examine many potential
risk and protective factors, it is possible that Type I errors
occurred amongst the many significance values. Effect
sizes were small, as noted previously, although effects for
clinical risk variables were generally stronger than psychosocial
variables. We focused on results that were consistent
across transitions (when possible) and on effects
significant at a more stringent probability level. Additionally,
there are other potential risk and protective factors
that were not examined in the current analyses, including
marital stability and religious variables, but it was necessary
to limit our range of inquiry.
Using time-based survival analyses to identify faster or
slower progression to key developmental transitions in
alcohol use, the current study examined domains of risk
identified in current alcohol problem use etiology literature.
Results confirmed that known risk factors were
associated with faster progression toward three key onset
transitions and then extended examination to subsequent
remission and then later relapse. Further research should
continue the effort to identify the predictors that hasten
or slow the progression of drinking throughout an alcohol
use career. The study of remission and relapse may be
particularly informative to clinicians and others involved
in the treatment of substance disorders. Importantly, the
role of psychosocial variables as predictors of remission
and the delay of relapse may provide empirically-identified
avenues of treatment intervention that may inform
developing treatment programs.