Introduction
Suicide is a complex issue that involves multiple factors.
Many researchers have looked into risk factors for
suicide. However, much of this research looks at risk
factors in isolation, or corrected only for age or gender
[1–5]. As a consequence, risk factors found in these
studies could simply be a proxy for other risk factors
due to the fact that they are correlated (for example,
education level and income). Additionally, many studies
are of limited size, and are usually non-representative of
the population as a whole due to the way the selection
procedure was set up, for example, a clinical setting [1].
Knowing that suicide is rarely related to just one risk
factor, this study quantifies the effect of individual
characteristics as accurately as possible by correcting for
correlation of characteristics. Furthermore, this study
uses all suicide cases in the Netherlands (around 1900
suicides are reported every year) and a large randomly
selected sample of control cases drawn from the full
population. This avoids issues of small sample size and
selection bias.
To our knowledge, only Gradus et al. [6] used such an
approach before in Denmark. They found sex-specific
risk profiles for suicide, focusing their risk profiles
mainly on medical data. However, in this paper, we
focus on socio-demographic risk factors.
This study decorrelates the effects of the risk factors
to obtain odds ratios which take into account the proxy
effects to the other risk factors. Moreover, we look
across multiple years (2014–2017) and at a large number
of socio-demographic factors. In this way, we obtain risk
factors that are both robust to intercorrelation as well as
to events that raise the risk among a certain
subpopulation.
Methods
The primary aim of the study is to find risk factors for
suicide that are robust to intercorrelation. In this way
we can be sure that the risk factors are not proxies for
the numerous other risk factors that are included in the
study. Additionally, a secondary aim is to make sure that
we can be sure that the risk factors found are based on a
large unbiased sample.
The data used was the micro-data of Statistics
Netherlands [7]. Statistics Netherlands collects data on
each inhabitant of the Netherlands (approximately
17,000,000 inhabitants) from various sources, which are
required to provide this information by law. This data
includes socio-demographic characteristics like birth
date, gender, marital status, type of household, role in
household, ethnicity, income, social benefits and in case
of death it includes cause and date of death.
Due to the privacy-sensitive nature of the data, it is
not freely accessible, nor is the data itself allowed to
be published. Access has to be granted by Statistics
Netherlands on a project-to-project basis, which was
granted for this project. It is only possible to work
with the data via remote connection to their secure
servers, and any output is checked on whether it
satisfies the privacy regulations before it is released
for publication.
We limited ourselves to the period of 2014–2017
since some of the databases for 2018 and later were
still undergoing data quality checks. Additionally,
some databases had a different format prior to 2014
so did not include all of the characteristics of interest
prior to 2014. Therefore, we could not analyze
data from before 2014 alongside data from the period
2014–2017 while retaining all characteristics of interest.
From the dataset of the years 2014–2017, those
individuals who died by suicide were identified based
on their cause of death, as established by coroners
(ICD-10 codes for external causes: intentional selfharm
(X60-X84)). The coroner is contacted when
there is doubt as to whether a person died of natural
causes. The coroner is always contacted when the
deceased is underage (in the Netherlands, this means
younger than 18 years old).
Statistical analysis
The binomial logit model was used (commonly referred
to as logistic regression) to decorrelate effects. Sociodemographic
characteristics of each inhabitant aged 10
and up on the 31st of December (of 2013, 2014, 2015, or
2016) were categorised. We limited ourselves to ages 10
and up since Statistics Netherlands doesn’t report on
suicides among youths under 10 years old, due to it
being an extremely rare event. We then modelled the
probability of suicide according to a binomial logit
model such that
P Snjxn !
 ¼ eV xn !
 
1 þ eV xn !
 
;
where Sn is the event that individual n dies due to
suicide in the following year, and
V xn !
 ¼ β0
þX k
j¼1
βj xn !
 j
where ðxn ! Þ
j is 1 if individual n has characteristic j and 0
otherwise, and k is the total number of possible characteristics.
This results in characteristics j having an odds
ratio (OR) of eβ j .
Since suicide is a quite rare event (roughly 1 per
10,000 people per year), the odds which are defined
as O ¼ p
1−p are extremely close to the actual
probability.
The main advantage of such a model is that proxy effects
are corrected for as long as the proxy is also included
in the model. Therefore, risk groups that are
heavily correlated with, e.g., age, gender, income are corrected
for. Though there is still an underlying assumption
that risk factors increase risk independently to a
certain degree, this assumption is significantly weaker
than if one considered the risk factors in isolation or if
corrected for a small number of risk factors.
Estimation was done using the Python package biogeme
[8]. This package estimates the model parameters
using maximum likelihood estimation by gradient descent.
It has been proven [9] that in the case of the binomial
logit model, this always converges to the optimal
model with regards to the training error. This means we
do not have to worry about local optima. Additionally,
the package provides us with standard errors on the parameter
estimation, allowing us to form confidence intervals
and do tests of significance. The tests of significance
done are t-tests (which show how many standard deviations
of the estimator it is distanced from 0).
First, estimation was done on a training set. This training
set consisted of both people who died by suicide as
well as a group of people who did not die by suicide.
The people who died by suicide were included with independent
probability 0.8 (ended up being 5854 cases).
The people who did not die due to suicide were included
with independent probability 0.01 (ended up being
596,416 cases). Due to the way the sampling was done,
all bias introduced is introduced into the β0 parameter.
We, therefore, do not report this parameter. The selection
procedure of the training set does not introduce
any bias into the other parameters.
Secondly, we generated a test set. This test set contained
the remaining suicide cases (1425 cases). Additionally,
it contained cases of people who did not die by
suicide. These cases were again included with probability
0.01, in such a way that it contains no cases included in
the training set.
We then estimated the predicted risk of suicide for
this test set. From these predictions, we calculated the
sensitivity (the proportion of correctly classified cases
among suicide victims) and specificity (the proportion of
correctly classified cases among those who did not die
due to suicide) for various risk thresholds. We then plotted
the sensitivity and specificity against each other. In
this way, we obtained the receiver operating characteristics
curve (ROC curve). We then calculated the area
under the ROC curve (AUC) to estimate model performance.
The AUC is also the probability that a random
case of death by suicide gets a higher predicted risk
than a random case of someone who does not die due to
suicide.
Results
The parameters we estimated (i.e., the βj parameters and
associated standard errors, t-tests, and odds-ratios) for
the binomial logit model are shown in Table 1. When
we talk about increased risk we are talking about increases
to the odds of suicide.
Taking the effect of possible correlating risk factors
into account, significant increases in risk in all age
groups were observed compared to those aged 10 to 19.
We see large increases in particular among people aged
between 40 and 49 (OR 5.70, 95% CI [4.57,7.24]),
between 50 and 59 (OR 6.69, 95% CI [5.37,8.33]), and
between 60 and 69 (OR 4.76, 95% CI [3.82,5.93]).
The fact that males die more often due to suicide than
females (OR 2.60, 95% CI [2.46,2.77]) still holds when
corrected for other characteristics. Furthermore, having
mental health problems (OR 7.69, 95% CI [7.24,8.17]) as
well as physical health problems as measured through
healthcare costs (up to OR 2.23, 95% CI [2.01,2.46]) are
major risk factors. Additionally, living alone (OR 1.75,
95% CI [1.49,2.05]), and all forms of unemployment,
especially those that have been found unfit for work
(UFW; having an OR of 1.89, 95% CI [1.75,2.05]),
increase the risk of suicide.
Looking at protective factors, the analyses show that
people with a high level of education have a low risk
(OR 0.82, 95% CI [0.74,0.90]). Low-risk people are also
those with a non-western immigration background (OR
0.63, 95% CI [0.57,0.69]) and 1st generation immigrants
(OR 0.72, 95% CI [0.66,0.78]). Also being married or
having children is a protective factor for a couple living
together (OR 0.64, CI 95% [0.54.0.75] for a married
couple without kids, OR 0.63, 95% CI [0.52,0.77] for a
non-married couple with kids). These effects are weaker
when the other effect is already present (OR 0.58, 95%
CI [0.48,0.69]).
Having a higher income is also a protective factor.
This holds for both personal income (up to OR 0.64,
95% CI [0.41,1]) as well as household income (up to OR
0.63, 95% CI [0.50,0.80]). Interestingly, household wealth
does not appear to be a protective factor. It even increases
risk in the wealthiest category (Table 1). We observe
urbanicity and regional differences being mostly
non-significant.
Figure 1 shows the approximate ROC (based on
percentiles to preserve privacy). Each point on the
curve corresponds to a threshold and shows the proportion
of people who died by suicide that are above
the threshold (the sensitivity) on the y-axis. On the
x-axis, it shows the proportion of people in the control
group who are above the threshold. The curve
shows a trade-off between true and false positives
and allows for an informed choice of thresholds for
risk groups. The AUC, which is based on the full
plot, is 0.77. This means that the probability that an
individual in the sample of those dying by suicide
will get a higher predicted risk than an individual in
the control set is 77%. A fully random model would
have an AUC of 0.50, while a perfect model would
have an AUC of 1.
Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study done into suicide
on socio-demographic factors with such a large and
unbiased sample, where, due to the level of detail of the
data, analyses could be done to control for many characteristics,
giving us very robust risk factors. We found
that previously discovered risk factors for suicide (middle-
age, male gender, and unemployment (as measured
through benefits)) remain elevated even when corrected
for a wide array of socio-demographic characteristics.
The same holds for commonly found protective factors
for suicide, like having a higher income or immigration
background.
Most increased risk came from being a recipient of
mental health care (which includes being an inpatient
as well as being an outpatient), which can be
expected knowing that approximately 87% of people
who die by suicide have mental health problems
[10]. Additionally, physical healthcare being a risk
factor could be explained due to hospitalisations for
previous suicide attempts. However, due to the fact
that the risk keeps increasing as physical health care
costs increase, it is unlikely this would account for
all of the increased risk.
This study did not observe significant differences
between rural and urban municipalities. However, it
is important to note that due to the high population
density in the Netherlands, most rural areas in the
Netherlands might still be considered urban compared
to rural areas in other countries.
Looking at raw frequencies, we see regional differences
in the Netherlands [11]. These differences became much
less when the effects of possible correlating risk factors
were considered. This seems to indicate that the regional
differences are primarily caused by the differences in the
demographic makeup of the regions as opposed to
specific local causes.
When we look at level of education, we see that being
highly educated remains a protective factor. However,
this only holds for the highest level of education and is
not particularly protective. Especially when compared to
the results of Phillips and Hempstead [12] who found
large differences between the suicide rates among people
with a high school degree and those among people with
a college degree in the United States. Combined with
the protective factor of income and the high correlation
between level of education and income, this seems to
suggest a proxy effect. The level of education might only
be a protective factor due to the associated increase in
income.
Our model has a reasonable fit with an AUC of 0.77,
which is high for a model predicting suicide death [1]
and comparable to the recent results of Zheng et al. [13]
who used deep neural networks on electronic health records
to predict suicide attempts (AUC of 0.769). It
could be used to identify low, regular, or high-risk
groups. However, the model is not usable to predict suicide
risk in individuals. Suicide is a rare event that on
average occurs in about 1 in 10,000 people a year. This
means that even if you have a tenfold increase in predicted
risk, you will still have 1000 false positives for
each true positive.
Although then not useful for prediction on an individual
level, the results from this study allow for targeted
prevention measures at certain risk groups. For example,
it would be possible to train social workers that are in
regular contact with recipients of social benefits to be
gatekeepers. Alternatively, high risk groups may be specifically
targeted to raise awareness of suicide prevention
hotlines within these groups. The authors also recommend
that this study is repeated at regular intervals to
see whether changes in public policy coincide with
changes in risk groups.
The methodology used in this study allowed us to find
robust risk and protective factors for suicide. However,
with this methodology it is not possible to discover
which specific combinations of risk factors or protective
factors are especially dangerous or safe. Research has
shown that the interactions of risk factors play a substantial
role in suicide prediction and greatly improves
model performance [13]. Therefore, having a proper
understanding of such interactions will be of great importance
in future research. We are currently working
on a new machine learning model that will allow us to
find significant interactions in a data-driven and
hypothesis-free manner. Since we are doing this in a
data driven and hypothesis-free manner, it both limits
bias on which interactions to include and allows us to
discover interactions that have not even been considered
before.