Background
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic and often progressive
disease that can lead to devastating complications and
long-term disability [1]. The economic cost of diabetes is
rising steeply, increasing from $245 billion in 2012 to
$327 billion in 2017 [2]. The burden of diabetes on affected individuals and on society as a whole underscores
the importance of prevention. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that up to 88
million adults aged 18 years or older have prediabetes,
[1] and many of these individuals will progress to incident type 2 diabetes over 3 years without intervention
[3, 4]. However, intensive lifestyle interventions (ILIs),
including the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), can
significantly lower risk of incident type 2 diabetes among
overweight/obese adults with prediabetes [4]. Increased
work-site adoption of obesity and diabetes prevention
interventions, such as DPP-based ILIs, can help promote
healthy weight among employees, [5, 6] reduce health
risks, and improve health outcomes [6]. In a 2017 review
of work-site translations of DPP, weight loss ranged between 1.4 and 4.9 kg at 7 to 12 months (n = 6 studies),
with worksite programs offering > 16 core sessions having the most favorable outcomes [7].
Ongoing efforts to disseminate DPP nationally have increased the rate of program adoption by US employers,
but reach and engagement among at-risk individuals
remains relatively low [8]. University systems represent a
promising, largely untapped option for DPP dissemination to overweight/obese adults with prediabetes. In the
US, there are over 4300 higher education institutions
(e.g., universities and colleges that grant degrees), [9]
and in many communities, universities are the largest
employer. The University of California (UC) system, for
example, is one of the largest employers in California
with over 229,000 employees [10]. University employee
turnover may be lower than at for-profit organizations
and many employees may also be enrolled in universitymanaged insurance programs, providing increased impetus to prevent diabetes and obesity. Large university
systems also have many resources to readily implement
DPP-based ILIs, making them an ideal setting to engage
personnel in evidence-based obesity and diabetes prevention interventions. However, very few studies have
examined the effectiveness of university-based DPP
models. Among 1863 CDC registered DPP organizations
as of March 1, 2021, 50 appear to be university or
college-affiliated programs (Fig. 1). To our knowledge,
only six published studies have focused on university
based DPP adaptations. However, these studies included
small sample sizes, pre-post analyses that lacked comparator groups, and short-term follow-up windows
(Table 1) [11–16].
Beginning in 2018, the UC System implemented the
UC DPP Initiative, which is a multi-component program
to target diabetes and obesity prevention among at risk
affiliates. This initiative was informed by a pilot DPP implemented at the University of California Los Angeles
(UCLA) in 2016. UCLA DPP was one of the first
university-based programs in the US to achieve full CDC
recognition. CDC recognition is granted to programs
that meet all recommended milestones for DPP delivery,
including 5% mean weight loss among participants.
Based on the success of the UCLA campus-wide DPP,
campus leaders and researchers partnered with the UC
Office of the President (UCOP) and UC Health to
launch a UC-wide DPP Initiative in 2018. By 2019, all 10
UC campuses had implemented UC DPP, which now
operates as part of routine campus activities (more details below). To our knowledge, this is one of the largest
university-based efforts to adress diabetes and obesity
prevention with a focus on system-wide DPP-based ILI
delivery.
Our goal is to conduct a rigorous, mixed-methods
evaluation of the UC DPP Initiative, focusing on the five
UC campuses with large medical centers where robust
EHR data for UC beneficiaries is also available; namely
UC Los Angeles, Irvine, San Diego, San Francisco, and
Davis. Our goals are to identify why the UC DPP Initiative
succeeds (or not), and to document lessons learned across
the UC system and between campuses to inform future efforts across UC and other large university systems.
The University of California Diabetes Prevention Program
(UC DPP) initiative
The UC DPP Initiative has four key components; 1)
identification of diabetes prevention as a system-wide
goal, 2) a prediabetes awareness campaign targeting atrisk beneficiaries, 3) coordinated DPP implementation
and delivery on every UC campus 4) coverage of DPP
for all campus affiliates, including faculty, staff and
students, at no cost. Each campus identified local champions, engaged key stakeholders, and signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with UCOP to receive
funding for program implementation. The MOU outlined a
commitment to the goals of the initiative, delineated guidelines for DPP delivery, and confirmed available resources.
Funding to campuses was based on fixed costs of delivering
a DPP cohort (i.e., not based on number of participants or
program outcomes). Although the UC system could have
easily continued to outsource DPP delivery (as many
universities and workplaces do through their insurers), this
initiative aimed to prioritize diabetes prevention as a highly
visible system-wide goal that leverages university-based
infrastructure and resources to implement all four key
components. For example, campuses aimed to implement
> 4 DPP cohorts in their first 2 years and then receive
additional UCOP funding to add cohorts based on local
demand.
The UC DPP Coordinating Center was established by
UCOP/UC Health to support system-wide DPP activities. The UC DPP Coordinating Center assists UC campuses with all aspects of program delivery, including
DPP coach training by UCLA-based certified master
trainers and data management for DPP cohorts. Centralizing some activities, such as coach training, provides
efficiency of scale (e.g., each individual campus is not required to spend time and money to train master
trainers). The Coordinating Center leads monthly group
calls with all UC campuses and individual calls with each
campus as needed. Each UC campus is also registered
with the National DPP (each campus has their own
unique CDC organization number in order to be eligible
for CDC recognition).
The UC system, like many other academic institutions,
provides and manages health insurance benefits for many
of its employees. The UC DPP Coordinating Center conducts outreach to at-risk UC health insurance beneficiaries with documented prediabetes (i.e., prediabetes
diagnosed as part of usual care). Trained UCOP staff use
UC EHR and claims data algorithms to identify at-risk
participants with documented prediabetes. Personalized
initiation letters with UC DPP logos are mailed from the
Coordinating Center to overweight/obese UC beneficiaries
with documented prediabetes. These prediabetes awareness letters include information about the importance of
diabetes prevention and the UC DPP Initiative, including
contact information for the local campus DPP. The letters
clarify that there is no out-of-pocket cost for the UC DPP.
UC DPP cohorts are led by UC staff who complete DPP
coach training and have experience delivering campusbased wellness programs. DPP eligibility criteria include 1)
age > 18 years, 2) body mass index (BMI) > 25 kg/m2 (> 23
for Asian adults) and 3) history of prediabetes, gestational
diabetes, or a “high risk” CDC Prediabetes Risk Test. UC
funding is provided to campuses for each additional DPP
cohort and is not contingent on meeting National DPP
metrics (e.g., 5% weight loss).
Methods
To ensure a rigorous and multifaceted program
evaluation, we will use the reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance (RE-AIM)
evaluation framework. The RE-AIM framework is a
well-established tool to evaluate the implementation
process of evidence-based health promotion programs
and interventions, to address internal and external validity, as well as feasibility and generalizability [17–19].
We propose a rigorous, comprehensive evaluation of
the UC DPP Initiative integrating unique and diverse
data sources including EHR data, administrative
claims, and campus data (DPP data, site visits and
qualitative interviews). Table 2 provides an overview
of the UC DPP-specific metrics guided by the RE-AIM
framework. Our study includes three specific aims
described in more detail below.
Aim 1: effectiveness of UC DPP
To assess the effectiveness of the UC DPP Initiative, we
will examine mean percent weight change from baseline
at 12 month follow-up and 24 month follow-up within
and between three groups of overweight/obese UC
beneficiaries. Group 1 includes overweight/obese beneficiaries with documented prediabetes who receive UC
DPP Initiative prediabetes awareness letters and enroll
in DPP (i.e., receive “full treatment”). Group 2 includes
overweight/obese beneficiaries with documented prediabetes who receive UC DPP Initiative prediabetes awareness letters, but do not enroll in DPP. Group 3 includes
overweight/obese UC beneficiaries without documented
prediabetes who are not included in the UC DPP Initiative (do not receive prediabetes awareness letters and do
not enroll in DPP). Group 3 serves as a control group to
account for secular trends and/or concurrent programs
that may affect weight change outcomes among UC
beneficiaries (such as weight management services any
overweight/obese UC beneficiaries may receive as part
of routine care). The primary outcome will be %
weight change at 12-month follow-up within those
who received a “full intervention dose” (i.e., Group 1)
and secondary outcomes will compare mean % weight
change between UC beneficiaries (Groups 1 vs. 2 and
Group 1 + 2 vs. Group 3).
Data collection & statistical analyses
To measure mean percent weight change, we will use
EHR weights, which are collected similarly across UC
health center visits, and DPP session weights for UC
beneficiaries who enroll in DPP. Baseline covariate differences between those with and without attrition will
be examined and we will then adjust for any covariates
found to be significantly different (p < 0.05) between attrition groups in order to satisfy the Missing at Random
assumptions of the mixed effects models. Because attrition could be a consequence of our primary outcome
(i.e. weight) our missing data may be Missing Not at
Random. In this instance we will utilize pattern mixture
modeling to impute missing valuies. We will conduct
within-subject analysis estimates of UC DPP Initiative
effectiveness among those who received a “full intervention dose” (i.e., Group 1 prediabetes awareness letters
and enrolled in DPP). For this primary analysis, we will
use a mixed effects linear regression model to compare
percent weight change within Group 1 subjects 12 and
24 months before DPP enrollment (pre period) and 12
and 24 months after enrollment (post period). Models
for the trajectory of percent weight change will be
specified with a random intercept for person with nested
random slope for time from enrollment measured on a
continuum. Average within-person between time-period
(post vs. pre-enrollment) differences in the trajectory for
% weight change will be modeled using a fixed effect
interaction term of time-by-time-period to test for between time-period differences in the rate of % weight
change. These models will be fit using a random intercept for person and random slope for time-period (post
vs pre). A fixed effect of time-period will be used to estimate the average between time-period difference in %
weight change adjusting for the corresponding length of
time over which the change was observed. For both
models, exploratory post-hoc analyses will also consider
additional subject level covariates (age, gender, race,
ethnicity, number of co-morbidities, number of DPP sessions attended, education level and years employed at
the institution), as well as DPP site. Interactions of the
difference over time (rates or mean levels) by these subject characteristics or site will also be explored to evaluate whether there is a differential benefit of the program
for certain groups of beneficiaries (i.e., heterogeneity in
treatment effect) and across sites. In the presence of
statistically significant (p < 0.05) interactions, the models
will be stratified so as to allow for potential heterogeneity in the covariates as well.
We will also compare outcomes between UC beneficiaries in Groups 1 vs. 2, a between-subject comparison, to
estimate DPP effectiveness while holding the effect of the
prediabetes awareness campaign constant across groups
(both Group 1 and 2 receive prediabetes outreach letters).
The mixed effects models mentioned above will be modified to examine between group differences in withinperson change by incorporating an interaction term with
Group membership. Similarly, we will compare outcomes
in Groups 1 + 2 vs. Group 3, a between-subject comparison akin to an intent-to-treat (ITT) analytic approach
since outcomes are being assessed among all UC beneficiaries with documented prediabetes eligible to receive the
UC DPP Initiative in comparison to similarly overweight/
obese individuals not exposed to the program. We will use
propensity score matching to identify comparable overweight/obese beneficiaries with (Groups 1 + 2) and without (Group 3) documented prediabetes. The propensity
score model will include baseline age, gender, race/ethnicity, BMI, and medical co-morbidities. Matching will be
accomplished through use of the nearest-neighbor
algorithm. Between group balance in the propensity scores
and covariates will additionally be examined. While
Groups 1 and 2 have an easily defined baseline for differentiating between pre- and post- diabetes awareness (i.e.,
enrollment or awareness letter date), Group 3 will have
their baseline selected as corresponding to 12–18 months
(or 24–30 months) prior to their most recent EHR entry.
Sample size and power calculations
For our primary outcome of % weight change at 12-
month follow-up within subjects, we will use 5% weight
change to estimate power based on the 2002 DPP randomized controlled trial [4] as well as National DPP recognition standards [22]. With a proposed sample size of
N = 50 using a two-sided alpha level of 0.05, we would
demonstrate 80% power to detect a paired difference of
at least 3.3% and have > 98% power to detect our target
weight change of 5%. For our outcome of weight change
at 12-month follow-up between subjects, we conservatively assume that the average % weight loss for those in
Group 2 (prediabetes notified) and Group 3 (usual care)
will be 2 and 0% respectively. These values will yield
about a 3% difference in weight loss between our comparison groups. Using an independent samples t-test as
a simplification of the mixed effects analysis plan with a
two-sided alpha of 0.05, we will have 90% power to detect our assumed between group difference of 3% with
the proposed sample sizes of 50 (Group 1; 10 per site)
and 500 (Group 2; 100 per site). Using the same assumptions, the proposed sample sizes of N = 550 Group A + B
and N = 500 Group 3 would yield 99% power to detect
the assumed 3% difference in the percentage weight
change between the groups. We would additionally have
80% power to minimally detect a between group difference of 2.5 and 1.1% with these sample sizes. All sample
sizes account for an anticipated 20% loss to follow-up
[7]. We will not be powered to detect differences in rates
of incident type 2 diabetes, but we will examine trends
over time using validated EHR and claims data algorithms [23, 24]. Metformin is not specifically highlighted
in the UC DPP Initiative, but since some beneficiaries
with prediabetes may also seek out this option, [4, 25]
we will also examine rates of metformin uptake using
prescription data available in the EHR.
Aim 2: reach of UC DPP
To assess reach, we will report the proportion of eligible
UC beneficiaries who engage in DPP (attend > 9 and > 16
sessions) and their representativeness of UC beneficiaries
overall. Using DPP enrollment and participation data
from each campus, we will assess the proportion of
eligible participants who enroll in DPP, as well as rates
of participation and engagement according to CDC standards (e.g., average number of sessions attended, proportion who completed > 9 and > 16 sessions, proportion
with documented physical activity minutes, etc.). We will
assess the representativeness of those who enrolled and
participated in DPP as compared to the population overall, as well as the subset who were contacted for enrollment but chose not to enroll. We will also report
exclusions, participation rates, drop-outs and representativeness within campuses and across UC.
We will examine the effectiveness of the DPP program
(% weight change and DPP participation) within and
between subjects. We will evaluate the consistency of
outcomes across sites and key subgroups (e.g.,
race and ethnicity). We will also construct a logistic regression model to evaluate factors that predict whether
subjects that receive the prediabetes letter will enroll in
DPP. This is equivalent to the comparison of patient
level factors between Group 1 and Group 2. First, we
will use bivariate logistic regression models to evaluate
subject level characteristics (e.g., age, gender, race, ethnicity, BMI, change in weight between the pre time point
and baseline, income level) that predict the outcome.
Next, we will construct a multivariable logistic regression model using a Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO), [26] to identify the combination
of factors that predict whether eligible subjects enroll in
DPP (Group 1 vs. Group 2).
Aim 3: adoption, implementation, and maintenance of UC
DPP
To examine adoption, implementation, and maintenance, we will conduct qualitative interviews (at 12 and
24 months) to assess the degree of implementation,
identifying barriers and facilitators associated with
implementation, and unanticipated consequences. For
adoption, we will assess representativeness of those making UC DPP-related decisions on each campus (i.e.,
those leading DPP efforts, implementation, and maintenance) and report types of key campus stakeholders involved within each campus and variations across UC.
For implementation, we will assess facilitators and barriers to initiative implementation; examine how these
vary across campuses and over time. We will also assess
unintended consequences of implementation (e.g., support and resources pulled away from other programs),
and if UC DPP milestones are followed at all campuses
or only partially implemented at some locations. We will
evaluate fidelity for at least two of 16 core DPP sessions
at each campus and will assess similarities and differences in strategies across campuses (e.g., recruitment
and engagement efforts, reported costs of program delivery). Research staff will observe DPP sessions and use
standardized checklists to assess fidelity of DPP delivery.
For maintenance, we will examine program outcomes
within and across campuses, including attrition. We will
report the degree to which the UC DPP milestones were
met over time and the degree to which initiative is integrated with campus workflow. We will also report
whether the local and UC leadership provide upkeep
and necessary support (e.g., staff).
Relevant RE-AIM constructs will be used as an initial
organizing framework for data coding and analysis. We
will use matrix analysis methods [27] for rapid turnaround of the results, including aggregated site profiles,
to share with UC leadership. In-depth analysis of the
qualitative data will be conducted using ATLAS.ti. Initially, a top-level codebook will be developed for the
baseline interviews based on the semi-structured interview guide, [28] Using a constant comparison analytic
approach, this codebook will be elaborated upon based
on emergent themes, and will be adjusted as each round
of interviews is reviewed. Interviews will be compared
within each campus, across campuses, across roles, and
over time. Additional sources of qualitative data (i.e.,
field notes from site visits) will also be included in the
data set and will be coded separately and in relation to
the interview data.
This study was funded by NIH/NIDDK
(1R01DK124503–01) and approved by the UCLA IRB
(20–000357-AM-00001).
Discussion
Increasing engagement in diabetes and obesity prevention is of paramount importance, but reach and engagement often fall short in real world settings [8]. Thus,
studies evaluating real-world approaches to enhance
DPP translation across diverse segments of the population are critically needed. Comprised of 10 unique campuses and serving as the third largest employer in
California, the UC System is an ideal setting to conduct
evaluations of system-wide initiatives to address diabetes
and obesity prevention.
The UC DPP Initiative is a multi-component program
implemented across UC as of 2018. By using the established RE-AIM framework and incorporating diverse
data sources, we will provide a detailed understanding of
the reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation and
maintenance of the UC DPP Initiative. While universitybased diabetes and obesity prevention interventions are
being implemented in UC and other settings, our study
is one of the first rigorous evaluations to be conducted
to date.
Studies have shown worksite lifestyle change programs
can provide convenience and accessibility, which may
help enhance individual-level engagement [6]. Coworker social support may increase the likelihood of
achieving desired outcomes, such as increases in physical
activity, and cost-savings may be enhanced when focusing on employees at risk for chronic diseases such as
obesity, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes [15]. Multicomponent work-site interventions, that consider
individual, organization and community factors, are
more successful than single component programs [29].
Universities are worksites, where all of these factors are
important considerations.
Universities are also the type of setting where affiliates
(i.e., faculty and staff) may spend extended hours beyond
the typical work-day (e.g., recreational or academic activities). Additional resources, such as campus recreation
and wellness services, can be leveraged to more effectively deliver interventions at lower costs. For example,
many universities already employ wellness and/or health
promotion staff who can be trained to also deliver an
on-site DPP. Thus, examining whether the UC DPP
Initiative works and potential lessons learned across the
UC system has many important implications. Findings
from this study will help inform future diabetes and
obesity prevention efforts across UC, as well as the
implementation of DPP-based interventions at other
universities and large, stable employers.