Introduction
Smoking is a major risk factor for noncommunicable
diseases (NCDs) such as cancer and heart diseases, causing
more than 7 million deaths worldwide each year [1,
2]. Waterpipe known as Ghalian in Iran, is one of the
oldest methods of tobacco smoking, which has now become
one of the major public health challenges in the
world, especially in the Eastern Mediterranean countries,
including the Arab countries, Turkey, and Iran [3, 4].
Since the late 1990s, waterpipe has been introduced as
an inexpensive and social method of smoking, especially
among young people and students [5]. It is estimated
that the prevalence of waterpipe smoking (WPS) in
youths Eastern Mediterranean region (EMR), about 15%
of use waterpipe [6]. A longitudinal study among young
people in EMR showed a 40% in prevalence of WPS
within 2 years of follow-up [7]. In Iran, various studies
have reported high rates of WPS among young people,
especially college students. For example, in studies by
Latifi et al. in [8], Karimi-Afshar et al. [9], and Ghafouri
et al. [10], more than a third of youths had a history of
WPS or were current waterpipe users.
In Iran, similar to Arab countries, waterpipe has less
social stigma than cigarettes. Although, in the past,
waterpipe was more common among the elderly, today
it has become very popular among young people as a
means of leisure, social gathering and communicating
[11, 12]. Studies have shown that waterpipe users believe
that it is healthier than cigarettes, is not addictive, and
its smoke is more enjoyable than cigarettes due to the
use of Moassel or fruit-flavored tobaccos [13, 14]. However,
studies have shown that WPS is associated with a
number of harmful health consequences such as lung
and esophageal cancers, respiratory diseases, low birth
weight, and oral diseases [15]. In addition to chronic diseases,
waterpipe exposes people to infectious diseases
such as tuberculosis, and viral infections including hepatitis
and herpes, as a result of sharing between waterpipe
users [5, 12, 16]. Despite the health risks of waterpipe,
its use is increasing and has reached alarming levels in
some countries [15, 17].
This study was conducted in the Kermanshah city in
western Iran, where the majority of residents are Kurds.
Few studies have been conducted on the prevalence or
desire of WPS in Kurdish people, but the prevalence of
hookah use, especially at a young age, is significant and
alarming in few studies. Bashirian et al., in a study
showed that 20.4% of female adolescents in Kermanshah
were current WP users [18]. Another study in Kermanshah
found that 36.1% of high school boys reported ever
hookah use and 17.1% mentioned WPS in the past
month [19].
The development of effective intervention strategies to
restrict the increasing use of waterpipe requires a clear
understanding of the factors influencing this behavior
[20]. It should also be noted that WPS depends on culture,
ethnicity, and other social environments [21, 22].
Qualitative studies are the most important tools for understanding
culture-based topics that can assess the
WPS in a particular geographical or cultural area and
provide rich information about the related factors [23].
Therefore, we conducted this study to investigate the
WPS in the young people of Kermanshah in 2020 using
a qualitative method.
Materials and methods
Design
This was a qualitative study conducted with the approach
of content analysis to explore the participants’
perspectives on the nature, and aspects associated to the
WPS.
Participants
Participants of this study were young people aged 17 to
25 years in Kermanshah city, located in the west of Iran.
They were Muslim Kurds or Persian and were also
current waterpipe users. We used purposeful sampling
method to select the participants by which the eligible
waterpipe users were invited to interview in coffee shops
or traditional restaurants. Criteria for entering the
research being 17 to 25 years old; both men and women,
being current WP smoker i.e. WPS at least once in the
last 30 days [24], having the ability to speak to record
the interview, giving informed consent to participate in
the study. The study did not consider any limitations on
factors such as financial status, family status of WPS,
marital status, level of education and some other underlying
factors, although they may have been confounder
factors.
Data collection
The data collection method was semi-structured interview
based on an interview guideline during June to August
2020. Interview questions were designed to gather
rich descriptions of experiences, and to achieve research
objectives. It consisted of 10 questions originally, which
sometimes increased according to the interviewees’ responses
(please refer to Table 1). Adequate sample size
in qualitative studies is a subject-oriented issue based on
information needs. In the present study, data collection
continued until information saturation, which occurred
with 23 interview. The male and female interviewers
were members of research team and health promotion
specialist.
It should be noted that the content of the interview
guideline was confirmed by experts in related fields
(three health education specialists, two psychologists, a
sociologist, and a health promotion specialist).
Procedures and ethics
The interviews were conducted face-to-face and lasted
30 to 45 min in coffee shops or traditional restaurants in
Kermanshah city. The interviews were recorded after
obtaining written informed consent from the participants.
All interviews were conducted in the language of the
interviewee (Kurdish or Persian) for mutual and deeper
understanding of the subject under study. Non-verbal
messages of individuals and their body language were also
recorded by memoing. We asked the interviewees to ask
any questions they had at the time of the interview. Recording
the interviews were also paused if interviewees
wanted to make a comment out of the record. This study
received ethics approval from the Research Ethics Committee
of Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences
(KUMS.REC.1396.751). We confirm that all methods related
to the human participants were performed in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved
by Research Ethics Committee of Kermanshah University
of Medical Sciences.
Data analysis
In the present study, according to the inductive approach,
we transcribed verbatim the content of the interviews immediately
after each interview considering the nonverbal
clues such as Anger, sadness, smiles, regrets, etc. Three
members of the research team read the texts separately,
and in the first step, called the initial encounter, notes, associations,
summaries, labels, and questions were noted in the
left margin of the pages. In the second stage, which was the
stage of identifying and labeling sub-categories, meaning
units were determined and labeled. In the third stage, subcategories
were organized and based on conceptual similarity,
the main categories were finally determined.
Trustworthiness
In the present study, Lincoln and Guba’s Evaluative Criteria
was used to assess the trustworthiness of the data
including credibility, transferability, confirmability, and
dependability [25]. The two methods used to assess
credibility were member checks and peer debriefing. In
the member checks, a summary of the interview was
returned to the participants to review the agreement. In
cases where there was disagreement between the researchers
and the participant, research team attempted
to reach a common understanding through interaction
with subjects. In peer debriefing, we invited experts in
the fields of health, psychology, and sociology to comment
on the results of the study and the categories extracted.
To meet the transferability criteria, we used
thick description of subject, and purposive sampling
with maximum variance in term of education, job, gender,
marital status, and age. Dependability was met by
audit trails in the implementation of the research protocol
including sample selection, data collection and analysis,
and matching the findings. Peer check as a
confirmability method was used to assess the confidence
that the results would be confirmed by other
researchers.
Results
In this study, 23 young people participated who were
waterpipe users at the time of the study. The mean (SD)
age of participants was 22.08 (2.74) years. The majority
of participants were male (16; 69.56%), single (17; 78.26),
had university education (12; 52.17%), and unemployed
(13; 56.52%). Details of demographic characteristics of
the interviewees is provided in Table 2.
Interviews with 23 young waterpipe users resulted in
information saturation, and data replication. The initial
codes were extracted according to the results of the interviews,
and subsequently sub-categories and main categories
were identified. In this study, two main
categories were “social aspects of waterpipe use”, and
“individual aspects of waterpipe use” along with five subcategories.
Each of these categories had one or more
subcategories and the semantic codes, presented in
Table 3.
Social aspects of waterpipe use
In this category, three aspects or sub-categories including
“socio-cultural aspects”, “socio-environmental aspects”,
and “social relations” were extracted, each contained one
or more semantic codes.
I. Socio-cultural aspects
The analysis of the interviews resulted in two aspects related
to culture in the subjects, which were: “social
norm” and “family norm”.
Social norm Fourteen participants believed that waterpipe
is a popular social phenomenon in the community
in which they lived and among their generation. Some
people believed that waterpipe is not a stigma like cigarettes
and there was no need to hide the WPS from
others in society.
Participant # 22, single, male: “I smoke waterpipe
like everyone else. I don’t think it’s wrong. Waterpipe
is so popular”.
Family norm According to nine participants, WPS in
families has become a common issue and in five cases
was reported as a family accepted behavior. They believed
that the culture of WPS is ingrained in families
and there is no prohibition on the use of waterpipe by
parents, children, or spouses.
Participant # 3, single, female: “ Participant # 3: “I
smoke waterpipe at home, with my father and
grandfather. My father says it’s better for me to
smoke waterpipe at home than outside”.
II. Socio-environmental aspects
In this study, we categorized meaning codes related to
economic aspects, physical environment, access, and
other issues related to WPS in the environment in this
sub-category. Specifically, three semantic codes including
accessibility, unemployment, and leisure time were
included in this sub-theme, which are mentioned below:
Accessibility In this study, 19 participants reported easy
access to waterpipe in multiple places such as coffee
shops and restaurants as one of the reasons for their
WPS.
Participant # 4, single, male: “We do not need to
look for a coffee house. Now, in addition to the Taqe
Bostan [a historical-recreational place in the north
of Kermanshah city with a lot of coffee shops], there
are many cafeterias in every area and neighborhood
of the city. The prices may be different, but waterpipes
can be found everywhere in the city”.
Unemployment One of the issues related to WPS raised
by participants was the lack of an activity as a “job” or in
other words “being unemployed”. According to many
young people, unemployment has affected both their inclination
towards waterpipe and the rate of WPS.
Participant # 1, single, male: “I’m unemployed and
have no a job. In fact, I started smoking waterpipe
due to the unemployment. If I had a job, I would not
be here at this time and was at workplace.
Leisure time Lack of facilities and recreational places to
spend leisure time was one of the environmental problems
in the city of Kermanshah, which was mentioned
by nine participants as a factor in their tendency towards
WPS.
Participant # 12, single, male: “There are not many
entertainment places in this city to go there. We are
young and need fun. “Waterpipe and coffee houses
have become our entertainment, work and life.”
III. Social relations
In this study, social relations played a pivotal role in the
initiation or continuation of WPS, and according to the
interviews, the semantic unit had a prominent role in
the influence of peers.
Peer influence We found that influence of peers or
friends was one of the most important aspects related to
WPS in young people. Twenty of the interviewees stated
that they smoked waterpipe for the first time with the
compliments or insistence of their friends, and now they
go to the cafeterias with their friends to use waterpipe.
Some of them mentioned that the most important motivation
for smoking waterpipe was to be with friends
and to be among them.
Participant # 18, single, female: “I first came to the
coffee shop with my classmates. I really did not intend
to smoke a waterpipe. Girls and boys all
smoked there, and I was tempted to smoke a waterpipe.
Then it continued. It was not a bad
experience”.
Individual aspects of waterpipe use
In this study, the content analysis of the interviews
showed that in addition to social issues, some individual
aspects also influenced the tendency of people to WPS.
This category contained two sub-categories including
“motivational aspects” and “lack of psycho-protective aspects”;
each contained two semantic codes.
I. Motivational aspects
Content analysis of the interviews revealed items that
pointed to the attractiveness of WPS, including the smell
and taste of fruit tobacco playing with smoke and creating
smoke ring, and the calmness due to WPS. According
to the semantic similarities, we put these aspects in
two meaning codes including Appeal and Relaxing.
Appeal From the point of view of all participants, waterpipe
was an attractive means of smoking. The most important
antisocial factor in the attractiveness of
waterpipe was the taste and smell of waterpipe tobacco,
and the resulting smoke.
Participant # 17, married, female “The taste of
waterpipe is very important to me. In fact, I love the
waterpipe because of its taste and smell!”
Relaxing Twelve of the interviewees believed that smoking
a waterpipe makes them feel calm. Some believed
that waterpipe nicotine is far less than cigarettes, but it
is far more sedative. To justify this, eight of them believed
that they do not take waterpipe smoke into their
lungs and only enjoy smoking it, and that enjoying it
makes them feel calm.
Participant # 23, single, female: “When I have a
problem with my family, I smoke a waterpipe to
relax and temporarily I forget my problems. It is better
to say that I try to forget.
Participant # 5, married, male: “No one can say that
waterpipe is not relaxing. Maybe because of nicotine,
I relax when I smoke waterpipe. By the way, when I
do not smoke, I feel upsetting.”
II. Lack of psycho-protective aspects
We found that the participants attributed the lack of
some psychological factors to their tendency to use
waterpipe or the rate of its use. Two semantic codes including
risk perception and self-efficacy were classified
in this sub-theme.
Risk perception We categorized some perspectives such
as low perceived risk of waterpipe, comparison of side
effects of cigarette smoking with waterpipe, reducing
health effects of waterpipe by mechanism of passing
smoke through water, and low nicotine of waterpipe in
this category.
Participant # 13, single, male: “Everyone knows that
waterpipe is much better and less harmful than cigarettes.
I did not smoke cigarettes but I know cigarettes
are very harmful. I do not bother much when I
smoke waterpipe.”
Participant # 12, single, male: “Do you know why
waterpipe is less harmful? Because its smoke passes
through the water and its poisons and harmful substances
are removed. Light waterpipes such as
lemon-mint or chewing gum are not harmful”.
Self-efficacy One of the important issues introduced by
11 of the participants was their lack of resistance to
WPS and their low motivation to quit waterpipe. Some
of them reported that although they were aware of some
harms of waterpipe, their inability to resist the temptation
of waterpipe led them to start using waterpipe. We
named these aspects as low self-efficacy.
Participant # 21, married, male: “Although I smoke
waterpipe for fun, but I cannot quit. Every time I
want to quit waterpipe, two or three days later I am
tempted again.”
Participant # 16, single, male: “I do not think about
giving up waterpipe because I know I cannot quit.
When I like it, it is difficult for me to quit. I see no
reason to quit.”
Discussion
The present study was a content analysis study that was
conducted to understand the WPS and related aspects
among young people in Kermanshah. The results of this
study showed that social aspects in three sub-categories
were involved in WPS include: socio-cultural aspects,
socio-environmental aspects, and social relations. Individual
aspects that referred to waterpipe tool, or psychological
aspects were also categorized in another category,
including two sub-categories: motivational aspects and
lack of psycho-protective aspects.
Social aspects of waterpipe use
Various studies have shown that social issues are among
the most important aspects of WPS, which include issues
such as social popularity, the impact of family and
peers, and access to waterpipe [21, 26]. Other studies
have shown that in Middle Eastern culture, WPS is recognized
as a cost-effective and pleasant social activity
with low health risks [27]. However, because waterpipe
is a culturally related phenomenon, qualitative studies
are needed to understand the relevant factors in each society
[28].
In the present study, socio-cultural aspects were classified
into two sub-categories: social norm and family
norm. Waterpipe in Iranian society opposes gender stereotypes
and social stigma and has become popular
among women and girls, and young people in recent
years [29]. The results of a qualitative study in northern
Iran showed that waterpipe in Iran has less stigma than
cigarettes. This belief has led to waterpipe being accepted
as a traditional and safe pastime in many families
and has become a social norm [30]. In some Arab countries,
where gender discrimination is a common issue,
the stigma of WPS has diminished in recent years, and
women are more likely to smoke waterpipe freely and
without shame [31].
In this study, consistent with other studies in Iran,
participants pointed to the effective role of the family in
initiating or continuing WPS [29, 32, 33]. In a qualitative
study in Iran, most participants emphasized the role of
the family in starting the WPS and believed that the
patterns, conditions and educational system of families
play a key role in orienting family members towards
WPS [34]. In the present study, participants
believed that waterpipe use was more prevalent
among family members in whom WPS was more
common as a family tradition, a finding that was consistent
with other studies [30, 35].
Access to waterpipe as a socio-environmental factor
has been emphasized in literature related to the prevalence
of WPS. From the perspective of the participants
in a qualitative study, the supply of waterpipe in public
places, especially in cafes and restaurants has helped to
increase its use and transfer consumption from homes
to the public sphere [36]. Cafes and restaurants provide
waterpipe for people who do not have the facilities or
patience to prepare it. Waterpipe consumption requires
the purchase of the device, tobacco and all its
accessories. This is time consuming but all these
problems have been solved by cafes and restaurants
[36]. Other studies have confirmed that access to
waterpipe in traditional cafes increases the chances of
WPS among young people [35, 37].
The availability of waterpipe in the social environment
and its comorbidity with the lack of facilities for spending
leisure time in the community is another important
environmental factor that has led young people to use
waterpipe. The results of a study in Iran showed that the
most important factor affecting WPS from the students’
point of view was spending leisure time [38]. It seems
that one of the most important ways to reduce WPS in
society is implementing policies to reduce its access and
supply in public [26, 30].
Unemployment was another socio-environmental factor
of WPS that was expressed by some participants in
the present study. They believed that unemployment
and consequently having free time was one of the factors
that started WPS or increased their consumption. Other
studies have shown that the prevalence of WPS among
unemployed people was higher than other occupational
groups [33, 39].
In this study, social relations was another factor related
to WPS, which refers to the impact of peers and
friends on waterpipe use in young people. The results of
a study showed that the number of days that adolescents
and young people spend with friends is directly related
to their chances of using waterpipe [40]. The results of
another study showed that peer pressure more than
curiosity led adolescents to use waterpipe [23]. It seems
that the main mechanism of peer influence on WPS is
learning how to use waterpipe in friendly or two-person
groups [14, 41, 42].
Individual aspects of waterpipe use
In this study, we found that individual aspects, especially
psychological, are related to hookah use in young people.
The sub-category of “motivational aspects” included two
semantic codes: “appeal” and “relaxing”. Many participants
emphasized that waterpipe as a means of smoking
has special charms and fundamental differences with
cigarettes, which has increased its popularity. In a qualitative
study, waterpipe users believed that the appeal of
WPS was multifaceted. Taste, smell, and sight were significant
sensory cues that contributed to its attractiveness.
The use of a wide range of flavoring tobaccos, and
innovations associated with large volumes of smoke also
contribute to the attractiveness of waterpipe [43]. A
qualitative study in Saudi women who used waterpipe
showed that the smell and taste of tobacco in different
flavors such as cappuccino, chewing gum, and various
fruits played an important role in the attractiveness of
waterpipe [31].
Another motivating factor for WPS expressed by the
participants in this study was the relaxing effect of
waterpipe. Similarly, Saffarzadegan et al., in their study
concluded that the relaxation seeking is one of the main
factors in the tendency of young people to waterpipe
[32]. In a qualitative study, Iranian Turkmen men did
not mention the relaxing effect of WPS [44]. Other studies
have shown that positive perceptions related to
waterpipe such as relaxation, encourage and maintain
WPS [45, 46]. Given the findings that emphasize relaxation
as a key feature of WPS, interventions should focus
on providing alternative methods that can meet this
need in young people instead of waterpipe.
In the present study, lack of two psycho-protective aspects
against waterpipe was identified, which included
risk perception and self-efficacy. Consistent with many
other quantitative and qualitative studies in the world,
the results of the present study showed that the perceived
risk related to the health effects of waterpipe and
its addictive nature was low in consumers. Participants
in the study believed that waterpipe was less dangerous
and addictive than smoking. In a similar study, those
who smoked cigarette and waterpipe reported that
waterpipe is less dangerous, less addictive than cigarettes,
and “lighter”, “cooler” and “milder” than cigarette
smoke [43]. In other studies in Lebanon and the United
States, young people have also emphasized that waterpipe
is less dangerous than cigarettes [47, 48]. Participants
in this study, in line with the study of Jawad et al.
[43], reported that harmful chemicals are filtered due to
the passage of smoke through the water in waterpipe,
and this process reduces its risks and harms compared
to cigarettes. Therefore, it is necessary to implement
educational interventions to increase people’s knowledge
about the amount of nicotine in waterpipe tobacco, the
possibility of addiction, and the inefficiency of passing
smoke through water in reducing nicotine.
Self-efficacy is one of the most important personal factors
that is used both to resist the temptation to smoke
in public and to stop waterpipe among smokers [49]. In
WPS behavior, there is an interaction between behavioral,
personal and environmental factors, and the
process of interactions may affect a teenager’s belief in
the temptation to smoke a waterpipe. The results of a
cross-sectional study in Iranian male adolescents showed
that lack of self-efficacy was the strongest determinant
of WPS [50] which was consistent with similar studies
[51, 52]. Another study also found that most women
who use waterpipe cited poor self-efficacy as an
important factor in WPS. They also stated that they
could not resist the temptation to waterpipe use in difficult
conditions [34].
One of the most important limitations of this study
was the uncertainty or unwelcome attitude of some
young people, which led to a longer data collection time.
Also, in some cases, the owners of the cafeterias prevented
the interview in their cafeteria. Moreover, the effect
of ethnicity can be considered as a limitation for the
generalizability of the results of this study.
Conclusions
The results of the present study showed that social environment,
culture and relations were social aspects of
WPS in youths. It seems that the implementation of the
policy of reducing access to waterpipe in public environments
can reduce WPS. Individual aspects such as motivation,
beliefs and psycho-protective also were related
to the WPS in participants. It is suggested that educational
and interventions, based on models and theories
such as health belief model (HBM), theory of planned
behavior (TPB), and extended parallel process model
(EPPM) be implemented in order to increase young people’s
belief and perception on dangers of WPS, and to
improve their self-efficacy to smoking cessation.