Background
The burden of infection caused by nontuberculous
mycobacteria (NTM), defined as mycobacteria other
than M. leprae and M. tuberculosis complex, is increasing
globally [1]. While NTM can involve organs such
as the skin, soft tissue, and lymph nodes, it predominantly
causes infection in the lungs. M. avium complex
(MAC), which includes M. avium and M. intracellulare,
is the most common cause of NTM pulmonary disease
(NTM-PD). M. abscessus complex (MABC), to which
the M. abscessus subspecies abscessus (M. abscessus),
M. abscessus subspecies massiliense (M. massiliense),
and M. abscessus subspecies bolletii belong, is the nextmost
common etiology in many countries, including
South Korea [2].
Recent practice guidelines for NTM-PD recommend
treatment initiation rather than “watchful waiting” for
patients meeting the clinical, radiographic, and microbiological
criteria for diagnosis, especially in the context
of positive sputum acid-fast bacilli smears and/or
the presence of cavitary lesions [3]. However, the success
rate of antibiotic treatment is unsatisfactory, with
rates of 60.0–65.7% for MAC [4, 5] and 34.0–45.6% for
MABC [6, 7]. Consequently, surgical resection is considered
a reasonable adjunctive therapy, especially for
patients with refractory disease despite rigorous medical
treatment, with large cavitary lesions expected to be
less penetrable by antibiotics, or with severe diseaserelated
complications such as massive hemoptysis [1, 3,
8].
While previous studies on the surgical outcomes of
adjunctive surgery have provided meaningful guidance
and insight, these findings varied considerably by institution.
For example, major outcomes such as negative sputum
culture conversion or postoperative complications
ranged from 57 to 100% and 0–46%, respectively [9–20].
Conflicting results and lack of standardized guidelines
provide little help for patients and clinicians alike regarding
the decision to perform surgery.
To resolve this uncertainty, more evidence on surgical
outcomes is needed. This study described the outcomes
of patients with NTM-PD who underwent surgical resection
at a tertiary referral center in South Korea and provided
a detailed account of complications and risk factors
associated with refractoriness or recurrence after surgery
for NTM-PD.
Methods
Study design and patient selection
This retrospective cohort study analyzed the medical
records of patients with NTM-PD who met the diagnostic
criteria of the American Thoracic Society/European
Respiratory Society/European Society of Clinical Microbiology
and Infectious Diseases/Infectious Diseases Society
of America guidelines [3] and underwent surgical
resection as adjunctive therapy between January 1, 2006,
and December 31, 2020, at Seoul National University
Hospital in South Korea. For patients with multiple pulmonary
resections, the analysis considered only the first
resection. This study was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of Seoul National University Hospital (IRB
No. 2104-094-1211).
Data collection
Baseline patient demographics at the time of surgery,
including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), smoking history,
and underlying disease were collected. Data on
acid-fast bacilli smear, mycobacterial culture, mycobacterial
species identification using 16 S rRNA and
rpoB sequencing [21, 22], and drug susceptibility test
(DST) results; antibiotic regimen; and treatment duration
before and after surgery were also obtained. DSTs
were performed at the Korean Institute of Tuberculosis
using the broth microdilution method. Inducible resistance,
defined as the susceptible minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) values (≤ 2 mg/L) to clarithromycin
for three days but resistant MIC values (≥ 8 mg/L) at
a longer incubation period, was tested by extending the
incubation with clarithromycin to 14 days [3, 23]. Preoperative
chest computed tomography (CT) images were
acquired and classified as ‘fibrocavitary’, ‘non-cavitary
nodular bronchiectatic’, or ‘cavitary nodular bronchiectatic’
by two pulmonologists blinded to the clinical data.
The extent of disease was also evaluated. The presence of
postoperative residual lesions, defined by remaining nodular,
cavitary opacities, or multifocal bronchiectasis consistent
with radiologic findings of NTM-PD, was assessed
by comparing CT images before and after surgery. Discrepancies
were resolved through discussion. Data on
preoperative pulmonary function test results, surgical
procedure, immediate postoperative complications, and
their management were also collected. We also reviewed
the pathology reports of the surgical specimens.
Treatment outcome assessment
We assessed treatment outcomes according to the definitions
provided by the NTM-NET consensus statement
[24] and recent studies [16–20]. Negative culture
conversion was defined as three or more consecutive
negative mycobacterial cultures from respiratory samples
collected over at least 3 months. Patients who did not
achieve negative culture conversion after surgery were
defined as refractory cases. Patients with sustained multiple
consecutive negative mycobacterial cultures without
positive cultures until the end of follow-up were considered
microbiologically cured. Recurrence was defined as
the re-emergence of at least two positive mycobacterial
cultures from respiratory specimens following negative
culture conversion after surgery.
Statistical analysis
Categorical variables were reported as frequencies (percentages),
while continuous variables were summarized
as medians with interquartile ranges (IQRs). Patient
groups were compared using Pearson’s chi-square or
Fisher’s exact tests for categorical variables and Mann–
Whitney U tests for continuous variables. Univariate
logistic regression analysis was performed to identify the
potential risk factors associated with refractoriness or
recurrence. For multivariate logistic regression analysis,
variables with statistical significance of P < .2 on univariate
analysis were included, along with variables selected
a priori based on the background knowledge of previous
studies. P < .05 was considered statistically significant.
Statistical analyses were conducted using R software
(version 4.0.4, R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria) using the moonBook package for
descriptive analysis and fitting generalized linear models
for logistic regression modeling.
Results
Patient characteristics
During the study period, 67 patients with NTM-PD
(female 53 [79.1%]; male 14 [20.9%]) underwent surgical
resection and were included in the study. The baseline
characteristics of the patients at the time of surgery are
summarized in Table 1. The median age and BMI were
57 years (IQR 50–65 years) and 20.1 kg/m2 (IQR 18.7–
21.3 kg/m2), respectively. Fifty-nine (88.1%) patients had
never smoked cigarettes, and 10 (14.9%) patients had a
previous history of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Thirty-nine patients (58.2%) were positive for MAC (M.
avium, 18 [26.9%]; M. intracellulare, 21 [31.3%]), while
24 (35.8%) patients were positive for MABC (M. abscessus,
16 [23.9%]; M. massiliense, 8 [11.9%]). Detailed characteristics,
surgical indications, and types of procedures
stratified by the type of NTM species are presented in
Additional file 1: Table 1. Among the 61 patients whose
DSTs were available, 11 (84.6%) of 13 patients infected
with M. abscessus and one (12.5%) of eight patients
infected with M. massiliense showed resistance or inducible
resistance to clarithromycin, respectively. The most
prevalent CT pattern in the study group was cavitary
nodular bronchiectasis (34; 50.7%), followed by non-cavitary
nodular bronchiectasis (19; 28.4%) and fibrocavitary
bronchiectasis (14; 20.9%). Forty-nine (73.1%) patients
showed bilateral involvement of the disease, while seven
(10.4%) patients showed single-lobe involvement.
Before surgery, most patients (61; 91%) received antibiotic
treatment for NTM-PD and among them, 58 patients
(95.1%) were treated with guideline-adhering regimens:
a combination of clarithromycin or azithromycin,
rifampin, and ethambutol with consideration of amikacin
or streptomycin for MAC; a combination of isoniazid,
rifampin, and ethambutol for M. kansasii; and multidrug
regimens including macrolides, amikacin, imipenem, or
cefoxitin for MABC [1]. The median duration of antibiotic
treatment before surgery was 14 months (IQR 9–25
months).
Indications and types of surgical resection
The main indication for surgery was persistent positive
mycobacterial culture (54; 80.6%) followed by longstanding
cavity or radiographic aggravation (7; 10.4%)
despite rigorous antibiotic treatment. Three patients
underwent resection due to massive hemoptysis (4.5%).
Another patient (1.5%) had his right middle lobe, the
only region destroyed by M. abscessus, removed as initiation
of NTM therapy. The remaining two patients
(4.5%) underwent resection of a solitary nodule or cavitary
lesion for diagnostic purposes. Fifty-eight patients
(86.6%) underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
(VATS); the others underwent open thoracotomy.
The surgical procedures included pneumonectomy
(4; 6.0%), bilobectomy with wedge resection (1; 1.5%),
bilobectomy without segmentectomy or wedge resection
(1; 1.5%), lobectomy with segmentectomy or wedge
resection (15; 22.4%), lobectomy without segmentectomy
or wedge resection (18; 26.9%), segmentectomy
with wedge resection (11; 16.4%), segmentectomy without
wedge resection (5; 7.5%), and wedge resection (12;
17.9%) (Table 2). The median length of hospital stay for
surgery was 6 days (IQR 4–9 days).
Postoperative complications
The postoperative complications are summarized in
Table 3. Nine patients experienced immediate postoperative
complications, more commonly those who underwent
open thoracotomy (five following open thoracotomy
and four following VATS; P = .001). The most common
postoperative complication was prolonged air leakage
(3; 33.3%). Wound dehiscence requiring surgical closure
occurred in patients who underwent VATS. One patient
experienced delayed surgical site bleeding, which was
successfully managed by hemoclipping. Only one patient
in our study developed a bronchopleural fistula.
Treatment outcomes
Fifty-nine (88.1%) patients were administered antibiotics
postoperatively for a median of 17.5 months (IQR
10.25–23.75 months). Of the 54 patients with persistent
positive mycobacterial culture before surgery
(one was omitted due to planned sequential operation
within 3 months), 38 (71.7%) achieved initial negative
culture conversion postoperatively. Among them, 27
(50.9%) patients maintained negative culture conversion
throughout the median follow-up period of 38
months (IQR 17.5–59.5 months) while 9 (17.0%) experienced
recurrence. Fifteen (28.3%) patients displayed
persistently positive mycobacterial cultures and were
defined as refractory cases. The details of the treatment
outcomes are summarized in Fig. 1. One patient
with recurrence and six refractory patients underwent
sequential surgery, five of whom subsequently achieved
negative culture conversion. The factors associated with
the additional surgeries are summarized in Additional
file 1: Table 2. All three patients whose indications for
surgery were massive hemoptysis despite bronchial
artery embolization remained stable without hemoptysis
for a median of 14 months (range, 10–90 months),
and none underwent additional intervention. None of
the patients died within 90 days. The number of NTMPD-
related hospital admissions before and after surgery
was 17.1 and 22.8 admissions per 100 person-years,
respectively (P = .119). The number of emergency room
(ER) visits before and after surgery was 20.7 and 18.3
visits per 100 person-years, respectively (P = .544). The
changes in the type of surgical procedure and outcomes
according to the time periods are summarized in Additional
file 1: Table 3.
Concomitant fungal infections
Five of the 67 patients had an account of numerous
hyphae, suggestive of aspergillosis. The patient ages
ranged from 47 to 69 years, and only one patient was
male. None of the patients had underlying disease and
four (80%) had complained of hemoptysis before surgery.
The causative mycobacterial species included M. avium
in two patients and M. intracellulare, M. abscessus, and
M. massiliense in one patient each. Three patients had
cavitary lesions; the other two showed extensive bronchiectasis
and parenchymal destruction. Only one patient’s
surgical specimen exhibited fungal organisms infiltrating
the surrounding lung parenchyma, consistent with
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA). This patient was
consequently treated with itraconazole for 1 year, while
others were closely followed without the administration
of any antifungal agent. Two patients were tested for
Aspergillus immunoglobulin G, and all the test results
were positive. Fungal organisms were not isolated from
the sputum cultures studied in two other patients.
Risk Factors associated with refractoriness or recurrence
A total of 15 refractory and 12 recurrent patients were
grouped for logistic regression analysis. This analysis
indicated postoperative residual lesions (odds ratio [OR]
4.74, 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.32–16.96, P = .017)
as a potential predictor of refractoriness or recurrence
after surgery. Multivariate analysis revealed that female
sex (adjusted OR, 6.63; 95% CI, 1.04–42.4; P = .046), preoperative
positive mycobacterial culture (adjusted OR,
5.87; 95% CI, 1.04–33.08, P = .045), and residual lesions
after surgery (adjusted OR, 6.86; 95% CI, 1.49–31.56;
P = .013) increased the odds of refractoriness or recurrence,
while age, BMI, and type of surgical procedure
were not associated with treatment outcomes (Table 4).
Predictors of treatment outcomes by species type are
presented in Additional file 1: Tables 4 and 5.
Discussion
This study investigated the outcomes of adjunctive
surgical treatment in 67 patients with NTM-PD and
derived the risk factors associated with unfavorable
outcomes. Following surgical resection, 70% of the
patients who were refractory to prior antibiotic treatment
achieved initial negative culture conversion. After
achieving culture conversion, half of these patients
remained culture-negative during a median followup
of 38 months. In addition to mycobacterial eradication,
surgical resection also resolved uncontrolled
hemoptysis. Although approximately 13% of patients
experienced postoperative complications, all of them
recovered with appropriate measures and none died
due to surgical resection. However, 15 patients were
non-responsive to surgical resection. Unfavorable outcomes
were associated with female sex, preoperative
positive mycobacterial culture, and residual lesions
after surgical resection. While these are acceptable
outcomes, the culture conversion rate in our study was
lower than those reported previously [9–13, 15–20,
25, 26]. This may be explained by different patient
compositions and outcome definitions across studies.
For instance, while many studies did not include or had
few patients with MABC infections, which are difficult
to treat and resistant to many antibiotics, one-third of
our study population was positive for MABC infection.
Moreover, unlike other studies, we took a more
conservative approach of assessing ‘true’ postoperative
negative culture conversion among those who showed
persistent positive mycobacterial cultures before
surgery.
Our study results indicated that surgical resection in
patients with NTM-PD can be performed safely without
long-lasting morbidities. Although postoperative
complications occurred in 13.4% of patients, all were
managed without enduring morbidity. Only one patient
required an additional surgical procedure, while the
others recovered with conservative management. A
larger proportion (86.6%) of patients who received
VATS in the present study compared to those in other
studies [9, 11, 12, 17, 18, 20, 27] may have improved the
postoperative complication rate in our study. The postoperative
complication rate was the lowest when most
patients were treated with VATS (Additional file 1:
Table 3).
Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis (CPA) following
NTM-PD, which is caused by Aspergillus species, has
been increasingly reported. The prevalence of CPA in
NTM-PD ranges from 3.9 to 16.7% [28, 29]. The risk
factors associated with concomitant CPA in NTM-PD
include the presence of fibrocavitary lesions or emphysema
and the use of corticosteroids [29]. In our study,
five patients had pathologic findings suggestive of CPA,
one of whom was treated with an antifungal agent. This
result emphasizes the importance of an awareness of
combined fungal infections when treating NTM-PD.
In this study, female sex, preoperative positive mycobacterial
culture, and postoperative residual lesions
were associated with NTM-PD refractoriness or recurrence
after surgery. The unfavorable outcomes in female
patients could be explained in terms of female predilection
for NTM-PD [31, 32], which might lead to higher
recurrence rates in female patients. In this study, all
of the recurrent cases were women. This predilection
could be caused by genetic or hormonal differences [31,
32]. Interestingly, previously reported risk factors such
as old age, longer period from initial medical treatment
to surgery, and infection by non-M. avium species were
not predictors of outcome in the present study. This
may be due to differences in the size and composition
of the study population.
Similar to previous studies, we confirmed the importance
of residual lesions after surgery [17, 33, 34].
The most common radiographic feature of residual
lesions was non-cavitary nodular bronchiectatic (69.6%),
followed by cavitary nodular bronchiectatic (21.7%)
and fibrocavitary pattern (2.2%). Overwhelmingly many
patients (93.5%) with residual lesions had bilateral lung
involvement before surgery. Most patients in our study
underwent surgery in order to minimize the mycobacterial
burden in otherwise palliative setting. Thus, we
adopted limited resection strategy to conserve pulmonary
function. But, as Yamada and colleagues suggested
[34] and our result underscores, extensive resection that
minimizes residual lesion may be required for proper
disease control. As Togo and colleagues emphasized
[33], more study regarding acceptable extent of remnant
lesions after surgery may be necessary.
Our study has several limitations. This retrospective
cohort study was conducted in a single institution.
A relatively small number of patients were identified
over 15 years, which might imply a selection bias, where
only tolerable patients with few comorbidities and good
functional status were selected for surgery. Treatment
outcomes were evaluated according to a widely used
operational definition, which is mainly based on expert
consensus. Thus, cautious interpretation of the results is
advised. The changes in symptoms or quality of life following
surgery could not be quantitatively measured.
However, we have provided the changes in the number
of NTM-PD-related hospital admissions and ER visits
as surrogate outcomes. Well-designed prospective randomized
control trials comparing the outcomes of antibiotic-
only treatment and adjunctive surgery are required.
Yet, our study included a relatively large number of
patients with MABC compared to other studies. Moreover,
most of the patients in our institution were treated
with VATS, which depicts a more realistic and updated
picture of surgical outcomes of patients with NTM-PD.
Conclusions
In conclusion, pulmonary resection can be a valuable
treatment option for patients with NTM-PD who are
refractory to antibiotic treatment or experience diseaserelated
complications such as hemoptysis. The potential
factors associated with unfavorable outcomes included
female sex, preoperative positive mycobacterial culture,
and residual lesions after surgery. Postoperative complications
can be managed with low morbidity and mortality
in experienced institutions.