Introduction
Chronic cough is defned as cough ≥ 8 weeks with normal chest X-ray or CT scan. Cough variant asthma,
upper airway cough syndrome, eosinophilic bronchitis,
and gastroesophageal refux-induced cough are common etiologies of chronic cough [1, 2]. Obstructive
sleep apnea–hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) has recently
been considered as a possible disease that can lead to
chronic cough [3]. Most cough could be controlled or
relieved after treatments according to the diagnosis and
treatment procedures [4]. However, 10–42% of chronic
cough patients cannot clarify the etiology or receive
efective treatment measures [5], causing refractory
or persistent cough. Terefore, rare etiologies must be
continuously identifed, which can efectively reduce
the proportion of patients with refractory cough.
Studies have found that obese asthmatic patients
have a unique asthma phenotype, which is characterized by a higher level of infammation of neutrophils in
sputum and blood [6]. Morales-Estrella et al. reported
that patients with a higher BMI experience cough
more often than other patients and that the cough is
more severe in obese patients [7], indicating that obese
patients an increased susceptibility to cough. Recently,
it was suggested that type 2 diabetes may be a risk factor for chronic cough and that self-reported chronic
cough was more common in diabetic patients than
in the general population [8]. Our previous research
showed that OSAHS patients have a predisposition to
cough hypersensitivity associated with airway infammation [9]. Since obesity, type 2 diabetes and sleep
apnea are all closely associated with chronic cough and
bronchial asthma, metabolic syndrome (MetS) should
be considered.
Because increased cough sensitivity is a common
feature of all chronic cough patients, it is also called
cough hypersensitivity syndrome [10, 11]. We hypothesized that MetS patients had high cough sensitivity
and were more vulnerable to coughing after receiving
endogenous or exogenous coughing stimuli. Tis study
tested the hypothesis by comparing the capsaicin cough
sensitivity, induced sputum cell counts, and infammatory mediators in induced sputum supernatants among
MetS patients with OSAHS, MetS patients without
OSAHS, and healthy control populations and explored
the possible mechanisms underlying the increased capsaicin cough sensitivity in MetS patients.
Materials and methods
Participants
1. MetS with OSAHS group: A total of 29 MetS patients
diagnosed in the Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism at Tongji Hospital from December 2017 to
May 2020 were included in this group. Moreover, these
patients were diagnosed with OSAHS by polysomnography (PSG).
2. MetS without OSAHS group: A total of 22 MetS
patients who were diagnosed in the Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism at Tongji Hospital
from December 2017 to May 2020 were included in this
group. In addition, these patients were included in this
group, and did not meet OSAHS after being diagnosed
by PSG.
Diagnostic criteria for MetS: MetS patients were
investigated according to the “Chinese guidelines
on the Prevention and Treatment of Dyslipidemia in
Adults” revised in 2007 by the joint committee that
developed the guidelines [12]: (1) abdominal obesity—
waist circumference ≥ 90  cm for males and ≥ 85  cm
for females; (2) hyperglycemia—fasting blood glucose ≥ 6.1 mmol/L or blood glucose ≥ 7.8 mmol/L 2 h
after glucose load and/or diagnosed with diabetes and
subsequently treated; (3) hypertension—blood pressure ≥ 130/85  mmHg (1  mmHg=0.133  kPa), and/
or confrmed hypertension and receiving treatment;
(4) fasting triglyceride (TG) ≥ 1.70  mmol/L; and (5)
fasting high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLC) < 1.04 mmol/L. Patients who meet 3 or more criteria
can be diagnosed with MetS.
Diagnostic criteria for OSAHS: OSAHS was diagnosed according to the “International Classifcation of
Sleep Disorders (3rd edition)” by the American Sleep
Association (ICSD-3, 2014) [13].
3. Healthy control group: During the same period, 25
healthy volunteers without allergy were enrolled from
the staf and medical students in the hospital and designated as healthy control group.
Te inclusion criteria for the above participants were
as follows: (1) between 18 and 65  years of age; (2) no
wheezing, hemoptysis, and fever; (3) no obvious abnormalities on chest X-ray or CT; (4) pulmonary function tests: forced expiratory volume in one second
(FEV1) > 80% of predicted value, and FEV1/forced vital
capacity (FVC) > 70%; and normal airway reactivity;
and (5) tolerable to cough sensitivity test to capsaicin and sputum induction. Te exclusion criteria were
as follows: (1) smoking history or smoking cessation
< 2  years; (2) respiratory infections within 3  months;
(3) pregnant or lactating women; (4) mental health disorders. In addition, all participants with a history of
chronic cough were also excluded.
Te protocol was registered in the Chinese Clinical Trials Register (http://www.chictr.org.cn/)
(ChiCTR1800014768). Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants before enrollment.
Method
1. Capsaicin cough sensitivity: Capsaicin (30.5  mg) was
dissolved in Tween 80 (1  mL) and ethanol (1  mL) and
then dissolved in physiological saline (8  mL) to provide a stock solution of 1× 10−2
  M, which was stored
at −20  °C. Tis solution was diluted with physiological saline to make solutions of 0.49, 0.98, 1.95, 3.9, 7.8,
15.6, 31.2, 62.5, 125, 250, 500 and 1000 µM. Each subject
inhaled a control solution of physiological saline, followed by progressively increasing concentrations of the
capsaicin solution. Solutions were inhaled for 15 s every
60  s, by tidal mouth-breathing wearing a noseclip from
a Bennett Twin nebulizer (3012–60  cc; Puritan-Bennett
Co., Carlsbad, CA, USA) operated by compressed air at
5 L/min. Increasing concentrations were inhaled until
fve or more coughs were elicited. Te nebulizer output
was 0.21 mL/min. It has been reported that aerodynamic
mass median diameter (MMD) of the particle is 3.60 µM,
with a geometric standard deviation of 3.47 [14, 15]. Capsaicin-induced cough number was counted by two medical technicians in the pulmonary function laboratory.
Cough threshold C5 was defned as the lowest concentration of capsaicin that elicited fve or more coughs.
2. Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS): According to the
ESS proposed by Johns [16], a total score <5 points was
defned as normal, 5–9 points was defned as mild sleepiness, 10–15 points was defned as moderate sleepiness,
and 16–24 points was defned as severe sleepiness.
3. Gastroesophageal refux disease questionnaire
(GerdQ) [17]: Te questionnaire comprises 6 symptomrelated questions, of which 4 are questions related to
symptoms positively correlated with refux (A1, A2, C1,
and C2) and the other 2 are questions related to symptoms negatively correlated with refux (B1 and B2). Te
questionnaire asks respondents to recall the frequency
of each symptom in the past week, and symptoms are
divided into 4 levels according to degree. Te score
for each positive symptom increases with the increasing frequency of symptom onset. No positive symptoms appearing within the past week was set at 0 point;
a positive symptom appearing 1  day within the past
week was set at 1 point; a positive symptom appearing
2–3 days within the past week was set at 2 points; and
a positive symptom appearing 4–7 days within the past
week was set at 3 points. Te scoring criteria for negative symptoms were opposite, and the frequency grades
were set as 3, 2, 1, and 0 points. Te GerdQ score was
the sum of scores for each symptom; the score ranged
from 0 to 18 points, and a total score ≥8 points indicated the possibility of gastroesophageal refux disease.
Te higher the score was, the higher the possibility.
4. Induced sputum cell counts: Te analysis was conducted according to a method established by Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine at
Tongji Hospital [18]. Briefy, the subjects continuously
inhaled the 4% hypertonic saline solution through an
ultrasonic nebulizer (YS9801, Yisheng Corp., Shanghai, China) and were asked to expectorate sputum
into a sterile pot every 5 min, after blowing their noses
and rinsing their mouths. Sputum with minimal salivary contamination was immediately collected, mixed
with 4 volumes of 0.1% dithiothreitol by gentle aspiration and then was mixed on a bench rocker for 20 min.
Te fltrate through a 48-mm gauze was centrifuged
at 3000  rpm for 10  min, and the cell-free supernatant
was removed and stored at −80 °C until assay. Te cell
pellet was re-suspended in 1  mL of PBS and smeared
on glass slides, followed by total cell counting using a
standard hemocytometer. Te air-dried preparations
were stained with HE stain, and then cell diferential
was performed on 400 nucleated cells according to
standard morphological criteria.
5. Analysis of infammatory mediators in induced sputum supernatants: Te levels of bradykinin, calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP), substance P (SP), pepsin,
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), histamine, eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), and interleukin-8 (IL-8) in induced
sputum supernatants were analyzed according to the kit
instructions. Te average value of 3 measurements was
used as the fnal result. Each reagent kit was provided by
Shanghai Yuanxiang Medical Devices Co. Ltd., improting from R & D Systems (United States). Te error within
the same detection batch was <5%, and the error among
batches was <10%. Te lower limit of detection for each
mediator was as follows: bradykinin, 39.0 pg/mL; CGRP,
7.8  pg/mL; SP, 2.5  ng/mL; pepsin, 0.01  ng/mL; PGE2,
0.01 pg/mL; histamine, 0.78 ng/mL; ECP, 1.5 ng/mL, and
IL-8, 7.8 pg/mL.
6. Measurement of basic parameters: Te basic parameters including height, weight, waist circumference and
blood pressure were measured by professionally trained
medical personnel. Height data were accurate to 0.1 cm
and body weight was accurate to 0.1  kg. Waist circumference was measured according to the method recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO)
and the data were accurate to 0.1  cm. Blood pressure
measurement was performed twice at an interval of
5 min, and the average was taken.
7. Measurement of blood biochemical parameters: All
subjects fasted for more than 10  h, and fasting venous
blood was drawn the morning of the next day. Triglycerides, HDL-C, and blood glucose were measured in our
laboratory according to routine procedures.
8. Pulmonary function tests and exhaled nitric oxide
measurement: Tese procedures were conducted by
professional technicians. Pulmonary function tests were
performed using a MasterScreen spirometer (Jaeger,
Germany) according to the instructions developed by
the American Toracic Society [19]. Exhaled nitric oxide
measurements were performed according to the manufacturer’s manual (NIOX, Sweden). Pulmonary function
and histamine bronchial provocation tests were performed according to the methods recommended by the
Respiratory Branch of the Chinese Medical Association.
Te instruments adopted were MasterScreen Difusion
lung function instrument and APS nebulizer from Jaeger
Company (Germany). With histamine as the stimulant,
when the cumulative histamine dose (PD20-FEV1) that
reduces FEV1 by 20% was less than 7.8 mol, the increased
airway reactivity was considered. All indeterminate
results of the above tests were conducted for a second
time, and conclusive results were fnally got. No signifcant adverse events occurred during above tests.
9. PSG monitoring: All night sleep monitoring was
performed using Alice 5 Polysomnography (Philips
Respironics, Inc.). Nose and mouth airfow, percutaneous
oxygen saturation (SpO2), electroencephalography (EEG),
eye movement, mandibular electromyography (EMG),
chest and abdomen respiratory motion, posture, leg
movements and snoring were recorded for at least 7  h.
After monitoring, the sleep physician (Dr. Shi) manually
analyzed and normalized the data to calculate the apnea–
hypopnea index (AHI, the average number of apneas or
hypopneas recorded during the study per hour of sleep),
minimum oxygen saturation during sleep, and mean oxygen saturation.
Process
Te enrollment process was as shown in Fig.  1. Te
enrolled participants frst completed a basic medical
history inquiry, had their body height and blood pressure recorded and underwent blood biochemical tests
to establish a preliminary diagnosis of MetS; these procedures were followed by PSG monitoring, a pulmonary
function test, an exhaled nitric oxide test, a capsaicin
cough sensitivity test, and an induced sputum cell count.
Te remaining sputum was used for cytological analysis
and an assay of the supernatant to determine the infammatory mediator profle. Participants were subsequently
divided into a MetS with OSAHS group and a MetS without OSAHS group based on PSG monitoring. Te above
tests were also completed in the healthy controls.
Statistical analysis
Data with a normal distribution are expressed as the
mean±SD, while those with a skewed distribution
are expressed as the median (25–75% interquartile).
Data among the 3 groups were analyzed using one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) or a nonparametric test
(Kruskal–Wallis H test). If there were diferences among
the groups, the LSD t-test or Mann–Whitney U test
was used for pairwise comparisons between 2 groups
and categorical variables were compared using the chisquare test. Once diferences were determined, we incorporated the most signifcant individual variables into a
stepwise multiple linear regression to determine signifcant predictors of increasing capsaicin cough sensitivity.
(A multiple linear regression model was used to analyze
the efects of triglycerides, age, gender, fasting glucose,
GerdQ score, FENO, AHI, systolic blood pressure, pepsin concentration and BMI on cough sensitivity.) Correlation analyses were performed using Spearman’s rank
correlation coefcient. Prospective statistical power calculation based on our published observation [9, 20, 21]
indicated that the minimum of 20 patients per group
would be required to provide 80% power between two
groups using a 5% two‐sided test. Statistical analysis was
performed with SPSS version 20.0 (a relatively newer version). P<0.05 was considered statistically signifcant.
Results
General information, pulmonary function indicators
and PSG monitoring results for the 3 groups
Te general information, pulmonary function indicators,
C5 and PSG monitoring results for each group are provided
in Table 1. Waist circumference, systolic pressure, diastolic
pressure, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and fasting blood glucose were signifcantly diferent
among the 3 groups. Te AHI, minimum oxygen saturation, and average oxygen saturation were signifcantly different among the 3 groups. Te BMI for the 3 groups was
signifcantly diferent (F=13.892, P=0.000). Te BMI for
the MetS with OSAHS group was signifcantly higher than
that for the MetS without OSAHS and the control groups
(P=0.001, P=0.000). Te GerdQ scores were signifcantly
diferent among the 3 groups (F=11.604, P=0.000) and
were signifcantly higher in the MetS with OSAHS and the
MetS without OSAHS groups than in the control group
(P=0.000, P=0.007). ESS scores were signifcantly diferent among the 3 groups (H=19.985, P=0.000). Te ESS
score for the MetS with OSAHS group was higher than 
those for the MetS without OSAHS and control groups
(P=0.000, P=0.000).
Comparison of capsaicin cough sensitivity
among the groups
Tere was a signifcant diference in C5 among the 3
groups (H=14.393, P=0.001). Te C5 concentrations for
the MetS with OSAHS and MetS without OSAHS groups
were signifcantly lower than that for the control group
(P=0.001, P=0.001); however, there was no diference
between the 2 MetS groups (P=0.750).
Comparison of induced sputum cell counts and cell
classifcation among the groups
Tere was a signifcant diference in the proportion of
neutrophils among the 3 groups (H=14.056, P=0.001).
Te proportion of neutrophils in the MetS with
OSAHS and MetS without OSAHS groups was signifcantly higher than that in the control group (P=0.004,
P=0.001); however, there was no diference between
the 2 MetS groups (P=0.168, Fig.  2a). Te proportion
of macrophages were signifcantly diferent among the 3
groups (H=21.468, P=0.000) and signifcantly lower in
the MetS with OSAHS and MetS without OSAHS groups
than in the control group (healthy subjects) (P=0.000,
P=0.000); however, there was no diference between the
2 MetS groups (P=0.372, Fig. 2b).
Comparison of infammatory mediators in the supernatant
of induced sputum among the groups
Tere was a signifcant diference in CGRP concentration
among the 3 groups (F=17.697, P=0.000). Te CGRP
concentration in the MetS with OSAHS and MetS without OSAHS groups was signifcantly higher than that in
the control group (P=0.000, P=0.000). Te SP concentration was signifcantly diferent among the 3 groups
(F=5.892, P=0.008) and signifcantly higher in the MetS
with OSAHS and MetS without OSAHS group than that
in the control group (P=0.002, P=0.038). Tere was a
signifcant diference in IL-8 concentration among the
3 groups (F=14.340, P=0.000). IL-8 concentration was
signifcantly higher in the MetS with OSAHS and MetS
without OSAHS groups than that in the control group
(P=0.000, P=0.000). Tere was a signifcant diference
in pepsin concentration among the 3 groups (F=129.362,
P=0.000). Te pepsin concentration in the MetS with
OSAHS group was signifcantly higher than other two
groups (Table 2).
Correlation analysis of capsaicin cough sensitivity and each
indicator in the MetS population
The correlation between capsaicin cough sensitivity
(lgC5) and various indicators in the MetS with OSAHS 
and MetS without OSAHS groups were analyzed.
Spearman rank correlation analysis showed that in the
MetS with OSAHS group, lgC5 was negatively correlated with the AHI (r = − 0.394, P = 0.035, Fig. 3) and
was not correlated with triglycerides, HDL-C, fasting
blood glucose, bradykinin, CGRP, SP, pepsin, IL-8 and
other indicators. In the MetS without OSAHS group,
there was no correlation between lgC5 and the aforementioned indicators. In terms of exogenous factors,
there was no correlation between lgC5 and waist circumference, blood pressure, GerdQ score, ESS score,
neck circumference, history of past rhinitis, history of
past gastritis, FeNO, lung function indicators, regardless of whether MetS patients had OSAHS or not.
The multiple linear regression of capsaicin cough
sensitivity
Triglycerides, age, gender, fasting glucose, GerdQ score,
FENO, AHI, systolic blood pressure, pepsin concentration and BMI were included as independent variables
into the multiple linear regression. Te results showed
that triglycerides, AHI, pepsin concentration and BMI
were negatively correlated with cough threshold which as
shown in Table 3.
Discussion
Tis study found that the capsaicin cough sensitivity was
increased in MetS patients independent of the presence
OSAHS, manifesting as a decreased cough threshold
accompanied by an increased percentage of neutrophils
in induced sputum and an increased concentration of
IL-8, SP, CGRP and pepsin in the supernatant; additionally, the GerdQ scores for MetS patients was signifcantly
higher than those for the control group. Te caspase
cough thresholds lgC5 for the MetS with OSAHS group
were signifcantly negatively correlated with the AHI.
Triglyceride, AHI, pepsin concentration and BMI are risk
factors for increased capsaicin cough sensitivity and the
pepsin concentration in the MetS with OSAHS group
was higher than that in the MetS without OSAHS group.
MetS is the general term for the presence of multiple clinical diseases, including obesity, hypertension,
insulin resistance (or type 2 diabetes) and dyslipidemia.
Data from China indicate that the prevalence of MetS
among people over 60  years of age is 58.1% [22]. With
an increase in BMI, the prevalence of OSAHS also signifcantly increases; therefore, MetS is closely related to
OSAHS [23]. A study found that 33% of OSAHS patients
had chronic cough, of which 28% had nighttime heartburn symptoms and 44% had rhinitis symptoms, suggesting that OSAHS-associated gastroesophageal refux
and postnasal drip may cause long-term cough [24].
Our previous studies have also suggested that OSAHS
patients have a high sensitivity to cough, manifesting as
cough susceptibility [9]. Tis study indicated that the
capsaicin cough sensitivity of the MetS with OSAHS
group was higher than that of the control group. Te capsaicin cough sensitivity of the MetS with OSAHS group
was negatively correlated with the AHI, suggesting that
increased capsaicin cough sensitivity in MetS patients
is closely related to OSAHS. Te mechanism may be
caused by airway infammation, especially airway neurogenic infammation and repeated airway obstruction [9].
Gastroesophageal refux is a common cause of chronic
cough [25, 26], and OSAHS patients have increased negative intrathoracic pressure during apnea, which induces
or aggravates gastroesophageal refux. Studies have
found that nighttime refux events in OSAHS patients
are increased and that the incidence of nighttime refux
events is positively correlated with the AHI [27]. In this
study, the pepsin concentration in the MetS with OSAHS
group was higher than that in the MetS without OSAHS
group, indicating that in MetS patients, OSAHS may
aggravate the severity of gastroesophageal refux. Te
results of this study also indicated that history of rhinitis,
concentrations of ECP, and histamine in induced sputum
were not signifcantly diferent among the 3 groups, suggesting that the increase in capsaicin cough sensitivity in
MetS patients was not signifcantly related to rhinitis.
Our study also found that the capsaicin cough sensitivity of patients with MetS without OSAHS signifcantly
increased, indicating that increased cough sensitivity in
MetS patients was not simply caused by the presence
of OSAHS. Te pepsin concentration and the GerdQ
score in the MetS without OSAHS group were signifcantly higher than those in the control group, suggesting that gastrointestinal refux is an important factor
for the increase in capsaicin cough sensitivity in MetS
patients without OSAHS. Why did these patients also
have gastroesophageal refux? First, hypertriglyceridemia
is a risk factor for gastroesophageal refux [28–31]. Te
probable reason is that the lower esophageal sphincter
pressure and the autonomic contraction frequency in
the lower esophagus are afected by elevated blood lipid
levels, leading to the abnormal secretion of gastrointestinal hormones and an increase in low-density lipoproteins, subsequently inducing gastroesophageal refux.
Second, high blood glucose levels can cause autonomic
neuropathy, which in turn afects esophageal motility
and gastrointestinal emptying. In patients with diabetes,
esophageal motility is reduced, peristaltic waves are
reduced or absent, reverse peristalsis can occur, and
gastroesophageal refux-related symptoms are present
[32, 33]. In addition, hypertension and gastroesophageal refux have many common risk factors, such as age,
obesity, smoking, and drinking [31, 34, 35]. However,
the specifc mechanism is still not clear. Te mechanism of chronic cough caused by gastroesophageal refux
includes the theory of refux and the theory of refex. Te
former proposes that refux of the stomach contents into
the gullet or trace amounts of aspiration into the lungs
can stimulate the throat or trachea and tracheobronchial
cough receptor to cause coughing. Te latter proposes
that esophageal stimuli generated by lower esophageal
refux induce airway neurogenic infammation through
an esophageal-bronchial refex and stimulate coughing
centers or a sensitize cough refex to cause coughing. We
further explored the factors afecting the cough sensitivity of MetS patients through a multiple linear regression
model, and fnally confrmed triglyceride, AHI, pepsin
concentration and BMI as the risk factors, which verifed
our conjecture to a certain extent.
Tis study found that neutrophilic infammation exists
in the lower airway of MetS patients. Taking into account
the steps for cleaning the nasal cavity and mouth during
the induction process, the possibility of contamination
of nasopharyngeal infammatory secretions in sputum is
relatively low. Terefore, the neutrophils in the induced
sputum are mainly from the lower airway. Te patients in
the MetS group did not have infection-related manifestations, such as fever and jaundice. Terefore, neutrophilic
airway infammation was not caused by infection. Coughing itself can cause mechanical injuries to the airway
mucosa, and related studies in a guinea pig cough model,
including those by our group, also showed that coughing
can cause airway damage, produce neutrophilic airway
infammation, and increase the hypersensitivity of the
cough refex [36, 37]. Activated neutrophils can secrete
neutrophil elastase (NE) to further promote the release
of IL-8 from epithelial cells. In this study, the increase in
IL-8 concentration in the supernatant of induced sputum from MetS patients also provided evidence of neutrophilic airway infammation. In addition, neutrophil
metabolism is related to the expression of receptor for
advanced glycation end products (RAGE) [38, 39]. RAGE
is a cell membrane surface protein. After binding with the
corresponding ligands, RAGE upregulates the synthesis
and secretion of IL-8 and promotes the local infltration
of neutrophils. Furthermore, it inhibits the phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils by phagocytic cells, directly
leading to the release of antigenic substances in apoptotic cells, thereby aggravating the local infammatory
response [40, 41]. Further studies need to be conducted
to confrm the upregulation of RAGE expression in
the lower airway of MetS patients, which results in an
increase in the proportion of neutrophils. Te classical mechanism of cough hypersensitivity involves the
infammatory-mediator activation of TRPV1, which
stimulates the vagal aferent terminals, resulting in neurogenic airway infammation, leading to the release of
neuropeptides such as SP and CGRP which stimulates
local nerves as well as transmitting signals to the central
nervous system, thereby increasing cough sensitivity [42].
Te results of this study showed that the concentrations
of SP and CGRP in the supernatant of induced sputum
from MetS patients signifcantly increased, further indicating that airway infammation, especially neurogenic
airway infammation, plays an important role in the
cough hypersensitivity of MetS patients.
Tis study has some limitations. First, induced sputum from MetS patients was not retested after treatment to further confrm the causal relationship between
neutrophilic airway infammation and cough. Second,
all participants did not receive multichannel intraluminal impedance combined with pH monitoring (MII).
Te specifc refux property and severity were not clear,
but we explored the pepsin concentration in the induced
sputum supernatant and the GerdQ score and evaluated gastroesophageal refux from the aspects of objective detection and subjective evaluation. Tird, related
inspections for cough susceptibility, including cough
induced by inhalation of capsaicin, induced sputum
testing, lung function, FeNO, PSG monitoring, are not
routine examination items for patients with metabolic
syndrome, leading to difculties in inclusion and insufcient sample size. We will continue to expand the sample
size and conduct further research.
In summary, MetS patients are susceptible to cough.
Increased capsaicin cough sensitivity in these patients
is closely related to sleep apnea and gastroesophageal
refux. In MetS patients without OSAHS, gastroesophageal refux is an important factor that increases capsaicin
cough sensitivity. Airway infammation, especially airway
neurogenic infammation, may plays a role in increased
capsaicin cough sensitivity in MetS patients.