Background
Supplemental oxygen therapy is routinely required as
part of the supportive care of patients with the acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), but it is typically
administered without defined or standardized targets [1].
This has prompted oxygenation targets in ARDS to be
considered a priority for clinical trials in ARDS [2].
The mechanisms through which oxygen therapy may
be injurious are unclear, and it is difficult to separate
the potentially injurious effects of high fractions of
inspired oxygen (
FiO2) causing alveolar hyperoxia, from
high partial pressure of arterial oxygen (
PaO2) causing
hyperoxaemia. Exposure to supra-physiological FiO2
(0.5–0.6) has been demonstrated to augment lipopolysaccharide
and ventilator-induced lung injury in preclinical
models [3, 4]. The potentially harmful effects of
alveolar hyperoxia were also demonstrated in a clinical
trial of mechanically ventilated patients with septic
shock. Although this trial was discontinued early,
there were fewer ventilator-free days and more serious
adverse events in the group allocated to receive maximal
oxygen therapy (
FiO2 1.0) [5].
Hyperoxaemia has also been associated with harm
in critically ill patients in multiple studies [6–10]. In
an open-label randomized controlled trial of adult
patients admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), conservative
oxygen therapy (defined as the lowest possible
FiO2
to maintain PaO2
between 9.3 and 13.3 kPa
(70–100 mmHg) or arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation
measured by pulse oximetry (
SpO2) 94–98%) was
reported to reduce ICU mortality when compared with
standard care [11]. Furthermore, in a cohort of patients
receiving veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
for respiratory failure, moderate hyperoxaemia
(
PaO2 between 13.5 and 40 kPa (101–300 mmHg))
was associated with increased hospital mortality [12].
However, in a large randomized controlled trial of
mechanically ventilated adults, a conservative oxygen
strategy titrated to avoid hyperoxaemia did not reduce
ventilator-free days [13]. Whilst this suggests that conservative
oxygen targets may be as safe as usual care,
it does not exclude the possibility of harm from hyperoxaemia.
Similarly, in patients with acute hypoxaemic
respiratory failure who were admitted to the ICU,
which included some patients with ARDS, there was
no difference in outcome between patients allocated
to receive an oxygen target of either 8 kPa (60 mmHg)
or 12 kPa (90 mmHg) [14]. In comparison, a clinical
trial of patients with early ARDS, allocation to conservative
oxygen therapy (
PaO2 target 7.3–9.3 kPa
(55–70 mmHg)) was associated with higher 90-day
mortality than a liberal oxygen strategy (
PaO2 target
12–14 kPa (90–105 mmHg)) [15]. Despite these results,
a post-hoc analysis of 10 randomized controlled trials
that recruited patients with ARDS provides conflicting
data, suggesting that higher cumulative excess oxygen
exposure (sum of inspired oxygen received beyond
what was required for a specified PaO2)
was associated
with increased hospital mortality and fewer ventilatorfree
days [16].
These data demonstrate that there is still uncertainty
about the optimal oxygen titration targets for patients
with ARDS. Whilst most studies have investigated a
strategy of conservative or liberal oxygen titration strategies,
it is plausible that there is an optimal target for
oxygenation between the ranges studied thus far. In an
evaluation of prospectively identified patients, the primary
aim of this analysis was to assess whether there was
a relationship between average time-weighted PaO2
and
ICU mortality in patients with ARDS. Secondary aims
included evaluating whether oxygenation targets were
associated with changes in hospital mortality or duration
of invasive mechanical ventilation.
Methods
Patient population
An observational study of prospectively identified adult
patients (> 16 years, with no upper age limit) requiring
invasive mechanical ventilation admitted to a 27-bed
mixed medical and surgical intensive care unit was performed.
Between 1st January 2014 and 13th December
2016, patients were prospectively evaluated each day during
their admission. All patients meeting the Berlin definition
of ARDS [17], regardless of severity, with at least
12 h of available data were included in the study. This
was a convenience sample, and the timeframe selected
represented the onset of patient identification and planning
for ARDS clinical trials. Data collection ceased
when staff were no longer available to work on this project.
As such, a power calculation was not performed.
This study was conducted within the Belfast Health and
Social Care Trust, who determined this study as an audit
because patient management was not altered, only routinely
collected data were used and the data were fully
anonymized. As a result, research ethics committee
approval was not required.
Data collection
Baseline demographics recorded at the time of ICU
admission included age, sex, source of admission (e.g.
elective, emergency, medical or surgical) and acute physiology
and chronic health evaluation (APACHE) II score.
Non-respiratory sequential organ failure assessment
(SOFA) scores were calculated at the time of ARDS diagnosis.
Predicted body weight (PBW) was calculated for
each patient based on their documented height and sex
[18], and from this baseline tidal volume per predicted
body weight (ml/kg) was determined. Additional parameters
recorded at diagnosis of ARDS included blood lactate,
positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP), fraction of
inspired oxygen (
FiO2), partial pressure of arterial oxygen
(
PaO2), arterial oxygen saturation (
SaO2) and mean
airway pressure (MAP). P/F ratio was calculated from
available arterial blood gas measurements at 6-hourly
intervals. Oxygenation values are expressed in kPa
(mmHg) throughout the manuscript, with the equivalent
value in mmHg accompanying kPa values in each results
table.
Exposures
Oxygen exposure variables were collected from the onset
of ARDS for 7 days, or until unassisted breathing (defined
as extubation, or breathing without ventilatory assistance
with a PEEP ≤ 5 cm H2O
for one whole calendar day) or
death (whichever occurred earliest). These variables were
collected for up to 7 days because early oxygen exposure
has previously been demonstrated to have significant
effect on outcomes in other cohorts of critically ill
patients [5, 11, 19]. The primary exposure of interest was
the average time-weighted PaO2
calculated over a maximum
of 7 days from meeting ARDS criteria [20]:
T-PaO2 = mean PaO2
× time (between consecutive
timepoints where PaO2
was measured). T-Total = time
between the first and last PaO2
measurement during the
period of mechanical ventilation after meeting ARDS criteria,
up to 7 days.
Hyperoxaemia was defined prospectively as a PaO2
greater than 14 kPa (105 mmHg) [11]. Excess oxygen
exposure was defined as any FiO2
> 0.5 in patients with a
PaO2
> 10.7 kPa (80 mmHg), and was calculated at 24-h
intervals with a cumulative value obtained [16].
Outcomes
The primary outcome was ICU mortality. Secondary outcomes
included duration of ventilation and hospital mortality
(both censored at 60 days). Duration of ventilation
was calculated as the total time of invasive mechanical
ventilation until unassisted breathing was achieved for
one whole calendar day [21].
Statistical methods
Baseline characteristics and outcome variables were
compared using standard tests for continuous and binary
variables. Data are presented as means (standard deviation,
SD), median (interquartile range, [IQR]) and number
(percentage, %) as appropriate. The percentage of
missing observations is shown when necessary. The distributions
of all variables were tested for normality. The
independent sample Student’s t-test was used for continuous
variables with a normal distribution. Otherwise,
the Wilcoxon‐Mann‐Whitney was used when normality
was violated. The Chi squared test or Fisher’s exact twosided
test, as appropriate, were used for binary variables.
A p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Univariable and multivariable logistic regression
models were performed to identify the association
between baseline characteristics and, respectively,
ICU mortality, hospital mortality, and duration of
mechanical ventilation. Results of regression models
for ICU and hospital mortality are shown as odds
ratio (OR) [95% confidence interval (CI)]. Duration of
mechanical ventilation is presented in log scale. The
relationship between mortality and either average timeweighted
PaO2
or highest PaO2
was modelled through a
Average time-weighted PaO2
T-PaO21 + T-PaO22+· · ·T - PaO2x
T-Total
quadratic trend. Results of the models with duration of
mechanical ventilation as outcomes are shown as Estimate
[95% CI]. Values of the estimate are values of the
estimated beta coefficient of predictors, and therefore
positive coefficient values mean that for a unit increase
in the predictor, the outcome is increasing, and for
negative coefficient values the outcome is decreasing.
Multivariable models were constructed using variables
that showed a statistically significant difference
(p < 0.2) between the groups in univariate analysis.
Stepwise backward elimination was used to develop
final multivariable models with best fit for the outcome
of interest. As the primary exposure of interest, average
time-weighted PaO2
within the first 7 days of ARDS
was forced into multivariable models evaluating ICU
and hospital mortality. Where variables were subject to
collinearity, a preference was made to select averagetime
weighted PaO2
in the models because it was the
primary exposure of interest.
Mediation analysis [22] was performed to identify if
there was a causal relationship between an early exposure
(hyperoxaemia in the first 24 h from ARDS diagnosis),
high lactate or baseline tidal volume (mediators),
and how this relationship affected ICU and hospital
mortality. Early hyperoxaemia was selected as an exposure
because it was an potential early event in the disease
course that has been previously demonstrated to
be associated with increased mortality in mechanically
ventilated patients without ARDS [19]. High lactate was
chosen as a mediator because prior analyses have identified
that there is an increased risk of death in patients
with septic shock and a high lactate exposed to hyperoxia,
whilst baseline tidal volume was selected because
volutrauma has been shown to augment experimental
hyperoxia-induced lung injury [4]. Baseline FiO2
and
PEEP were considered as confounders based on their
clinical effect on oxygenation. The causal relationship
was assessed in three steps: (1) indirect or mediated
effect: regression models with the two mediators (high
lactate and baseline tidal volume) as dependent variables
and the exposure (hyperoxaemia in the first 24 h)
as the independent variable together with baseline
FiO2
and PEEP as confounders; (2) effect of mediators
on outcomes: regression model with ICU or hospital
mortality as dependent variable and each mediator and
confounders as independent variables; (3) estimation of
mediators effect as a combination of both steps 1 and 2.
All statistical analyses were carried out using the R statistical
package (https:// www.R- proje ct. org).
Results
Between 1st January 2014 and 13th December 2016,
3773 patients were admitted to the ICU, and of these, 222
patients were identified for inclusion. Following clinical
review for suitability, 202 patients were confirmed as having
ARDS with at least 12 h of available data, and therefore
included in the final analysis. A full list of exclusions
is provided in the Additional file 1. The median duration
of mechanical ventilation in patients was 9 days [5, 16].
Overall ICU mortality was 31%, and overall hospital mortality
was 38%. At the point of meeting ARDS criteria,
ICU survivors were younger, had a lower non-respiratory
SOFA score, and had a lower blood lactate than non-survivors
(Table 1).
The average time-weighted PaO2
during the first 7 days
of ARDS was similar between non-survivors and survivors
(11.3 kPa [10.2, 12.5] (84.8 mmHg [76.5, 93.8]) vs.
11.9 kPa [10.9, 12.6] (89.3 mmHg [81.8, 94.5]); p = 0.08).
In contrast, during the first 7 days after meeting ARDS
criteria, the highest recorded P/F ratio was lower in nonsurvivors
than in survivors (38.2 kPa [IQR 26.4, 44.6]
(286.5 mmHg [198.0, 334.5]) vs. 41.7 kPa [35.1, 49.5]
(312.8 mmHg [263.3, 371.3]); p = 0.004), and non-survivors
also had fewer hyperoxaemia episodes (defined
as a PaO2
> 14 kPa (105 mmHg)) (2 [0.5, 4] vs 3 [1, 6];
p = 0.04).
The number of patients ever exposed to excess oxygen
was similar between survivors and non-survivors (54 vs.
57%; p = 0.79), whilst the cumulative excess oxygen exposure
within the first seven days of ARDS was low and
similar between survivors and non-survivors (0.1 [0.0,
0.3] vs. 0.1 [0.0, 0.2]; p = 0.84) (Table 2).
ICU mortality
In univariable and multivariable analysis, average timeweighted
PaO2
demonstrated a U-shaped relationship
with ICU mortality. For values of average time-weighted
PaO2
< 13.5 kPa (101.3 mmHg), increasing average
time-weighted PaO2
is associated with a reduced mortality.
In contrast, for values of average time-weighted
PaO2
> 13.5 kPa (101.3 mmHg), when average timeweighted
PaO2
increases this is associated with increased
ICU mortality. The effect of average time-weighted PaO2
on ICU mortality is shown in Fig. 1.
Of the other variables that were assessed, age, non-respiratory
SOFA score, and blood lactate were associated
with increased ICU mortality, whilst highest recorded
P/F ratio and higher baseline PEEP were associated with
reduced ICU mortality (Table 3).
After adjusting for age, lactate, non-respiratory SOFA
score and baseline PEEP, average time-weighted PaO2
within the first 7 days of ARDS continued to demonstrate
a U-shaped relationship with ICU mortality, similar to
that reported in the univariable analysis (quadratic term
OR 1.08 [1.01–1.16]; p = 0.03 and linear term OR 0.12
[0.02–0.66]; p = 0.02). Of the other co-variables, age was
associated with increased ICU mortality whilst PEEP was
associated with reduced ICU mortality (Table 3).
Hospital mortality
In univariate and multivariable analysis, average timeweighted
PaO2
demonstrated a U-shaped relationship
with hospital mortality (Fig. 2). When average timeweighted
PaO2
was < 13.2 kPa (99.0 mmHg), increasing
average time-weighted PaO2
was associated with
reduced mortality. In contrast, average time-weighted
PaO2
beyond 13.2 kPa (99.0 mmHg) was associated with
increased mortality.
After adjusting for age, lactate, non-respiratory SOFA
score and baseline PEEP in multivariable analysis, average
time-weighted PaO2
within the first 7 days of ARDS
continued to have a significant association with hospital
mortality (quadratic term 1.09 [1.02–1.18]; p = 0.02 and
linear term 0.11 [0.01–0.63]; p = 0.02). The pattern of the
relationship is similar to that presented in Fig. 2. Of the
other co-variables, age was associated with increased
ICU mortality whilst PEEP was associated with reduced
hospital mortality (Table 4).
Effect of ARDS severity
To evaluate whether there was a difference in effect based
on ARDS severity at diagnosis, separate multivariable
analyses were performed for patients with mild (n = 78),
moderate (n = 90) and severe ARDS (n = 34). In patients
with moderate ARDS, average time-weighted PaO2
was significantly associated with ICU mortality (quadratic
term 1.21 [1.08–1.43]; p < 0.01 and linear term 0.01
[0.00–0.14]) (Additional file 1: Table S1) and with hospital
mortality (quadratic term 1.16 [1.04–1.35]; p = 0.02
and linear term 0.03 [0.00–0.38]; p = 0.02) (Additional
file 1: Table S2), There was no association between average
time-weighted PaO2
and ICU or hospital mortality in
patients with either mild or severe ARDS.
Duration of mechanical ventilation
There was no association between average time-weighted
PaO2
over 7 days and duration of mechanical ventilation
(− 0.05 [− 0.12, 0.02]; p = 0.19) (Additional file 1:
Table S3). In an adjusted analysis, highest recorded
P/F ratio was associated with an increased duration of
mechanical ventilation (0.01 [0.00, 0.01]; p = 0.04). Use
of neuromuscular blockade during the first seven days
of ARDS was also associated with an increased duration
of mechanical ventilation (0.44 [0.19–0.70]; p = 0.001),
whilst increasing tidal volume (− 0.09 [− 0.15, − 0.03];
p = 0.002) and lactate (− 0.08 [− 0.14, -0.02]; p = 0.01)
were associated with a reduced duration of mechanical
ventilation (Additional file 1: Table S4).
Patients who survived ICU had a longer duration of
mechanical ventilation compared to non-survivors
(10 [6, 17] days vs. 7 [4, 12]; p = 0.001). In an analysis
restricted to patients who survived ICU, there was no
association between average time-weighted PaO2
over
7 days and duration of mechanical ventilation (− 0.06
[− 0.15, 0.03]; p = 0.18) (Additional file 1: Table S5). In
multivariable analysis, the use of neuromuscular blockade
was associated with an increase (0.52 [0.22–0.82];
p = 0.001), and tidal volume a reduction (− 0.09 [− 0.16,
− 0.01]; p = 0.03), in duration of mechanical ventilation
in survivors (Additional file 1: Table S6).
Mediation analysis
In an effort to establish whether there was a causative
effect between hyperoxaemia exposure and outcome,
mediation analysis was performed using both blood lactate
[23] and baseline tidal volume [4] as mediators that
could affect outcome. In both cases no significant effect
was identified between either high lactate (p = 0.33) or
baseline tidal volume (p = 0.08) as mediators that affects
outcome of patients exposed to hyperoxaemia in the first
24 h of ARDS in a model with baseline FiO2
and PEEP
as confounding variables. Therefore, the three conditions
for mediation analysis, defined in the methods section,
are not satisfied.
Discussion
In prospectively identified patients with ARDS, the predicted
probability of both ICU and hospital mortality
was lowest when the average time-weighted PaO2
was
between 12.5–14 kPa (93.8–105.0 mmHg). This suggests
that clinicians targeting a PaO2
out-with this range may
increase the risk of mortality in their patients with ARDS,
and this data is novel in providing a clearer understanding
of the risks of different oxygenation targets in patients
with ARDS.
These findings expand upon the findings from previous
studies, and provide further insight about optimal
oxygen targets in patients with ARDS [2]. In a clinical
trial of patients with ARDS, a liberal oxygen strategy
(targeting a PaO2
12–14 kPa (90.0–105.0 mmHg)) was
associated with increased survival compared with a conservative
oxygen strategy (targeting a PaO2
7.3–9.3 kPa
(55.0–70.0 mmHg)) [15]. In contrast, although not limited
to patients with ARDS, the HOT-ICU study evaluated
patients with acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure
and did not identify any difference in outcome when
patients were managed with either a target PaO2
of either
8 kPa (60.0 mmHg) or 12 kPa (90.0 mmHg) [14]. Interestingly,
the safest threshold of average time-weighted
PaO2
within the first 7 days of ARDS for patients in this
analysis was 12.5–14 kPa (93.8–105.0 mmHg), which was
a similar target to that which showed benefit in a previous
study of patients with ARDS [15]. When patients
were grouped by ARDS severity, the effect of average
time-weighted PaO2
was only observed in patients with
moderate ARDS. Although this may be driven by the
slightly higher number of patients with moderate ARDS,
it is possible that there is a difference in effect of oxygen
exposure based on illness severity.
The concept of a U-shaped relationship between
oxygen targets and mortality has been previously demonstrated
in a broad cohort of critically ill patients. In
a retrospective analysis of two large patient datasets
of patients admitted to ICUs, it was demonstrated
that hospital mortality was lowest in patients when
their median SpO2
was 94–98% [24]. Titrating oxygen
to SpO2
targets is likely to be more achievable in
resource-limited environments and therefore a study
of oxygen titration to SpO2
in patients with ARDS
may be warranted in future. Such studies may wish
to prioritise including patients with moderate ARDS
given the findings presented in this manuscript.
Whilst oxygen targets are predominantly based on
pulse oximetry or PaO2
the variable that is most likely to
be adjusted to achieve these targets is FiO2.
It is difficult
to extrapolate the benefits or harms from one oxygenation
target without considering the potential harms from
higher FiO2.
Indeed, it is plausible that patients at both
extremes of arterial oxygenation were each exposed to
high FiO2.
Exposure to an FiO2
set at 1.0 has been shown
to be associated with increased mortality in critically ill
patients with septic shock [5], and therefore it is possible
that the harm demonstrated in this analysis (of an average
time-weighted PaO2
within the first 7 days of ARDS
out-with 12.5–14 kPa (93.8–105.0 mmHg)) is at least in
part mediated by exposure to high FiO2.
In an effort to better understand whether there was
a causal relationship between hyperoxaemia exposure
(
PaO2 > 14 kPa (105 mmHg)) and clinical outcome, mediation
analysis was performed. Hyperoxaemia within the
first 24 h of ARDS was selected as a potentially modifiable
exposure that occurred early in the disease course,
and as early hyperoxaemia had previously been demonstrated
to be associated with increased mortality in
patients without ARDS [19]. Potential mediators that
could have affected this exposure include baseline tidal
volume [4] and high lactate [23]. Unfortunately, the three
conditions for mediation analysis were not met, which
may reflect the choice of mediator. This study is limited
in mediator assessment because of the data variables collected,
and therefore future studies may wish to evaluate
whether there is a mediation effect of alternative variables.
For example, the effect of different oxygen titration
strategies in patients with sepsis remains uncertain
[5, 25], and therefore it is plausible that differences in the
host response may modify the risks from hyperoxaemia
(e.g. the effect of hyperoxaemia in patients with neutropenia
may differ from that in patients with neutrophilia).
This points to the need for improved understanding of
the mechanisms of potential harm from hyperoxia and
hyperoxaemia.
This study has several strengths. Patients were prospectively
identified according to the Berlin criteria [17].
All patients had established ARDS and were receiving
invasive mechanical ventilation, which contrasts
with previous studies in a general ICU population [11],
and therefore may better inform the bedside clinician
about the association between arterial oxygenation targets
and outcomes in patients with ARDS. In keeping
with all observational studies, these results are limited
by unmeasured variables that could have a confounding
effect, both on the effect of oxygen exposure but also
on the patient course during their illness. This includes
patient co-morbidities, the duration of mechanical ventilation
prior to ARDS diagnosis, the use of oxygen during
tracheal intubation, and the frequency of respiratory
physiotherapy or recruitment maneuvers, each of which
were not included in this evaluation. Whilst PEEP was
controlled for in multivariable analysis, a more precise
understanding of the effects of arterial oxygenation targets
may be obtained in a study where PEEP is similar
between groups. Future studies may consider evaluating
the relationship between oxygen exposure and ARDS
sub-phenotype [26] as it is plausible that there may be
a difference in effect in patients with either a hyper- or
hypo-inflammatory sub-phenotype. Finally, the findings
in this study may be limited by the number of patients
analysed. As this was designed as an exploratory analysis
using a convenience sample, there was no sample size
calculation performed. Therefore, it is possible that the
study does not include a sufficient number of patients to
identify a difference in hyperoxaemia exposure that has
a significant impact on survival in patients with ARDS.
Furthermore, in the absence of a sample size calculation,
it is difficult to quantify the bias of the population sample
studied. Therefore, although the results from this study
are in keeping with those from recent randomized controlled
trials [15], the use of a convenance sample means
there is greater uncertainty regarding the applicability of
the results of this study to a wider population of patients.
This emphasizes that the results from this study should
be considered hypothesis-generating, and support the
need for appropriately powered clinical trials investigating
the optimal oxygenation targets in patients with
ARDS.
Conclusion
Despite existing evidence, there remains a need to better
define the optimal oxygenation targets in ARDS, and
how to safely titrate oxygen to achieve these but without
exposing patients to potentially injurious hyperoxia. Furthermore,
there remains a need to define hyperoxaemia,
with a pragmatic definition that can be evaluated by the
bedside clinician likely to be of most practical benefit.
In patients with ARDS, the predicted probability of both
ICU and hospital mortality was lowest when the average
time-weighted PaO2
was between 12.5 and 14 kPa (93.8–
105.0 mmHg), suggesting this is a reasonable oxygenation
target for clinicians to aim for. A recently completed
clinical trial evaluating different oxygenation targets in
patients with systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(NCT02321072) will add to existing data in patients at
risk for ARDS and will help to inform clinicians about the
risks to their patients of different oxygenation targets.