Background
Asthma is a syndrome defined by symptoms of reversible
airway inflammation, intermittent wheeze and shortness
of breath, and caused by a combination of genetic, epigenetic
and environmental factors. Acute exacerbations
are the major cause of morbidity and mortality from
the disease and severe asthma remains difficult to treat
due to lack of effective therapeutic options. In 2007, a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of asthma identified
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) flanking
ORMDL3 gene on chromosome 17 to be significantly
associated with the disease [1]. This association then
has subsequently been replicated in many studies worldwide,
including a multi-ancestry global meta-analysis
[2]. Chromosome 17 ORMDL3 locus is now recognised
as the major predisposing factor for childhood-onset
asthma. Significant increases in the number of wheezing
illnesses have been observed in children with enhanced
transcription genotypes at the 17q21 ORMDL3 locus.
Rhinoviruses are the most frequent pathogen associated
with the symptoms of virial respiratory infections
(VRI) [3] and early symptomatic human rhinovirus
(HRV) infection is a major risk factor for subsequent
asthma. HRV infection accounts for nearly two thirds of
childhood asthma exacerbations [4]. Evidence now indicates
that the association between the 17q21 ORMDL3
locus and childhood-onset asthma is also limited to
those children with HRV-induced wheezing in early
life [5], however the mechanism for this interaction
remains unclear. We previously reported that ORMDL3
has multiple effects on host–pathogen interactions,
stress responses and ubiquitination in cells. Importantly,
ORMDL3 regulates the major HRV receptor, intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) during the IL-1β-
stimulated inflammatory response [6]. ORMDL3 was also
found to promotes HRV replication in human epithelial
cells [7]. Human ORMDL3 is a trans-membrane protein
anchoring in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The ER is
the site responsible for protein folding, synthesis of lipids
and the storage of free calcium. ER stress can reduce the
capacity of the ER for protein folding and thereby dictate
cellular responses to inflammation. It interacts with the
serine SPT enzyme complex in sphingolipid synthesis
[8]. ORMDL3 facilitates the unfolded protein response to
cellular stress by influencing sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic
reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA) and ER-mediated
Ca2+
flux [9]. ORMDL3 also regulate endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress, cermide and shingosine-1-sulfate levels
that regulate cytokine release. ORMDL3 could work in
multiple pathways in regulating HRV infections [10].
In this brief report, we investigated the role of
ORMDL3 in the host inflammatory response to viral
stimulation, as mimicked by polyinosinic-polycytidylic
acid (poly I:C), in airway epithelial cells. Poly I:C is a
synthetic analog of viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
and a mimic of viral infection. is recognized by toll-like
receptor 3 (TLR3, also known as CD283) in a variety of
cell types, including B-cells, macrophages, dendritic and
epithelial cells [11, 12], triggering an innate immune
response and recapitulating the major cellular, physiological
and molecular changes characteristic of the host
inflammatory response to viral infection. These include a
loss of epithelial integrity, increased production of mucus
and induction of inflammatory cytokines, most notably,
the major mediator of host antiviral defence; interferon
(IFN)-ß [13]. Recent evidence indicates that IL-17A
and poly I:C act synergistically to induce production of
chemo-attractants CXCL1 and IL-8 [14] and release of
inflammatory cytokines [15] in bronchial epithelial cells.
We established ORMDL3 knockdown and over-expression
models in A549 epithelial and NHBE cells and stimulated
the cells with either poly I:C or IL-17A alone or in
combination. The inflammatory response measured over
a 24-h time course for mono-stimulation experiments,
and at 10 h for co-stimulation experiments through
mRNA levels of key genes and protein levels of IL-6 and
IL-8 in the supernatant. We finally tested the inflammatory
cytokine release in ORMDL3 knockdown A549 and
BEAS-2B epithelial cells infected by live human rhinovirus
(HRV16).
Methods
Cell culture and stimulations
Human lung epithelial cell line A549 cells were purchased
from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC).
The cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
Medium (DMEM) containing 10% vol/vol (v/v) FBS
and 2 mM L-Glutamine. A549 cells were maintained in
150 cm2
(T150) flasks at 37 °C with 5% CO2.
The SV-40
immortalised human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-
2B was purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), maintained in LHC-8
medium (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) at 37 °C, 5% CO2,
and
sub-cultured twice a week. Normal human bronchial
epithelial (NHBE) cells were obtained from Lonza and
cultured in human airway epithelial cell (hAEC) culture
medium (Epithelix, Switzerland). Poly I:C was purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (cat P1530, UK). Recombinant
human IL-17A was obtained from R&D (cat 317-ILB-
050, UK). Following gene knockdown or over-expression
and incubation with the respective culture medium in 24
well plates, A549 and NHBE cells were stimulated in triplicate
with 10 μg/ml poly I:C per well or/with 100 μg/ml
IL-17A per well.
ORMDL3 knockdown and overexpression
ORMDL3 gene knockdown was performed by using gene
specific ORMDL3 siRNA ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool
(Dharmacon Research Inc., Lafayette, CO). ONTARGETplus
Non-targeting Pool (Dharmacon Research
Inc., Lafayette, CO) was used for control in the experiments.
Transfection of 40,000 A549 cells each well was
carried out with using Thermo Scientific DharmaFECT
transfection reagent 4. In total 25 nM of siRNA in serum
free medium (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each well
simultaneously and the cells were placed in a CO2
incubator
at 37 °C for 48 h. The medium of each cell was
removed, cells were starved in serum free medium for
24 h and then stimulated with poly I:C or IL-17A. For
construction of an ORMDL3 over-expression plasmid,
we generated an ORMDL3 gene specific PCR from control
cDNA (Clonetech, USA). The sequences for primers
were: forward, CAC CAT GAA TGT GGG CAC AGC GCA
CAG CGA G; reverse, TCA GTA CTT ATT GAT TCC AAA
AAT C. The PCR product was then cloned to the pcDNATM3.1
directional TOPO
® expression vector (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Clones
containing the correct insert were sequenced and verified.
For the over-expression experiment 250 ng of the
ORMDL3 over-expressing plasmid or control plasmid
with 1μl lipofectamine™ 2000 (Invitrogen) were used per
well. Cells were cultured for 48 h, then the medium was
removed and serum free medium was added for 24 h.
Cells and supernatants were collected at 0, 6, 10, 16 and
24 h for time course studies. For co-stimulation of poly
I:C and IL-17A, samples were collected at 10 h.
Western blotting
For ORMDL3 expression, whole-cell protein extracts
were prepared by using the RIPA Lysis Buffer (Millipore).
For each sample, 50 μg of protein was separated by electrophoresis
on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gels (Invitrogen) and transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes using the iBlot™ DryBlotting device (Invitrogen)
and iBlot™ Transfer stacks. After blocking for 1 h
with 5% milk, the blot was immersed with the first antibody
(1: 500, Rabbit anti-human ORMDL3, ABGENT
Cat no: AP10739c) and then detected using secondary
antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
(1:4000; DAKO Cytomation) and enhanced chemi-luminescence
GE Healthcare ECL/ECL Plus (Amersham)
detection solutions.
Enzyme‑linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA)
Cell-free supernatants were harvested and stored for further
cytokine measurements. Human IL-6 and IL-8 were
measured using ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (PeproTech, US).
Quantitative PCRs
RNA was extracted from samples using the protocol
and RNeasy Plus Mini Kit provided by Qiagen (Qiagen,
UK). Extracted RNA was transcribed into complementary
DNA (cDNA) using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse
Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems, Lithuania).
qPCRs were performed in QuantStudio 7 Flex Real-
Time PCR System with KAPA SYBR® FAST Universal
(Sigma-Aldrich). Forward and reverse primer sequences
are: GAPDH, CAC CAT CTT CCA GGA GCG AG, CCT TCT
CCA TGG TGG TGA AGAC; ORDML3,TTG TGA GTG TCC
CTG TCG , AGT GTA GAA GCT GGT GAG G; TLR3, AGA
GTT GTC ATC GAA TCA AAT TAA AG, AAT CTT CCA ATT
GCG TGA AAA; TRIF, CCG GAT CCC TGA TCT GCT TG,
ATG TCG AAG GCG CTA GGA AG; IFNB, GAT TCA TCT
AGC ACT GGC TGG, CTT CAG GTA ATG CAG AAT CC;
IL1,TCT TTC TGG CTT AGA ACA AAG GGG C, AGT AAA
GGT AGC CCT TGT TTC CCC C; IL6, TAC CCC CAG GAG
AAG ATT CC, GCC ATC TTT GGA AGG TTC AG; IL8, ACT
GAG AGT GAT TGA GAG TGGAC, AAC CCT CTG CAC
CCA GTT TT.
TLR3 transcript levels in microarray data from ORMDL3
knockdown A549 cells
We examined TLR3 transcript levels in our previously
published global gene profiling of ORMDL3 knockdown
in A549 cells. The methods, protocols and analysis methods
are described in [6].
HRV16 infection in ORMDL3 knockdown A549 and BEAS‑2B
cells
Human rhinovirus (HRV16) (ATCC ®VR-283™) was
purchased from American tissue culture collection
(Manassas, VA, USA), and propagated in Hela cells
(ATCC®CRL-1958™). A549 cells or BEAS-2B cells were
transfected with ORMDL3 siRNA or scramble oligonucleotide
as shown above and incubated for 4 days at
37 °C, 5% CO2.
HRV16 (5 multiplicity of infection, MOI)
was then applied to cells and incubated for 48 h at 33 °C,
5% CO2.
The cell-free supernatant was harvested and
stored for IL-6 and IL-8 measurements. Human IL-6 and
IL-8 was measured using ELISA kits as shown above.
IL-6 and IL-8 levels of non-infection cells were applied to
be compared in each group.
Statistical analysis
Human IL-6 and IL-8 arithmetic means were compared
by one-way analysis of variance [1]. All statistical analyses
were performed, and graphs drawn using GraphPad
Prism Version 5.01 software (GraphPad Software Inc,
California, USA). Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
was conducted using QuantStudio 7 Flex Real-Time PCR
System (Applied Biosystems). Measurements were ascertained
in triplicate for each gene (ORDML3, TLR3, TRIF,
IFNB, IL1, IL6, IL8), with GAPDH as the reference gene.
The comparisons of ΔΔCT of each experiment groups
were performed with Student’s t tests. Data presented are
averages ± SEM (standard error of the mean). All statistical
hypothesis tests were two tailed and a P value of less
than 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
ORMDL3 does not impact baseline TLR3 expression in A549
cells
TLR3 transcript abundance data were available as part
of a prior global gene expression time course study of
ORMDL3 knockdown and IL-1β stimulation in A549
cells [6]. TLR3, as indexed by Affymetrix Human Gene
1.1 ST transcript cluster 8,098,611, showed no significant
difference in baseline gene expression dependent on
ORMDL3 knockdown status (control group expression
7.21, knockdown group 7.48, P = 5.60 × 10–
02). Looking
across the time-course, TLR3 showed a small, nominally
significant difference in response to IL-1β stimulation
between control cells and cells deficient for ORMDL3
(F = 3.27, P = 2.31 × 10–
02), though significance was not
retained following a global P value adjustment. The transcript
abundance of TLR3 in ORMDL3 knockdown and
control cells is listed in Table 1. The results indicate that
ORMDL3 may have a minor influence on TLR3 expression,
detectable only under stimulation. To confirm
absence of a baseline difference we used siRNA to silence
ORMDL3 and the pcDNA3.1-ORMDL3 plasmid to generate
over-expression of ORMDL3 in A549 cells (Fig. 1a).
We examined TLR3 transcript levels in the cells. The
transcript abundance of TLR3 did not differ significantly
between cells over-expressing or deficient for ORMDL3.
Together these data suggest that ORMDL3 expression
has no significant influence of the baseline expression of
TLR3 in epithelial cells (shown in Fig. 1b, c).
ORMDL3 regulates the poly I:C‑induced inflammatory
response in A549 cells
In order to determine whether poly I:C can induce an
inflammatory response in human airway epithelial cells
we stimulated A549 cells with poly I:C at concentrations
of 0, 1, 1, 5, 10 and 50 μg /ml for 10 h. Poly I:C induced an
inflammatory response in a dose dependent manner with
supernatant IL-6 and IL-8 levels increasing with each
poly I:C dosage increment (shown in Fig. 2a, b). We monitored
the cell viability at each poly I:C dosage concentration.
Poly I:C affected the cell viability at a concentration
of 50 μg/ml (data not shown). We therefore applied a
concentration of 10 μg/ml for all further experiments. In
order to assess participation of ORMDL3 in the poly I:Cinduced
inflammatory response we stimulated ORMDL3-
deficient and ORMDL3 over-expressing A549 cells with
poly I:C for 10 h. ORMDL3 knockdown resulted in a
blunted inflammatory response to poly I:C, with relatively
reduced IL-6 and IL-8 release at 10 h (P < 0.05 respectively;
Fig. 2c, d). Conversely ORMDL3 over-expression
yielded an exaggerated inflammatory response, with
poly I:C inducing relatively higher levels of IL-6 and IL-8
release (P < 0.05 respectively, Fig. 2e, f). These results
confirm that poly I:C induces an inflammatory response
in airway epithelial cells and identify ORMDL3 as a factor
regulating the magnitude of this response.
Time course studies of poly I:C stimulation in A549
and NHBE cells
To further explore the role of ORMDL3 in the poly I:C
inflammatory response we set up 24-h time-course
studies of poly I:C stimulation in A549 and NHBE cells
deficient or over-expressing for ORMDL3. After a 48-h
transfection cells were stimulated with poly I:C (10 μg/
ml) and supernatant samples collected at 0, 6, 10, 16 and
24 h. IL-6 and IL-8 production in each condition was
measured and compared to their respective controls. In
A549 cells under conditions of ORMDL3 knockdown
IL-6 levels were relatively reduced at all time-points
except 0 h (baseline), with statistical significance achieve
at 10 h only (P < 0.05). A consistent decrease in release
from ORMDL3 knockdown cells was observed from 10
to 24 h . IL-8 levels were also significantly decreased at
10 h (P < 0.05) but showed no consistent trend at other
time points (shown in Fig. 3a, b). For A549 cells overexpressing
ORMDL3 IL-6 levels were relatively increased
at 6 h but this difference achieved significance at
10 h only (P < 0.05, shown in Fig. 3c, d). For NHBE cells,
ORMDL3-deficient cells released significantly less IL-6 at
10 and 16 h after poly I:C stimulation (P < 0.05). IL-8 levels
were also significantly lower at 6 and 16 h time-points
compared to control (P < 0.05) (shown in Fig. 3e, f). For
ORMDL3 over expressing NHBE cells, whilst both IL-6
and IL-8 levels were elevated relative to control at all time
points, these differences did not achieve statistical significance
(shown in Fig. 3g, h).
Our results confirm a bidirectional influence of
ORMDL3 on the poly I:C inflammatory response in epithelial
cells. Silencing of ORMDL3 blunts the inflammatory
response whilst over-expression increases its
magnitude. The impact of ORMDL3 manipulation on the
poly I:C response was not however, as large as its impact
on the IL-1β response as reported in our previous experiments
[6].
Co‑stimulation of poly I:C and IL‑17A in ORMDL3
knockdown and over‑expressing A549 cells
The Th17 cytokine IL-17A can enhance the poly I:C
inflammatory response in epithelial cells [15]. We therefore
investigated the impact of ORMDL3 knockdown and
over-expression under conditions of poly I:C and IL-17A
co-stimulation in A549 cells.
In ORMDL3-deficient cells, as expected, poly I:C
induced lower IL-6 levels at 10 h relative to control
(P < 0.05). Likewise, IL-17A also induced lower IL-6 levels
in ORMDL3-deficient cells relative to control (P < 0.01).
Whilst co-stimulation of poly I:C with IL-17A enhanced
the IL-6 response in control cells (P < 0.001), this
response did not differ significantly between control and
ORMDL3 knockdown cells (P = 0.16, shown in Fig. 4a).
Similarly, whilst both poly I:C and IL-17A yielded lower
magnitude IL-8 responses in ORMDL3 knockdown cells
relative to control when applied independently (P < 0.05),
no difference in IL-8 levels was seen between control and
ORMDL3 knockdown cells under poly I:C and IL-17A
co-stimulation (P = 0.12, shown in Fig. 4b). In ORMDL3
over expressing cells both poly I:C and IL-17A led to an
elevation in IL-6 levels relative to control when applied
independently (P < 0.05), however no difference was seen
between control and ORMDL3 over expressing cells
under conditions of co-stimulation (P = 0.79, shown
in Fig. 4c). Similarly, both poly I:C stimulation and IL-
17A stimulation yielded a relatively larger IL-8 response
in ORMDL3 over-expressing cells relative to control
when applied independently (P < 0.05), however no difference
was observed between control and ORMDL3
over expressing cells under conditions of co-stimulation
(P = 0.46, shown in Fig. 4d).
These results show that ORMDL3 influences the
inflammatory response induced by IL-17A and poly I:C
in epithelial cells. Manipulation of ORMDL3 does not
however, influence the response to co-stimulation, suggesting
that ORMDL3 may have different, non-additive
roles in the signal transduction of TRL and Th17 pathways
in epithelial cells.
The transcript levels of TLR3, IFNB, TRIF, IL1, IL6 and IL8
in ORMDL3 knockdown and over‑expressing A549 cells
after poly I:C stimulation
To further delineate the role of ORMDL3 we analysed the
abundance of transcripts responsible for TLR3 signalling
and the inflammatory response in A549 cells deficient
for, or over-expressing ORMDL3 at baseline, and following
10 μg/ml poly I:C stimulation for 24 h. IFNβ is type
I class of interferon and is important for defence against
viral infections. TRIF encodes an adaptor protein containing
a toll/interleukin-1 receptor homology domain,
which is an intracellular signalling domain that mediates
protein–protein interactions between the TLRs and
signal-transduction components. It specifically interacts
with TLR3, but not with other TLRs, and this association
mediates dsRNA induction of IFNβ through activation
of nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) during an antiviral
immune response. We investigated the transcript levels
of TLR3, IFNB and TRIF and the inflammatory cytokine
genes IL1, IL6 and IL8. In ORMDL3 knockdown A549
cells at baseline, transcript levels of TLR3, IFNB, TRIF,
IL1, IL6 and IL8 showed no significant difference (shown
in Fig. 5a). In ORMDL3 over-expressing cells at baseline
the transcript levels of TRIF and IL1 were significantly
raised relative to the control group (P < 0.01, P < 0.05
respectively, shown in Fig. 5b). We then compared transcript
levels at 24 h after stimulation. Surprisingly, we
found that poly I:C significantly down regulated the TLR
pathway genes IFNB and TRIF, and up regulated the
cytokine genes IL1, IL6 and IL8 both after 24 h (P < 0.001
respectively, data not shown). Next, we compared the
transcript levels in cells deficient for, or over-expressing
ORMDL3 at 24 h following stimulation. For ORMDL3
knockdown cells, TRIF transcript levels were significantly
lower than the control group (P < 0.001) (shown
in Fig. 5c). For ORMDL3 over expressing cells, although
transcript levels for all genes were higher than the control
group, only the IL8 transcript achieved significance
(P < 0.05) (shown in Fig. 5d). The results show that whilst
ORMDL3 did not significantly influence transcript levels
of TLR3 and IFNB after poly I:C stimulation, it did
impact transcript levels of TRIF and several cytokine
genes.
The inflammatory response in ORMDL3 knockdown
epithelial cells after HRV‑16 infection
In order to determine whether ORMDL3 knockdown in
epithelial cells also influences the inflammatory response
to live viral infection, we silenced ORMDL3 in A549 and
BEAS-2B epithelial cells and infected these cells with
HRV16, one of the most common rhinoviruses. We then
evaluated the effects of knockdown on HRV16-induced
IL-6 and IL-8 release as compared to the non-infection
control in each group. Basal levels of IL-6 and IL-8 in
control A549 cells transfected with scramble oligo were
0.59 ± 0.37 pg/mL and 5.2 ± 0.20 ng/mL, respectively,
and HRV16 markedly induced IL-6 (0.59 ± 0.37 pg/
mL) and only weakly induced IL-8 (5.2 ± 0.20 ng/mL).
In contrast, ORMDL3 knockdown cells did not enhance
IL-6 and IL-8 production after HRV16 inoculation (IL-6
[HRV16/no-inoculation]: 2.2 ± 0.89/2.7 ± 2.3 pg/mL; IL-8
[HRV16/no-inoculation]: 6.2 ± 0.12/6.8 ± 0.46 pg/mL).
Basal levels of IL-6 and IL-8 in control BEAS-2B cells
transfected with scramble oligo were 2.8 ± 0.11 pg/mL
and 16. 4 ± 2.6 pg/mL, respectively, and HRV16 markedly
induced IL-6 (246 ± 31.8 pg/mL) and IL-8 (239 ± 49.2 pg/
mL). In contrast, in ORMDL3 knockdown cells, HRV16
induced IL-6 and IL-8 production but the induction levels
are relatively lower than those in control cells (IL-6
[HRV16/no-inoculation]: 231 ± 28.8/4.1 ± 1.2 pg/mL;
IL-8 [HRV16/no-inoculation]: 156 ± 45.5/ 17.0 ± 3.0 pg/
mL). To demonstrate the difference clearer, we calculated
the induction ratio [HRV16/non-inoculation] in each
cytokine. As shown in Fig. 6, HRV16-dependent induction
of IL-6 compared with base line was significantly
lower in ORMDL3 knocked-down A549 cells (P < 0.05)
and also bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B (P < 0.05).
For IL-8, levels were also somewhat reduced in the context
of ORMDL3 knockdown, but this did not achieve
statistical significance in either A549 cells (P = 0.20) or
BEAS-2B cells (P = 0.13). These data are broadly consistent
with our observations from the viral mimic poly
I:C and together confirm that ORMDL3 is involved in
HRV16-dependent cytokine production as well as poly
I:C dependent cytokine release.
Discussion
Viral respiratory infections show robust association
with asthma exacerbations in the community. Human
rhinovirus, in particular, is the predominant virus
associated with asthma attacks [16], although other
viral pathogens such as RSV and influenza may also
contribute to the disease [17, 18].
In this report, we generated ORMDL3 knockdown
and ORMDL3 over-expressing epithelial cells and
investigated the inflammatory response after administration
of poly I:C. Knockdown of ORMDL3 and overexpression
had little influence of TLR3 transcript levels
in A549 cells. However, in both A549 and NHBE cells,
knockdown of ORMDL3 led to a blunted poly I:Cinduced
inflammatory response. Conversely ORMDL3
over-expression led to an enhanced poly I:C-induced
inflammatory response in these cells. The reduction
of cytokine release by ORMDL3 knockdown was also
confirmed in HRV16-infected cells. Thus, the results
suggest a key role for ORMDL3 in the host response to
viral infection.
The IL-23/Th17 pathway is a central component of
cellular immunity and IL-17A is a signature cytokine of
this pathway [19]. IL-17A is widely reported to regulate
chronic inflammatory diseases, including respiratory
diseases such as asthma [20]. We show here that IL-17A
induces an inflammatory response in epithelial cells, and
that ORMDL3 regulates this response. In this report, we
did not observe an impact of ORMDL3 on the inflammatory
response to combined stimulations of poly I:C and
IL-17A; suggesting that ORMDL3 participates in multiple
pathways in epithelial cells.
Multi-transcript profiling showed that overexpression
of ORMDL3 up-regulates TRIF, suggesting regulation
of the inflammatory response through the NF-κB pathway.
Following poly I:C stimulation control cells showed
significant decreases in the transcript levels of IFNB and
TRIF, and increases in the cytokines IL1, IL8 and IL6,
indicating that poly I:C is a potent inflammatory inducer.
Knockdown of ORMDL3 blunted the TRIF response to
poly I:C, confirming that ORMDL3 works in the NF-κB
pathway [6]. Our results indicate that ORMDL3 is an
important regulator of the inflammatory response to poly
I:C in epithelial cells, and that this impact may not be
restricted to the TLR3 signalling pathway—since we did
not observe the significant differences in the expression
of IFNB between ORMDL3 knockdown and control cells,
or between ORMDL3 over-expressing cells and control
cells.
Viral respiratory tract infections are an established
risk factor for asthma and can cause symptom relapse
or exacerbations. The mechanisms underpinning these
features are not known. Viral infection could contribute
to asthmatic symptoms and/or change airway physiology
[21]. TLRs transduce the infection signal through
MAPKs, NF-κB, and IRF3, which induce the transcription
of proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferon
[22]. TRIF signalling also has both protective and pathologic
roles in several chronic inflammatory disease conditions
[23].
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play important roles in the
induction of innate antiviral immune responses to viral
infections as well as in in development, homeostasis
and injury repair [24]. A total of ten TLRs have been
identified in humans. Of these, TLR3, first characterized
as a regulator of anti-viral responses [25, 26]. TLR3
is assembled in the endoplasmic reticulum, from where
it is recruited to endosomes by the transmembrane
protein UNC93B1 [27]. TLR3 directly recruits TRIF
to its TIR domain to initiate signalling, leading to the
activation of the serine/threonine kinase TBK-1, which
in turn phosphorylates interferon regulatory factor
3 (IRF3) [24]. TLR3 signalling via TRIF also activates
NF-κB [28]. As such, treatment of wounded skin with
poly I:C; a dsRNA mimic, significantly reduces recovery
time in both humans and mice [29]. In this study,
we did not observe that ORMDL3 directly influenced
TLR3 and IFNB transcript level after poly I:C stimulation,
but it regulated transcript levels of TRIF and several
cytokine genes. ORMDL3 may work in multiple
signaling pathways to regulating viral infection through
ER stress, sphingolipid metabolism, glycolysis and
other mechanisms [10].
In this report, we found ORMDL3 knockdown epithelial
cells release less IL-6 after HRV16 infection, consistently
confirm the results from poly I:C stimulations
in ORMDL3 knockdown cells. In an experiment with
HRV14, another HRV strain used ICAM-1 as receptor
for entrance of epithelial cells, IL-6 and IL-8 levels were
found to increase by the infection [30]. HRV induced the
cytokines release may partly activate an NF-kB-dependent
transcriptional activation pathway [31].
This is the first report on the role of ORMDL3 in the
poly I:C stimulation response in epithelial A549 and
NHBE cells. We recognise several limitations. Firstly,
including use of a restricted (24 h) time course following
poly I:C stimulation, and a synthetic mimic of viral
infection. Secondly, HRV16 is less infectious to A549
and BEAS2B cells in monolayer cell sheet underneath
culture media compare with primary epithelial cells,
and high level of inoculum, which is not relevant to
the clinical condition, was required to induce IL-6
and IL-8. HRV16 does not replicate well in these
cells compared with primary epithelial cells, either.
To solve these problems, we will use air–liquid interface
cultured human bronchial epithelium, which is
known to be well infected with HRV16 [32], The viral
attachment, replication and inflammatory response
of HRV16 infection for ORMDL3 knockdown epithelial
cells need to be future in-depth investigation.
Nevertheless, the observations presented here have
significant clinical implications, and warrant further
investigation focusing on the precise mechanisms
through which ORMDL3 moderates the inflammatory
response to viral infection.
Conclusions
ORMDL3 significantly influences release of cytokines
following poly I:C stimulation in airway epithelial cells.
ORMDL3 regulates the poly I:C-induced inflammatory
response via mechanisms independent of the TLR3
pathway.