Background
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is currently the most common lethal
genetic disease. Registry-derived population estimates
suggest in excess of 72 000 people are living with CF
worldwide [1], with an expected large increase in CF
adults during the next decade [2]. CF is caused by mutations
in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator protein, an anion channel
that regulates the activity of other ion transporters and
governs the hydration and viscoelastic properties of
mucus in several epithelial tissues [3]. As a consequence
of abnormal mucus secretions, dysfunction in organ systems
including lungs, gastrointestinal tract, liver, male
reproductive tract and pancreas occurs. It results in
many symptoms especially cough, nasal obstruction and
abdominal pain [4]. Despite improvements in life expectancy,
many patients with CF experience a considerable
daily symptom.
Sleep disruption is also a common complaint in CF
children [5] that contributes to impaired daytime functioning
and quality of life [6]. In adults, CF-related sleep
quality has been the primary focus of a small number of
studies [7–12]. As the most common cause of both morbidity
and mortality in CF patients is respiratory disease
[13], most of these studies focused on the associations
between sleep quality and impaired lung function. Milross
et al. demonstrated associations between poorer
sleep quality, defined as Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
(PSQI) score > 5, and more severely impaired lung function
and gas exchange in adult patients with CF [10]. The
mean arterial oxygen level during sleep was also associated
with reduced sleep efficiency in adult CF patients
with severe lung disease [9].
In addition to lung function, other factors are likely to
impair sleep quality in CF adult patients such as nighttime
symptoms (cough [14], pain [15]), restless legs syndrome
(RLS) [16, 17], anxiety and depression [12, 18],
sleep-related breathing disorders [19, 20], acute pulmonary
exacerbation [21] or unhealthy lifestyle.
The insomnia severity index (ISI) is an effective brief
instrument to assess insomnia, which consists of seven
self-reported items [22]. It has been shown to be reliable
and has been validated against several other sleep questionnaires,
including the PSQI [23].
The objective of this study was to identify factors associated
with insomnia, as assessed by ISI, in clinically
stable CF adults and to analyze relationships between
insomnia and quality of life.
Methods
Adult CF patients were recruited from the Reims University
Hospital Department of pulmonary medicine
(France) and were included in the Research and Innovation
in Chronic Inflammatory Respiratory Diseases
(RINNOPARI) cohort. This study was performed in
accordance with the declaration of Helsinki and approved
by the Ethics Committee (Comité de Protection des Personnes—
Dijon EST I, No. 2016-A00242-49) and was
registered on clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02924818, date of
registration: October 5, 2016). Adult CF patients referred
to our center between January 2017 and June 2019
were considered for inclusion in this study. All patients
received detailed information about the methods used
and gave their written consent.
The RINNOPARI project is a general project designed
to study clinical, laboratory, functional, morphological,
histological and microbiological characteristics in
patients with chronic inflammatory lung diseases, including
CF.
Patient selection
Inclusion criteria were age older than 18 years, a diagnosis
of CF confirmed by sweat tests and/or genetic analysis,
and absence of long-term oxygen, bi-level positive airway
pressure therapy or lung transplantation. The exclusion
criterion was an ongoing or recent (i.e. within the last
4 weeks prior to study recruitment) medical condition,
including pulmonary exacerbations and pregnancy.
Patient demographic and clinical characteristics
Demographic data (age, sex), body mass index (BMI),
comorbidities, smoking status, alcohol, coffee, tea, energy
drink consumption and treatments were systematically
recorded. Patients filled in self-administered questionnaires
on cough (Cough And Sputum Assessment Questionnaire:
CASA-Q), dyspnea (modified Medical Research
Council dyspnea scale: mMRC), pain (Numeric Rating
Scale: NRS), insomnia (Insomnia Severity Index scale),
sleep quality (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index), daytime
sleepiness (Epworth Sleepiness scale: ES), snoring (Berlin
Questionnaire), circadian rhythm (Morningness-Eveningness
Questionnaire: MEQ), anxiety and depression (Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale: HAD). Patients were
asked about the presence or absence of restless legs syndrome
according to the International Restless Legs Syndrome
consensus criteria [24], the severity of which was
assessed by the International Restless Legs Syndrome
scale (IRLS). The patients’ quality of life was also assessed
by the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R
14+). Information regarding pathogens detected in sputum,
especially the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
and Achromobacter xylosoxidans was collected.
Cough And Sputum Assessment Questionnaire
The CASA-Q is a self-administered questionnaire assessing
cough and sputum based on their frequency, severity,
and impact on daily activities over the previous
7 days. It comprises four domains: cough symptoms,
cough impact, sputum symptoms, and sputum impact.
Each domain comprises three to eight items, each of
which is scored according to five categories from “never”
to “always” for frequency and from “not at all” to “a lot/
extremely” for severity. For each domain, the items are
summed and rescaled to obtain a score ranging from 0 to
100, with higher scores associated with fewer symptoms
or less impact [25].
Modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale
The mMRC scale consists of five statements that almost
entirely describe the range of dyspnea from none (grade
0) to almost complete incapacity (grade 4) [26]. Significance
thresholds of 1 and 2 has been used to categorized
patients according to their dyspnea.
Numeric Rating Scale for pain
The NRS was used to measure pain intensity, with scores
ranging between 0 and 10 (0: no pain, 10: maximum pain)
[27].
Insomnia Severity Index
The ISI is a self-reporting instrument measuring the
patient’s perception of his/her insomnia. It comprises
seven items assessing the severity of sleep-onset and
sleep maintenance difficulties (both nocturnal and early
morning awakenings), satisfaction with current sleep
pattern, interference with daily functioning, impairment
attributed to sleep problem, and degree of concern
caused by the sleep problem. Each item is rated on a 0–4
scale and the total score ranges from 0 to 28. A score
between 0 and 7 is considered not to be clinically significant,
a score of 8–14 indicates mild insomnia, a score of
15–21 indicates moderate insomnia and a score of 22–28
indicates severe insomnia [22].
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
The PSQI is a self-rated questionnaire, which assesses
sleep quality and disturbances over a 1-month time interval.
Nineteen individual items generate seven component
scores: subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration,
habitual sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of
sleeping medication and daytime dysfunction. The sum
of the component scores yields a global score from 0 to
21. A global PSQI score > 5 indicates impaired sleep quality
[28].
Epworth Sleepiness Scale
The ES is a self-administered questionnaire, in which
an individual rates the likelihood of falling asleep under
various circumstances in daily life. The scale ranges from
0 to 24. Excessive daytime sleepiness is defined by a
score ≥ 11 [29].
Berlin Questionnaire
The Berlin Questionnaire includes five items on snoring
(category 1), three items on daytime somnolence (category
2), and one item on the history of hypertension and/
or BMI > 30 kg/m2 (category 3). Patients are considered
to be at risk for obstructive sleep apnea when at least two
categories are positive [30].
Morningness‑Eveningness Questionnaire
The MEQ is used to determine the patient’s circadian
rhythm. It consists of 19 mixed-format questions regarding
the time individuals get up and go to bed, preferred
times for physical and mental activity, and subjective
alertness. The MEQ score ranges from 16 to 86, with
scores above 58 classifying individuals as morning-type
and scores below 41 as evening-type [31].
International Restless Legs syndrome scale
Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) was diagnosed when the
patient satisfied the International RLS consensus criteria
[24]. The severity of RLS was evaluated using the IRLS,
which is composed of 10 questions. Each question can be
classified according to severity, as follows: none (0 point),
mild (1 point), moderate (2 points), severe (3 points), and
very severe (4 points). The total score ranges from 0 to
40. Participants with IRLS scores < 10 were categorized
as mild, 11–20 as moderate, 21–30 as severe, and ≥ 31 as
very severe RLS [32].
Hospital Anxiety and Depression scale
The Hospital Anxiety and Depression scale is a selfadministered
rating scale specifically designed for
patients with physical illness. It consists of 14 items:
seven items relating to depression and seven items relating
to anxiety with cut-off points for severity. For each
domain (A or D), scores of 0–7 indicate no disorders,
8–10 indicate suspected disorders, and 11–21 indicate
confirmed disorders [33].
Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire‑Revised
The CFQ-R 14+consists of 50 items structured in 12
domains that, in turn, are divided into 6 domains that
assess general aspects of health-related quality of life:
physical functioning, role limitations, vitality, health perceptions,
emotional state and social functioning and 6
domains that address specific aspects of CF: body image,
eating problems, treatment burden, weight problems,
respiratory symptoms and digestive symptoms. Scores
range from 0 to 100, and higher scores correspond to better
quality of life [34].
Pulmonary function
Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) were performed according
to the American Thoracic Society/European Thoracic
Society guidelines [35] (BodyBox 5500 Medisoft
Sorinnes, Belgium).
The 6-min walking test (6MWT) was performed
according to the American Thoracic Society guidelines
(ATS 2002) [36]. Patients were instructed that the objective
was to walk as far as possible in 6 min.
Polysomnography
All patients were invited to undergo a full-night standard
polysomnography (PSG) (Resmed Nox A1). Only
patients who accepted to undergo a PSG were considered
for the analysis regarding PSG data. Transcutaneous
carbon dioxide (
PtcCO2) was monitored continuously
overnight (SenTec Inc., Therwil, Switzerland) and was
synchronized to the PSG. PSG recordings were analyzed
according to the 2015 update of the American
Academy of Sleep Medicine rules for scoring respiratory
events in sleep [37]. Apnea was defined as the absence
of airflow ≥ 10 s, hypopnea was defined as reduction of
airflow ≥ 30% associated with a decrease in oxygen saturation
≥ 3% or micro-awakening. The Apnea–Hypopnea
Index (AHI) was calculated as the number of apneas
and hypopneas per hour of total sleep time (TST). The
arousal index was defined as the number of electroencephalographic
arousals per hour of TST. Periodic leg
movement (PLM) was defined as four or more consecutive,
involuntary leg movements during sleep, lasting
0.5–5 s with an interval of 5–90 s.
Statistical analyses
Data are expressed as median and range for quantitative
variables and as number and percentage for qualitative
variables.
Comparisons between insomniac and non-insomniac
patients were performed using Fisher’s exact test for categorial
data. As the Kolmogorov test showed that distributions
are not normal, quantititative data were analyzed
using a non-parametric Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test
to assess significance between different conditions. A
Spearman test was used to study the correlation between
ISI and HAD scores. For all analyses, a two-sided p
value < 0.05 was considered significant. XLSTAT software
(version 2019.1.3, Addinsoft company, Paris, France) was
used to analyze and reformat data.
Results
Patient demographic and clinical characteristics
Fifty-nine adult patients with CF were referred to our
medical center. Nine of these patients were not eligible
for the study (long-term oxygen therapy (n = 1), bi-level
positive airway pressure therapy (n = 5) or lung transplantation
(n = 3)). Four patients refused to participate,
17 had experienced another medical condition during the
previous 4 weeks and 1 woman was pregnant. Twentyeight
patients were included in the final analysis.
Median age of the 28 patients was 27 (22–34) years,
including 18 men and 10 women.
Fourteen patients (50%) carried a heterozygous gene
mutation (Phe508del mutation on at least one allele in
64% of cases) and 50% carried a homozygous Phe508del
mutation. Eighteen patients (64%) had exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency and 9 patients (32%) had diabetes.
Median forced expiratory volume in one second was 2190
(1530–3667) mL, 72 (39–93) % predicted. Median consumption
of alcohol, coffee and tea were 0 (0–0) g/day,
1 (0–2) cup/day and 0 (0–1) cup/day, respectively and
no patient used energy drinks. Two patients (7%) were
treated with anxiolytics and no patient was treated with
hypnotics. Median screen time was 6 (4–8) h/day. Two
patients (7%) were shift workers. Patient demographic
and clinical characteristics are presented in Table 1.
Twelve patients (43%) presented insomnia, defined as ISI
score > 7.
Comparisons of patients with ISI score > 7 (insomnia)
and patients with ISI score ≤ 7 (no insomnia)
Patients with ISI score > 7 (insomnia) and patients with
ISI score ≤ 7 (no insomnia) were compared in terms of
demographic characteristics, clinical characteristics and
quality of life (Table 2), respiratory assessments (Table 3)
and polysomnographic data (Table 4). Compared with
patients with no insomnia (ISI score < 7), patients with
insomnia more frequently presented evening type (33%
vs 0%, p = 0.02) and RLS (42% vs 0%, p < 0.01), more
frequently experienced more severe pain (3 (1–4) vs 0
(0–1), p < 0.05), mMRC dyspnea ≥ 2 (42% vs 0%, p < 0.05)
(Tables 2 and 3) and more frequently presented lower
mean SpO2
during sleep (92 (92–94)% vs 96 (94–96)%,
p < 0.05) (Table 4). Insomnia was also associated with an
impaired quality of life in different domains of CFQ-R
(physical functioning, p < 0.05; vitality, p < 0.001; emotional
functioning, p < 0.001; health perception, p < 0.05;
social functioning, < 0.01; body image, p < 0.001; role
limitation, p < 0.001; respiratory symptoms, p < 0.05 and
digestive symptoms, p < 0.05) (Table 2). We identified a
strong association between insomnia and HAD anxiety
(r = 0.702, p < 0.0001) and depression score (r = 0.701,
p < 0.0001) (Table 2 and Fig. 1).
Polysomnography was performed in 14 patients.
Patients in whom polysomnography was performed had
similar characteristics to those in whom PSG was not
performed, except for ISI score (13 (5–17) for patients
with PSG vs 6 (2–9) for patients without PSG, p = 0.022)
and HAD depression score (6 (3–9) for patients with PSG
vs 2 (1–5) for patients without PSG, p = 0.029).
Two patients (14%) had sleep latency > 45 min.
Only one patient (7%) had sleep efficiency < 80%,
total sleep time < 360 min, AHI ≥ 15/h and severe
nocturnal hypoxemia (mean SpO2
during sleep: 87%,
with SpO2
< 90% during 77% of sleep time). Thirteen
patients (93%) had a mean SpO2
during sleep > 92%. No
patient had periodic limb movements.
Discussion
This study specifically assessed insomnia-related factors
in adult CF patients. It highlighted a high prevalence
of insomnia in adult CF patients with 43% of patients
exhibiting an ISI score > 7 and, in particular, showed that
insomnia is strongly associated with anxiety/depression
symptoms in this population.
Several screening tools can be used to diagnose insomnia.
A recent meta-analysis compared the three scales
most commonly used to screen for insomnia: PSQI, Athens
Insomnia Scale (AIS) and ISI [23] and identified comparable
diagnostic properties, with AIS and ISI providing
better results in terms of specificity than PSQI. Of note,
PSQI does not directly assess insomnia symptoms, but
rather evaluates a broad range of sleep domains affecting
sleep quality. AIS and ISI were developed according
to standard insomnia diagnostic criteria. The AIS was
designed to quantify sleep difficulties based on the International
Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems-10 (ICD-10). The ISI captures the diagnostic
criteria for insomnia defined in Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders-IV (DSM-IV) and the
International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD).
In addition, ISI is easy to use and not time-consuming in
clinical practice. As expected, the presence of insomnia
according to ISI was associated with a higher PSQI score
in our study.
Our study showed a high prevalence of insomnia in
clinically stable adult CF patients (43%), which is closely
comparable to that a previous study in CF young adults,
using AIS (41.7%) [12]. For comparison, the prevalence
of insomnia in healthy young adults (25–34 years
old) is about 18% in France, according to a large epidemiological
study conducted in 2001 [38]. Forty-six percent
of patients in our study also had poor sleep quality
(i.e., PSQI score > 5). These results are similar to those
of several studies conducted in CF adults that reported
impaired sleep quality according to PSQI in 37 to 66% of
patients [8, 10, 11, 15].
RLS was significantly more common in insomniac
patients in our study. A recent study has shown that
about one-third of adult CF patients experience RLS [16].
The prevalence of RLS was lower in our study population
(18%), but the presence of RLS was systematically
associated with an ISI score > 7, suggesting that RLS may
have a negative impact on sleep quality. Periodic limb
movements were not observed in patients who underwent
full-night polysomnography, but they may be absent
during PSG in a considerable proportion of patients.
Pain [15], with a mean score of "mild" in these stable
patients, and dyspnea were the two symptoms more frequently
associated with insomnia in our study.
Apart from mean SpO2
during sleep [9], we did not
find any associations between insomnia, as assessed by
ISI, and physiological variables describing the severity of
respiratory disease, probably due to the less marked respiratory
impairment in our study compared to the study
by Milross et al. [10] (mean FEV1
72 (39–93)% vs mean
FEV1
36 ± 12%). Decreased mean SpO2
during sleep in
insomniac patients could explained the fact that dyspnea
is more severe in this group.
The main factor associated with insomnia in our study
was higher HAD anxiety and depression scores. It was
already shown that reduced sleep quality and daytime
sleepiness were associated with poorer mood in children
and young adults with CF [6, 12]. Available data suggest
that, as in other chronic diseases, symptoms of anxiety
and depression are common features in CF patients. In a
study carried out on 4,739 adult CF patients across nine
countries in Europe and the USA, symptoms of anxiety
and depression were found in 32% and 19% of patients,
respectively (36% had an HAD anxiety score > 7, 18%
had an HAD depression score > 7 in our study). Overall,
anxiety and depression scores were 2- to threefold higher
than those of community samples [39]. Although anxiety
and depression are known to be a cause of insomnia
[40], a causal relationship cannot be established between
insomnia and anxiety/depression, but the presence of
insomnia symptoms should prompt physicians to investigate
the presence of and treat anxiety/depression symptoms
and vice versa.
Quality of life was more severely impaired in patients
with insomnia, especially for the categories concerning
physical functioning, vitality, emotional state, health
perception, social functioning, body image, role limitations
and respiratory and digestive symptoms. These
results are consistent with those of a study reported by
Bouka et al. [11], in which lower sleep quality was related
to vitality, emotional functioning, social, role, eating disturbances
and digestive symptoms. It is noteworthy that
these symptoms may also be an expression of anxiety
and/or depression.
Total sleep time and sleep architecture, analyzed by
PSG, were generally normal in patients with and without
insomnia. Total sleep time on PSG was slightly longer in
patients without insomnia than in patients with insomnia
and the time spent awake after sleep onset was slightly,
but not significantly shorter, probably due to the lack of
power of the study.
This study has several limitations. First, it was a single-
center study comprising a small number of patients,
which may limit the generalizability of the results. Given
the low number of patients, a comparative analysis by
gender was not possible [41]. It would also have been
interesting to assess insomnia by actimetry over several
days to obtain objectives measurements on activity and
rest periods. Despite these limitations, this pragmatic
study presents a number of important strengths, including
assessment of the relationships in CF adult patients
between insomnia, assessed by ISI, and multidimensional
parameters including demographic and clinical characteristics,
and a global respiratory assessment (symptoms,
airway colonization, PFTs, 6MWT, polysomnography)
with minimal exclusion criteria.
Conclusion
This study shows that insomnia is a common complaint
in CF adults and is associated with many factors: more
severe dyspnea, pain, RLS, lower SpO2
during sleep and
especially anxiety/depression symptoms. The strong
association between insomnia, impaired quality of life
and higher HAD score should prompt physicians to be
particularly attentive to the management of anxiety and
depression in adult CF patients with insomnia.