Introduction
Patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) harboring epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations can experience improved prognosis
when treated with EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor
[1, 2]. EGFR-mutated lung cancer is reported to comprise
approximately 45% of the NSCLC cases in Asia
and approximately 15% in Europe and the United States
[3–6]. Approximately 90% of EGFR mutations are either
EGFR exon 21 L858R point mutations (Ex21) or EGFR
exon 19 deletion mutations (Ex19) [7]. Detection of EGFR
mutations is the first process in deciding the treatment
for patients with advanced NSCLC. Currently, bronchoscopic
biopsy, computed tomography (CT)-guided
biopsy, and surgical biopsy are performed to collect
tumor samples. However, these methodologies have various
complications and are invasive for patients, which
can be especially problematic for those in poor condition
[8–11]. In addition to these biopsies, non-invasive liquid
biopsy using blood (liquid biopsy) has recently been
performed to detect EGFR mutations. However, a metaanalysis
reported that the sensitivity and specificity of the
detection of EGFR mutations in blood were 65% and 91%,
respectively, with recurring low detection sensitivity [12].
Development of a methodology capable of more safely
collecting tumor samples and more accurately detecting
EGFR mutations in patients with lung cancer is needed.
Sputum can be collected non-invasively from patients.
Whether EGFR mutation analysis can be performed
accurately using sputum is unclear. The sensitivity of
detecting lung cancer in sputum cytology is reported to
be approximately 40 to 66% [13, 14]. However, sputum
has been considered to be unsuitable for EGFR mutation
analysis because it contains many normal cells, such as
bronchial epithelium and inflammatory cells, with tumor
cells comprising < 1% of the total number of cells in sputum
[15]. Furthermore, primary lung adenocarcinoma,
for which molecular analysis is especially important
in deciding the treatment protocol, was reported to be
less likely to be detected via sputum cytology compared
to central squamous cell carcinoma [16]. Therefore, an
ultrasensitive method for detecting tumor EGFR mutations
in sputum sample is necessary. Furthermore, it is
necessary to know the clinical characteristics of patients
whose sputum contains a sufficient amount of tumor
cells for the EGFR gene detection.
Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR)
is a technology that can detect and quantify specific
sequences with much higher sensitivity and specificity
than conventional real-time PCR [17, 18]. ddPCR is
based on the limiting dilution of DNA sample in microcompartments
within droplets of a water-in-oil emulsion
[17]. The sensitivity of ddPCR was reported to be approximately
0.03%-0.001% mutant DNA in the detection of
EGFR T790M gene mutation and 0.0005% mutant DNA
in the detection of KRAS gene mutation [19, 20]. Considering
that it is difficult to detect ≤ 1% mutant DNA
using conventional PCR [21, 22], ultrasensitive ddPCR
is necessary to detect EGFR mutations in the tumor cells
in sputum, because of the abundant normal cells or nonmutated
DNA in the background of a sputum sample.
However, to date, few reports have described the use of
ddPCR in EGFR mutation analysis in sputum samples.
This study aimed to examine EGFR mutations of primary
lung adenocarcinoma in sputum samples using
ddPCR and compare it with an EGFR mutation in surgically
resected lung cancer. This study also analyzed the
clinicopathological features of patients in which sufficient
tumor cells were detected in sputum for EGFR mutation
testing via ddPCR.
Materials and methods
Patients and sputum collection
Sputum was prospectively collected from the patients
before complete resection of the primary lung cancer at
Kanagawa Cancer Center from September 2014 to May
2016. Patients with pure ground glass nodule, synchronous
multiple lung cancer, and uncontrollable other
cancer were excluded from this study. Patients undergoing
preoperative radiation therapy or chemotherapy,
and bronchoscopy within one week were also excluded.
All patients provided informed consent. This study was
performed in accordance with relevant guideline and was
approved by the Kanagawa Cancer Center institutional
review board (25 Ken—64 and 2019 Eki-14).
Each patient was given a container with YM fixative
solution (50% ethyl alcohol and 2% polyethylene) for collection
of sputum for 3 days before surgery [23]. Patients
were instructed to collect early morning sputum just
after gargling and to shake the container approximately
20 times after each sputum collection so that the sputum
mixed with the fixative. The patients were instructed to
store the containers in a refrigerator.
Cytology
After centrifugation, a total of two cytological specimens
were prepared by rubbing the sputum sample between
two glass slides. Each cytological specimen was stained
with Papanicolaou stain after 95% ethyl alcohol fixation.
Cytology was classified by an expert cytologist as follows:
(1) Insufficient material; (2) Class I: absence of atypical or
abnormal cells; (3) Class II: atypical cytology but no evidence
of malignancy; (4) Class III: cytology suggestive of,
but not conclusive for, malignancy; (5) Class IIIa: probably
benign atypia; (6) Class IIIb: malignancy suspected;
(7) Class IV: cytology strongly suggestive of malignancy;
and (8) Class V: cytology conclusive for malignancy. Final
diagnosis was made by a pathologist in cases of class III
or higher. Sputum cytology positive [SC (+)] was defined
as patients whose sputum cytology was class III or
higher. Sputum cytology negative [SC (−)] was defined as
patients whose sputum cytology was lower than class III,
including cases with insufficient material. SNC (sputum
not collected) was defined as patients who could not collect
sputum because of a lack of sputum.
DNA extraction and ddPCR
ddPCR was performed to detect Ex21 and Ex19 in
patients with lung adenocarcinoma using the same sputum
samples used for cytological examination. The
cover glass was peeled off after immersing the glass slide
with the cytological specimen in xylene. After applying
50% diluted Marinol in xylene, the Marinol was cured
on the extender for 30 to 60 min. The sample was then
immersed in Milli-Q® water for approximately 15 min
to soften the encapsulant, and the sheet-like cells were
peeled off with a knife and placed in a tube. After dissolution
and removal of the encapsulant, the sample was
washed with alcohol and dried. DNA was extracted using
the QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia,
CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
In all samples, the concentration of DNA was measured
using Qubit
® (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Carlsbad, CA, USA).
ddPCR was performed using the QX200 Droplet Digital
PCR System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. A total of 20 μL of ddPCR
reaction mixture was prepared. The volume contained 10
μL of 2 × ddPCR Supermix for Probe (no dUTP) (Bio-
Rad), 1 μL template DNA, 1.8 μL of forward and reverse
primers (10 μM), 0.5 μL of FAM- and Hex-labeled probe,
and 4.9 μL of nuclease-free water. A total of 20 μL/well
of the sample solution was transferred to DG8 cartridges
(Bio-Rad). After loading 70 μL/well of generator oil in
the lower layer of the well, droplets were made using
the Droplet Generator (Bio-Rad). After transferring 40
μL to each well of a PCR plate, the plate was sealed with
a foil heat seal using a PX1 PCR Plate Sealer (Bio-Rad).
PCR was performed using a C1000 Touch thermal cycler
(Bio-Rad). The droplet generator partitions samples into
approximately 20,000 droplets of identical volume. However,
12,000 to 16,000 droplets were finally used for the
reaction because some droplets were lost in the transfer
step.
EGFR p.L858R c.2573T>G (Bio-Rad, Catalog
#10,049,550, Assay ID: dHsaMDV2010021) was used as
the primer/probe mix to detect the Ex21 using ddPCR.
The ddPCR EGFR Exon 19 Deletions Screening Kit (Bio-
Rad, Catalog #12002392), which allows the quantification
and screening of 15 EGFR exon 19 deletions, was
used to detect Ex19. The negative template control contained
reaction mixed with water, and the positive template
control contained EGFR-mutated DNA (Ex21 and
Ex19). QuantaSoft software (version 1.7.4) was used for
the analysis. The presence or absence of EGFR mutations
was determined by the threshold set automatically
in the analysis mode of the software based on the
criterion optimized in the analysis of each sample. If the
automatic analysis did not work because of the small
quantity of sample DNA, the threshold was set manually,
based on the fluorescence amplitude of the positive
control. ddPCR was performed multiple times to confirm
reproducibility if the initial ddPCR result was positive
for EGFR mutation. Moreover, the sputum sample
was determined to be an EGFR mutant if the EGFR gene
mutation detection rate was above the detection limit
validated using each reagent. The limit of detection of
EGFR p.L858R c.2573T>G to detect the Ex21 was 0.1%
and that for the EGFR Exon 19 Deletions Screening Kit to
detect the Ex19 was 0.5%.
Pathological findings and EGFR mutation of surgically
resected lung cancer specimens
The pathological diagnosis was made by an expert
pathologist (Y.T.) based on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining and Alcian blue staining of the tissue sections
of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens.
Elastica van Gieson staining was used to evaluate vascular
and pleural invasion. Immunostaining of thyroid
transcription factor-1 was performed if necessary. Spread
through air space (STAS) was defined as the spread of
lung cancer cells into air spaces in the lung parenchyma
beyond the edge of the main tumor [24, 25]. The existence
of STAS was evaluated based on H&E stains of FFPE
sections of the tumor.
FFPE sections of the resected tumor were used to
extract the DNA from the samples. Eight to ten sections
(5–10 μm thick) where tumor diameter was maximum
were used to extract DNA. The fragment method
(sensitivity < 5% mutant DNA) was used to examine Ex19
[21]. The Cycleave method (sensitivity 1–5% mutant
DNA) was used to examine Ex21 [21]. The concordance
of EGFR mutation status detected in sputum samples and
in surgically resected specimens was evaluated for SC (+)
and SC (−) groups, respectively.
Sub‑analysis of risk factors of SC (+)
Sub-analysis of risk factors for SC (+) in patients with
primary lung adenocarcinoma was performed because
EGFR mutation cannot be detected if the sputum sample
does not contain any malignant cells. The clinicopathological
factors of SC (+) and SC (−) + SNC were
compared between groups, and the risk factors for SC
(+) were analyzed by multivariate analysis. Continuous
and categorical variables between the two groups
were compared using Mann–Whitney U test and Fisher’s
exact test, respectively. Receiver operating characteristics
(ROC) curve analysis was performed to discriminate
SC (+) from SC (−) + SNC via radiological examination
(CT tumor size and positron emission tomography maximum
standardized uptake value [PET SUVmax]). CT
tumor size was defined as the maximum tumor diameter
measured using high resolution CT (level 600 Hounsfield
units [HU]; width 1600 HU) of 1 to 2 mm thickness. The
preoperative PET-CT scan calculated the SUVmax of
the tumor lesion where fluorodeoxyglucose F 18 (18FFDG)
accumulated. Logistic regression was performed to
analyze the clinicopathological characteristics of patients
regarding SC (+). Significance was defined as p < 0.05.
Statistical analyzes were performed using EZR on R commander
version 1.30 (Saitama Medical Center, Jichi Medical
University, Saitama, Japan).
Results
Of the 118 patients who enrolled in this study, the number
of patients with SC (+), SC (−), and NC was 13
(11.0%), 76 (64.4%), and 29 (24.6%), respectively. Table 1
summarizes the radiological and cytopathological findings,
and the EGFR mutation status (sputum sample and
surgical resected specimen) of 13 SC (+) cases. In addition,
allel frequency in samples in which EGFR mutation
were detected in sputum samples was also shown.
Classes III, IIIa, IIIb, IV, and V included 2, 2, 3, 1, and 5
patients, respectively. STAS was detected in surgically
resected specimens in 12 of 13 SC (+) cases. Ex21 and
Ex19, and wild-type EGFR were observed in 2, 2, and
9 cases, respectively, based on ddPCR of the sputum.
Among SC (+) samples, the EGFR mutation status of the
main tumors in FFPE sections and in sputum were identical
in 12 cases, and the sensitivity, specificity, and positive
predictive value to detect EGFR mutations (Ex19 and
Ex21) were 80.0%, 100%, and 100%, respectively (Table 2).
In one discordant case (Case 4), the cytological examination
of sputum was Class IIIa with suspected squamous
cell carcinoma. Figure 1 shows the results of ddPCR
data analysis (1-D plot). Ex21 (Case 1) and Ex19 (Case
7) were detected in sputum by ddPCR. The lowest allele
frequency in the EGFR mutant SC (+) cases was 0.24%
(Table 1).
Figure 2 presents the cytological findings of sputum
and histological findings of resected specimen in Case 1
to 3 of the 13 SC (+) patients. In all three patients, the
EGFR mutation status of the main tumors in FFPE sections
and in sputum were identical. In all three patients,
STAS was detected in FFPE sections of the surgically
resected tumors.
Among 76 patients of SC (−) group, there were 9 cases
in which ddPCR could not be performed because of an
insufficient amount of DNA collected. There was one
case in which the Ex19 was detected in sputum samples
in the SC (−) group. The EGFR mutation status was
identical to that of FFPE sections of the tumor specimen.
The sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value
to detect EGFR mutations (Ex19 and Ex21) were 3.1%,
100%, and 100%, respectively, in SC (−) cases (Table 2).
Table 3 presents the comparison of the clinicopathological
features between 13 cases of SC (+) and 105
cases of SC (−) + SNC. Compared to the SC (−) + SNC
group, the CT tumor size was larger and PET SUVmax
was higher in SC (+) group. Patients with SC (+) were
in a more advanced stage (clinically and pathologically)
compared to patients with SC (−). STAS was detected
more frequently in FFPE sections of resected tumor in
the SC (+) group compared to the SC (−) group (92.3%
vs 34.3, p < 0.001). There was no significant difference
in the EGFR mutation status between the two groups
(p = 0.902); there were 61.5% and 43.8% of wild-type
EGFR in SC (+) and SC (−) + SNC group, respectively.
Figure 3 depicts the results of ROC curve analysis for
discrimination of the SC (+) and SC (−) + SNC groups.
The area under the ROC curve (AUC) regarding CT
tumor size was 0.823 (95% confidence interval [CI]:
0.717–0.929). The AUC regarding PET SUVmax was
0.809 (95% CI 0.718–0.901). There was no significant
difference between the AUC of both groups (p = 0.809).
The cut-off value of CT tumor size was 29 mm in ROC
curve analysis, and the sensitivity and specificity were
69.5% and 84.6%, respectively. The cut-off value of PET
SUVmax was 3.02, and the sensitivity and specificity were
58.1% and 100%, respectively.
Multivariate analysis based on a logistic regression
model revealed that CT tumor size (odds ratio = 10.6,
95% CI 1.85–61.0, p = 0.008) and STAS (odds ratio = 17.7,
95% CI 1.97–158, p = 0.010) were independent potential
predictive factors for SC (+) (Table 4).
Discussion
This is the first report of the detection of EGFR mutations
of primary lung adenocarcinoma using ddPCR
from prospectively collected sputum samples and compared
it with an EGFR mutation in surgically resected
lung cancer. EGFR mutations can be detected with high
sensitivity by ddPCR from sputum sample if the sputum
cytology is positive. Since a CT tumor size ≥ 29 mm is a
potential predictive factor for sputum cytology positive,
sputum should be collected in such cases for the EGFR
mutation analysis.
Bronchoscopic, CT-guided, and surgical biopsies
are currently performed in clinical practice to obtain
tumor tissue for molecular analysis. However, these
methodologies are invasive. An overall complication rate
of 1.55% was reported for bronchoscopic biopsy, and
included bleeding (0.63%) and pneumothorax (0.44%),
with a mortality rate of 0.003% [8]. The reported rates of
mortality and serious complications for CT-guided percutaneous
needle biopsy were 0.07% and 0.75%, respectively,
with complication rates of 35% for pneumothorax
[9, 10]. Furthermore, surgical biopsy requires general
anesthesia and is more invasive. The reported mortality
rate due to surgery was 0.5%, and the rate of complications
that included pneumonia, air leakage, and atelectasis
was 9.6% [11]. Plasma can be collected with minimal
invasion from lung cancer patients to detect EGFR mutations
in cfDNA. However, there is a possibility that EGFR
mutations cannot be detected in patients with EGFR
mutant lung cancer if the amount of cDNA is below
the threshold of detection sensitivity [12]. For this reason,
liquid biopsy is performed if a tissue biopsy cannot
be performed in patients with poor conditional status.
Similar to plasma, sputum can be collected non-invasively,
which is a greater advantage for cancer patients
compared to other biopsies. The use of sputum may be
another option to detect EGFR mutations in patients who
are in poor condition.
Tumor cells in sputum specimens were reportedly
detected in < 1% of the cells contained in sputum [15],
and sputum has been considered unsuitable for molecular
analysis. The present study demonstrates that
ddPCR can detect EGFR mutations in primary lung
adenocarcinoma with high sensitivity (80.0%) and high
specificity (100%) in SC (+) cases. One discordant case
in SC (+) (Case 4, invasive lepidic adenocarcinoma)
was suspected to be squamous cell carcinoma (Class
IIIa) according to the cytomorphologic features of
sputum cytology. The discordance of EGFR mutation
between sputum and surgical specimens might be due
to the absence of tumor cells in the sputum. Case 4
had a history of bronchial asthma, obstructive airway
disease, and lung cancer surgery. Bronchial cell hyperplasia,
reactive/atypical bronchial cell, or squamous
metaplasia that might be misinterpreted as malignancy,
can often be observed in respiratory cytology
specimens obtained from patients with asthma, chronic
obstructive airway disease, inflammatory disease of the
lung, and past history of lung disease chemotherapy/
radiation/surgical treatment [26, 27]. When performing
EGFR mutation analysis in combination with sputum
cytology, it is necessary to understand the cytomorphologic
features and past history of lung disease in these
patients. In contrast, we observed that the sensitivity
of EGFR mutation detection was as low as 3.1% in
SC (−) cases, and it was considered irrelevant to perform
EGFR mutation analysis unless the cytology was
positive. Only one case in which the EGFR mutation
(Ex19) was detected in the sputum sample in the SC
(−) case. Malignant cells might not have been detected
by sputum cytology. Sputum cytology involves abundant
normal cells, which sometimes make it difficult to
detect malignant cells. Endo et al. reported that cytotechnologists
with less cytology experience underdiagnosed
significantly more frequently than those with
considerable experience [28]. When performing EGFR
mutation testing in combination with sputum cytology,
well-trained cytotechnologists are needed to make
cytological diagnoses.
Hubers et al. reported that the sensitivity of EGFR
mutation detection was 30 to 50% in 10 sputum samples
using four different EGFR mutation analyses
(Cycleave PCR, COLD-PCR, Pangaea Biotech SL Technology,
and High Resolution Melting) [29]. Su et al.
performed amplification refractory mutation system
(ARMS)-PCR for 35 sputum samples containing tumor
cells collected from stage III-IV lung cancer patients
and reported a 90.9% sensitivity [30]. Wu et al. reported
a 63% sensitivity when an EGFR sensitizing mutation
was analyzed in 50 sputum samples using next-generation
sequencing [31]. Presently, ddPCR analysis of 80
sputum samples revealed an 80.0% detection sensitivity
for EGFR mutations if the sputum cytology was positive.
Recently, Wang et al. reported that detection sensitivity
and specificity for EGFR mutations of 46.2% and
100%, respectively, as detected using SuperARMS using
sputum cell-free DNA from 102 sputum samples [32].
It is necessary to prospectively examine in large scale
which methodology can detect EGFR mutations more
accurately in sputum.
It is unclear which sputum collection method was
appropriate for the analysis of EGFR mutations.
Hubers et al. used Saccomanno’s fixative (2% polyethylene
glycol in 50% ethanol) for 3-day pooled sputum
[29, 33]. Su et al. collected spontaneous sputum in a
1.5 mL container [30]. Wu et al. collected approximately
5 mL of spontaneous sputum in a mixed solution
with an equal volume of Saccomanno’s fixative
and 0.005% dithiothreitol solution at a 1:1 ratio [31,
34]. We used YM fixative solution for 3-day pooled
sputum. It has been reported that the detection sensitivity
of lung cancer in sputum is increased by a longer
duration of sputum collection and with the induction
of sputum by nebulization with hypertonic saline [33,
35]. A future study should examine whether the sensitivity
of EGFR mutation detection can be improved by
different sputum collection methodologies.
This study showed that EGFR mutation analysis of sputum
should be performed for SC (+). However, little is
known about the risk factors for SC (+). Therefore, subanalysis
of risk factors for SC (+) in patients with primary
lung adenocarcinoma was performed in this study.
As shown in Fig. 3 and Table 4, we found that CT tumor
size was strongly associated with SC (+). Patients with
CT tumors ≥ 29 mm were considered good candidates
for EGFR mutation analysis. The detection sensitivity of
lung cancer in sputum cytology was reported to be 40 to
66% [13, 14]. Presently, the sensitivity was 11.0%. There
are two reasons of the low sensitivity we observed. Firstly,
all the patients had lung adenocarcinoma. Sputum cytology
is highly effective for central type squamous cell
carcinoma in patients with hemoptysis [16]. Sing et al.
reported that the detection rate of sputum in adenocarcinoma
in 64 patients was 25.0% [14]. Secondly, patients
with early staged lung cancer were included. The sensitivity
of sputum cytology for patients with advanced stages
are reported to be higher than for early stage cancer [14].
The diagnostic sensitivity of bronchoscopic biopsy was
reported to be 88% (78% for peripheral lung cancer) [36].
The sensitivity of percutaneous needle biopsy was 86.1%
[37]. Although sputum can be collected non-invasively
from lung cancer patients, the detection sensitivity of
lung cancer was lower compared to other methodologies.
In sub-analysis of this study revealed that the sensitivity
increased to 69.5% in sputum cytology if the CT tumor
size was ≥ 29 mm. Risse et al. similarly reported that the
detection sensitivity of primary lung cancer was high
when the tumor size exceeded 24 mm [16].
This is the first study to analyze the correlation
between pathological findings of surgically resected
specimens and SC (+). SC (+) status was strongly associated
with STAS. The presence of STAS was higher in
patients with SC (+) than in patients with SC (−) (92.3%
vs. 34.3%). STAS was a potential predictive factor for
SC (+) in multivariate analysis (Table 4). STAS is a risk
factor for recurrence of primary lung adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma [38, 39]. Previously, we
examined the morphology and EGFR mutation status of
tumor cells in airway secretions collected from segmental
or lobar bronchus of surgically resected specimens
and compared the results with FFPE tumor tissue. The
study demonstrated that STAS may be spread to the respiratory
tract as far as segmental or lobar bronchus of the
tumor [40]. Because STAS was a risk factor for SC (+) in
the present study, we suggest that malignant tumors can
be efficiently detected from sputum if STAS is predicted
in preoperative radiological findings. Toyokawa et al.
reported that the presence of notch and the absence of
ground glass opacity were CT findings that were related
to the presence of STAS [41]. Kim et al. reported that
solid component ratio ≥ 90% in CT was a potential predictive
factor of STAS [42]. Performing sputum cytology
for tumors that display these CT findings may increase
the detection sensitivity of sputum cytology in patients
with primary lung cancer.
There were several limitations in our study. First, this
study was conducted at a single institution with a small
number of patients. Second, we have not investigated
the efficacy of EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor based
on the EGFR status detected in sputum samples. Third,
the methodology of detecting EGFR mutation differed
between surgical resected tumor samples and sputum
samples. The discordance of EGFR mutations between
the two samples might have occurred if the number of
tumor cells harboring EGFR mutations with mutations
was too small to detect these mutations, due to heterogeneity
in FFPE tumor sections by conventional PCR.
Fourth, it is unclear whether performing EGFR mutation
testing of sputum based on sputum cytology results
is valid. Further studies are needed to investigate the
clinicopathological factors of lung cancer patients who
are clinically relevant for sputum-based EGFR mutation
testing. Fifth, this study examined only the Ex21
and Ex19. Future studies will need to detect other EGFR
mutations, such as T790M, and other driver gene mutations
by ddPCR from sputum, and evaluate the usefulness
of ddPCR for sputum in clinical practice. Detection
of T790M for the indication of Osimertinib is especially
important in clinical practice. The detection of T790M
from sputum may play an important role similar to that
of cell-free DNA in plasma. Further studies are needed
to demonstrate the clinical usefulness of T790M detection
in sputum using ddPCR in patients with primary
lung cancer undergoing EGFR-TKI treatment. Further
research also is necessary to compare the detection rates
of EGFR mutations between sputum and cell-free DNA
in plasma.