Background
Delivery of the fetus with no sign of life after 28 weeks
of gestation was labeled as stillbirth [1]. According to the
world health organization report, more than 2.6 million
stillbirths were reported annually [2]. More than 75% of
stillbirths occur in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia
[3]. Placental problems, childbirth complications, infections,
congenital anomalies, and intrauterine growth
retardation were some of the causes for stillbirth [4, 5].
Expulsion of the product of pregnancy before viability,
usually 28 weeks of gestational age defines abortion in
resource limited settings [6]. Globally more than 25 million
unsafe abortions women were reported in 2014, and
most of them occur in developing countries [7]. Abnormal
chromosomes, maternal medical disorders, and
unhealthy lifestyles are some of the reasons for abortion
women [8]. Uterine perforation, infections, bowel and
bladder injury, excessive bleeding are some of the complications
of abortion women [9, 10].
Abortion was among the top leading causes of maternal
mortality. According to the Ethiopian demographic
and health surveillance 2016 report, the maternal mortality
ratio of Ethiopia was 412 per 100,000 live births [11].
Ethiopia tries to reduce the complications of abortion by
expanding the family planning services accessibility and
by drafting the legal abortion law [12].
Availing the maternal and child health services significantly
decrease maternal mortality. Report suggests that
MCH service utilization was determined by age, birth
rank, educational level, monthly income, number of children,
occupation, knowledge about sexually transmitted
infections, educational status, residence, parity, partner
communication, and the presence of TV/radio [13–19].
In resource limited settings, evidence on the effect of
stillbirth and abortion women on the next pregnancy was
scarce, which affects the quality of maternal and child
health services. This research work generates evidence
and improves the quality and utilization of maternal and
child health services.
The objectives of this study were: to estimate the MCH
service utilization after stillbirth and abortion, to assess
the prevalence of blood borne pathogens among stillbirth
and abortion women, to estimate the median time
of pregnancy after stillbirth and abortion women, to estimate
the risk of obstetric hemorrhage and pregnancyinduced
medical disorders after stillbirth and abortion
women.
Methods
A Prospective cohort study design was implemented. The
study was conducted in the Mecha demographic surveillance
and field research center catchment areas, Mecha
district. The district was located 30 km away from Bahir
Dar, the capital city of Amhara National Regional State.
The data were collected from January 2015 to March
2019. The target population for the study was all mothers
with stillbirth or abortion. Women out migrated from the
catchment areas were excluded. During update data collection,
pregnant mothers with chronic diabetes mellitus
or chronic hypertension were excluded. The sample size
was calculated using Epi-info software version 7 with the
assumption of 95% CI, power of 90, 3:1 ratio of abortion
women to stillbirth women, a risk ratio of 1.12 and 10%
non-response rate; give 1091 stillbirth and 3171 abortion
women. The systematic random sampling technique was
used to select both the stillbirths and abortion women.
They were recruited after pregnancy termination. The
study participants were selected from the government
health facilities of the Mecha district. Interviewing the
patient was conducted by midwife professionals and laboratory
samples were collected by laboratory technologists.
Baseline data were collected from the post-abortion
women and stillbirth women in the gynecologic ward
using the patient interviews. Then, every three months
update data were collected from each study participant
from their residence using Mecha demographic surveillance
and field research center frame. Clinician-Administered
post-traumatic stress disorder Scale (PTSD)
was used to screen for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Laboratory samples were collected by laboratory technologists.
For each study participant, 5 ml (ML) venous
blood was collected using an aseptic technique and an
Enzyme-linked immune Sorbent assay (ELIZA) test was
performed to screen for the presence of hepatitis B and
hepatitis C. The standard operating procedures (SOP)
were followed. For pregnant mothers, Peripheral blood
was collected to measure blood glucose levels. American
diabetic association criteria was used to diagnose gestational
diabetic mellitus [20]. Focused ante-natal care
(FANC) was given for all pregnant mothers to the nearby
health facility.
To increase the quality of data; pretest was performed,
the data collection was closely supervised, SOP was
adhered to all laboratory procedures, and training was
given for all data collectors and supervisors.
Data were entered into the computer using EPI-info
software and transferred to SPSS for analysis. Descriptive
statistics were used to present the profile of study
participants, MCH service utilization and estimate pregnancy-
related complications after stillbirth and abortion
women. Poisson regression was used to identify the
determinants of MCH service utilization after stillbirth
and abortion women. The Kaplan Meier survival curve
was used to estimate time to pregnancy and pregnancyrelated
complications.
Results
A total of 4117 women was included giving for the
response rate of 96.6%, 64 women were out-migrated
from the study areas and the medical records of 81
women were incomplete. Stillbirth constitutes 1042
study participants. The proportions of stillbirth and
abortion women completed the survey was 95.5% and
96.9% respectively. The mean age of the study participant
was 21.92 years [SD (standard deviation ± 4.9 years)].
(Table 1).
From 3075 abortion women, 24.09% of study participants
mention rape as a reason for abortion women and
58.08% of study participants not volunteer to mention
the reason for abortion women. Post traumatic stress
syndrome (PTSD) was observed in 44.9% of study participants
(Table 2).
During the consecutive 3 years, maternal and child
health service (MCH) was utilized by 42.1% of study participants.
After adjusting for residence, marital status,
stillbirth, abortion, family size, age, gravidity, the presence
of TV/Radio, knowledge on contraceptive, educational
status, access to contraceptives; MCH service
utilization was associated with age, knowledge of contraceptives,
educational status, the presence of TV/Radio,
marital status, and family size (Table 3).
In the subsequent 3 years, 22.8% of study participants
become pregnant and the median time of pregnancy was
12 months (Fig. 1).
Obstetric hemorrhage was the main complication of
abortion for the next pregnancy, antepartum hemorrhage
(APH) was observed in 23.1% of pregnant mothers with
a past history of abortion and post-partum hemorrhage
(PPH) was observed in 25.6% pregnant mothers with past
history of abortion (Fig. 2).
Gestational diabetes mellitus and pregnancy-induced
hypertension were the common complications of stillbirth
for the next pregnancy; PREGNANCY INDUCED
DIABETES MELLITUS was observed 14.3% of pregnant
mothers with a past history of stillbirth and pregnancyinduced
hypertension were observed on 9.2% of mothers
with a past history of stillbirth (Table 4).
Discussion
Totally, 1042 stillbirths and 3026 abortion women were
included. Most of the abortion women were single by
marital status (91.2%) but only 4.4% of stillbirth women
were single. This finding agrees with researcher results
from Nepal [21]. This occurs to the reason that pregnancy
before marriage is usually unintended and unsupported
ending with an abortion [22].
58.1% of abortion women do not want to report the
reason for abortion, but, post-traumatic stress disorder
was present in 36.8% of the post-abortion women and
68.9% of the stillbirth women. This finding was in line
with the 2017 finding [23]. The low prevalence of PTSD
among post-abortion women indicates the high proportion
of unintended pregnancy in the group [24].
The prevalence of hepatitis among abortion women
was two folds higher than stillbirth women. Hepatitis B
was present on 6% of the abortion women and 3.2% of
the stillbirth women. This figure was higher as compared
to the 2016 finding from Ethiopia [25]. This indicates that
risky sexual behavior is increasing from time to time.
HIV was detected in 3% of abortion and 0.8% of stillbirth
women. This finding was in line with the Uganda
research outputs [26]. This is due to the reason that most
abortion women were single with their marital status;
they might have multiple sexual partners, which finally
increase the risk of acquiring HIV.
Hepatitis C was diagnosed in 4.7% of abortion and 0.3%
of stillbirth women. This finding agrees with the research
results from Egypt [27].
In the consecutive 3 years, MCH service was utilized
by 75.7% of stillbirth women, but only 5.1% of abortion
women utilized MCH service. The median time of pregnancy
was 12 months for stillbirth and 11 months for
abortion. This finding was in line with finding from Zambia
[28]. This indicates that the tendency for repeated
abortion was higher.
MCH service utilization was 29% higher in the presence
of good knowledge regarding contraceptives [IRR
1.29, 95% CI 1.18–1.42]. The Ghanaian research article
also reported poor knowledge of contraceptives among
abortion women [29]. This finding indicates that women
should get access to family planning intervention to
reduce the risk of unintended pregnancy.
MCH service utilization was 4.3 folds higher among
women with tertiary education [IRR 4.29, 95% CI 3.72–
4.96], 3.14 folds higher among women in secondary education.
[IRR 3.14, 95% CI 2.73–3.61], however, primary
education was not helping women to use the MCH services.
The previous finding from Ethiopia report the same
results [30]. This indicates the government should extend
its directions from primary education to secondary and
above.
MCH service utilization was two folds higher among
married women [IRR 2.08, 95% CI: 1.84 -2.34]. This finding
was in line with the Nigeria research article [13].
This is due to the reason that the probability of partner
communication regarding MCH was high among married
women than single women. Additionally, married
women to have access to MCH services related to plan
and helped pregnancy.
MCH service utilization was 49% lower in women living
with high family-sized households [IRR 0.67, 95% CI
1.001– 1.01]. This finding was in agreement with findings
from Sub-Saharan African countries [31]. This indicates
that people living in overcrowded areas will not have
awareness about MCH services.
Antepartum hemorrhage (APH) was observed in 23.1%
of pregnant mothers with a past abortion women and
post-partum hemorrhage (PPH) was observed in 25.6%
pregnant mothers with a past history of abortion women.
Obstetric hemorrhage was a common complication of
abortion for the next pregnancy. This is because the uterine
procedures performed during abortion affects the
integrity of the uterine wall predisposing risk factors like
placenta previa and abruption [32, 33].
Stillbirth complicate the next pregnancy by predisposing
the women for pregnancy induced diabetes mellitus
and pregnancy induced hypertension; pregnancy induced
diabetes mellitus was observed in 14.3% of pregnant
mothers with a past history of stillbirth and pregnancyinduced
hypertension was observed in 9.2% of mothers
with a past history of stillbirth. This finding agrees with
the previous finding from the same study area [34]. This
is due to the endocrine effects of abortion and stillbirth
[35, 36].
This research work did not assess the effects of stillbirth
or abortion on the child health, and this is the limitation
of this research.
Conclusion
Abortion women had poor knowledge of contraceptives,
and unintended pregnancy was the predominant cause of
abortion. Blood borne pathogens were common among
abortion women. Primary education was not helpful
to utilize MCH services. Obstetric hemorrhage was the
common complications of abortion women for the next
pregnancy. Pregnancy-induced diabetic Mellitus and
pregnancy-induced hypertension were the most common
complications of stillbirth for the next pregnancy.