Background
In addition to its well-described role in the pathogenesis
of gout, hyperuricemia (defined as a serum urate [sUA] >
6.8 mg/dL) is associated with vascular, cardiac and
renal disease [1–9]. This hyperuricemic threshold, or
similar ones based on sUA distributions in populations
of men and women, are commonly used in epidemiological
and clinical research [10, 11].
However, the reliability of a single sUA measurement
in defining hyperuricemia is unclear. Previous
studies have found significant variability in the measurement
of serum urate over time, without known
causes for the fluctuation. Suggested reasons for this
fluctuation include variations in diet, alcohol intake,
body weight, time of day, and hydration status.
Hourly [12] and seasonal variation in serum urate
levels has also been suggested [13–15].
Many epidemiological studies which have explored the
question of whether sUA levels are associated with cardiovascular
outcomes have used a single-point threshold
(such as 6.8 mg/dL or 7.0 mg/dL) to classify individuals
as hyperuricemic [10, 11]. Even when hyperuricemia is
not defined, sUA levels are often stratified based on a
single measurement [16, 17].
The large number of factors affecting SUA likely account
for their propensity to fluctuate. Because of this
variability, more research is needed as to the value of a
single SUA level in confirming or discarding hyperuricemia.
Our study results will have implications for epidemiological
and clinical studies in hyperuricemia and
gout, which sometimes rely on a single sUA measurement
to classify participants. Further evaluations of
serum urate variability over a short period of time could
demonstrate the utility in performing serial checks prior
to classification of patients in both study and clinical
situations.
Methods
Data from the “Serum Urate Reduction to Prevent Hypertension
(SURPHER)” study were used. The study protocol
has been described in detail [18]. Briefly, SURPHER is a
single center, cross-over clinical trial conducted in the city
of Birmingham, Alabama (USA) that tested the hypothesis
that serum urate reduction with allopurinol could be
beneficial in elevated blood pressure in young adults. It
was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at
the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB – IRB approval
number 130408004). Oversight was provided by a
Data Safety Monitoring Board. The trial was conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the Declaration of
Helsinki and the International Conference on
Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guidelines and registered
in clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02038179). Written informed
consent was obtained from all participants. Key
enrollment criteria for the SURPHER trial were 1) The
mean of two clinic measurements with systolic blood
pressure (SBP) ≥ 120 and < 160mmHg or diastolic blood
pressure (DBP) ≥ 80 and < 100mmHg; 2) a serum urate
≥5.0mg/dL for men or ≥ 4.0mg/dL for women; and 3) age
between 18 and 40 years old. Major exclusion criteria included
1) current pharmacological treatment for hypertension
(calcium channel blockers were only allowed); 2)
prior diagnosis of gout or past use of ULT for gout; 3) > 2
alcoholic drinks per day; 4) glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) < 60 mL/min/1.73m2. Full description of enrollment
criteria and study procedures have been published
previously [18].
Participants were initially selected via a telephone
screen, followed by a study visit in which a screening
sUA was first measured at an appointment in either
morning or afternoon. After a 2-to-4-week run-in period
during which participants received a daily dose of placebo
to assess adherence, a sUA level was measured a
second time prior to any intervention.
Study participants were subsequently randomized to
receive oral allopurinol 300 mg daily or placebo for 3
weeks, and a sUA was measured a third time. After a 2-
to-4-week washout period, sUA was re-measured prior
to crossing over to the other study arm for another 3
weeks. A sUA was then measured a fifth and final time
at completion of the study.
The 4-week washout interval before crossover between
study arms allowed for full dissipation of the effects of
allopurinol, which is converted to oxypurinol and has a
half-life of 18–30 h [2]. This dissipation was anticipated
to take place over no longer than 2 weeks after the last
dose of allopurinol. To confirm this in our study, carryover
effects were examined using a two sample t-test,
described in detail in the SURPHER study [18].
Samples for sUA level measurements were processed
using two Beckman Coulter instruments. Precision statistics
performed on these instruments in 2014 demonstrated
an observed coefficient of variation in serum
urate of 0.3–1.2%.
Except for the initial screening visit, which occurred
throughout the day, serum urates were planned to be
drawn during appointments between the hours of 0700
and 1100. Participants were asked to fast during the day
prior to the screening visit. The samples were collected
at a consistent time within the menstrual cycle of premenopausal
females enrolled in the study.
For our secondary analyses of the data initially obtained
during the SURPHER trial, we made use of sUA
levels collected at screening, pre-intervention, preplacebo,
and post-placebo. Levels collected following
intervention were not considered in our analysis. Only
the data from the participants that had measurements of
all four sUA levels occurring without intervention was
used for our analysis. Mean coefficient of variation for
sUA was determined and compared across groups (sUA
levels at screening, gender) using t-test statistics to determine
differences.
The rates of conversion from normouricemia (sUA
≤6.8 mg/dL) to hyperuricemia (sUA > 6.8 mg/dL), and
from hyperuricemia to normouricemia were calculated.
The rates of conversion to hyperuricemia were then
compared across subgroups defined by the sUA level at
initial screening, as well as between subgroups with only
one initial normouricemic reading (and a second check
which was hyperuricemic) versus two initial normouricemic
readings. Comparisons between count data in
groups were performed using Fisher’s Exact tests, due to
small cell size.
Results
Of the 99 SURPHER study participants enrolled, 85
completed all four sUA measurements that occurred in
the absence of allopurinol (during the placebo period).
The 14 participants who did not complete all four
checks were excluded from further analysis. Time of day
data was available for 76% of participants, and showed
that 84% of measurements outside of the screening sUA
occurred during the targeted time frame of 0700 to
1100. Mean ± standard deviation study participant (n =
85) age was 27.8 ± 7.0 years and mean body mass index
was 31.1 ± 7.9. 39% of participants were women. 41% of
participants were African-American. (Table 1).
The mean coefficient of variation in sUA for all qualifying
participants was 8.5% ± 4.9% (1 to 23%). There was
no significant difference in the coefficient of variation
between men (8.5%) and women (8.6%) (p = 0.88), or between
subjects who were initially normouricemic (sUA ≤
6.8 mg/dL) (8.6%) and those who were initially hyperuricemic
(sUA > 6.8 mg/dL) (8.0%) (p = 0.68) (Table 2).
Among the 72 participants with an initial sUA value in
the range of normouricemia, 15 (21%) had sUA values in
hyperuricemia ranges during at least one subsequent
measurement. The subgroup with initial sUA < 6.0 (n =
54) was much less likely to have future values in the
range of hyperuricemia compared to the group with
screening sUA values between 6.0–6.8 (n = 18) (7% vs
39%, p = 0.0037) (Table 3, Fig. 1).
Discussion
In this study we demonstrated that single-point sUA
measurements are unreliable in hyperuricemia classification.
About 21% of participants initially normouricemic
were found to be hyperuricemic on subsequent
checkups. In addition, nearly half of hyperuricemic participants
were normouricemic on subsequent checkups.
Our findings could influence the way studies using
serum urate as an enrollment criteria or outcome are
conducted or planned. Our study differed from previous
examinations in its calculation of a threshold for screening
sUA level more helpful in ruling out future
hyperuricemia.
We used 6.8 mg/dL as our threshold for hyperuricemia,
as this is related to the physiologic saturation at
which urate begins to precipitate. We found a sUA
threshold < 6.0 mg/dL, reliable in ruling out subsequent
hyperuricemia, as the conversion rate was just over 7%.
Our somewhat small number of subjects did not allow
us to calculate a comparable threshold value above
which persistent hyperuricemia appears to be more
likely. A second sUA measurement did not add reliability
in excluding future hyperuricemia, as there was no
significant difference in the conversion rates between
those with one initial value below threshold and those
with two values below threshold.
There has been a paucity of published data on the rate
of conversion from normouricemia to hyperuricemia
and from hyperuricemia to normouricemia after an initial
laboratory check in the absence of intervention.
A 2004 study examined the serum urate levels and 24-
h urinary uric acid levels monthly for a 12-month period
in 12 healthy men on self-selected diets, without medications
known to effect urate levels, as well as abstinence
from alcohol 7 days prior to measurement of levels.
Seven of the twelve subjects (58.3%) had transient hyperuricemia
at some point during the study period [19]. A
similarly designed study found that 10/12 subjects experienced
transient hyperuricemia at some point during
the course of 1 year [15]. The Framingham heart study
concluded that a higher percentage of the male population
had hyperuricemia when considering four biennial
determinations rather than a single determination [6].
The mean coefficient of variation for sUA was also examined
in these two similar studies [15, 19]. Our mean
coefficient of 8.5% was comparable to the findings of the
2004 study (9%, with a range of 5–12%) [19], and is less
than that found in the second study mentioned (17.5%,
with a range of 15–22%) [15].
In addition to variation over months, it has also been
demonstrated that uric acid levels fluctuate over the
course of a single day [20]. Serum urate levels were significantly
higher when measured in the morning than
when measured in the afternoon, with a decrease of up
to 30% seen in a subgroup of diabetic patients [12]. In
contrast to this, other studies have found that the serum
urate levels are lowest when measured in the morning
[21, 22]. The factors driving diurnal variations in serum
urate are not fully understood, but changes in the variation
may be impacted by gender, age and diet [22]. Differences
in uric acid levels have also been shown to be
associated with hypertension with “non-dipping profiles”
(absence of significant decrease in blood pressure during
sleep), suggesting that there may be interplay between
sUA and blood pressure determiners [23–25].
The cause of the variation in sUA found by our study
and previous studies is likely multifactorial. Multiple elements
are known to affect sUA levels, including diet and
medications. Intake of alcohol, purine-rich foods (including
seafood and organ meats such as liver), xylitol
and fructose have all been associated with increased
serum urate. Medications that increase urate include
low-dose aspirin, pyrazinamide, cytotoxic chemotherapy,
diuretics (particularly loop and thiazide diuretics),
immunosuppressants such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus,
nicotinic acid, testosterone, levodopa and theophylline
[26, 27]. Lead exposure also increases urate and can
cause saturnine gout [28]. Disease processes that increase
serum urate include renal failure, polycythemia
vera, chronic myeloid leukemia and other hematologic
malignancies, genetic diseases such as Lesch Nyhan, and
any malady that results in acidemia [12]. Alternately,
medications that can decrease SUA levels include losartan,
amlodipine, fenofibrate and high dose aspirin [27].
Even though our study participants were part of a clinical
trial and sUA measurements were collected in a
relatively short time frame (12–14 weeks), the observed
variability in sUA levels could possibly be a result of
subtle factors such as time of day, diet, changes in
weight, renal function and undisclosed use of medications.
As more data becomes available regarding the degree
to which these variables affect sUA, a more
standardized protocol for checking sUA may become
common practice, such as checking sUA early in the
morning, prior to any meals.
This variability in sUA may also influence treatment
guidelines for gout in the future. Perhaps in part due to
increased recognition of the imprecision of a single spot
serum urate level, there is controversy regarding the
choice between titration of urate lowering therapy to
minimize acute intermittent symptoms and the treat-totarget
approach with specified urate goals [29, 30]. However,
because our study population excluded individuals
with gout, our ability to extrapolate in this regard is
limited.
Our study has a number of limitations. The initial
screening sUA was not standardized with regards to
time of day as the rest of the measurements were, and
not all the subsequent measurements occurred during
the targeted time frame. This discrepancy could account
for some of the measured variability in sUA levels, as
urate concentration is highest in the morning [12]. However,
in current clinical practice it is not standard of care
to draw sUA levels at a specified time of day, and sUA
levels measured at different times are often compared to
one another to assess response to treatment. In this
sense, our analysis may more accurately represent variability
in sUA often demonstrated in clinical practice.
The diet of the participants also likely had an impact on
the sUA variation. We attempted to mitigate this effect
by asking participants to fast prior to measurements, but
this overall likely remains a factor in urate variation both
in our study and in the general population.
The young age of our participants could limit
generalizability to older populations. We used the same
definition for hyperuricemia in both males and females,
due to the physiologic precipitation of urate at this level;
we also attempted to control for changes in urate due to
hormonal fluctuations by timing our sample collections
at similar points in the menstrual cycles of our
participants.
The sample size was relatively small, but our study
may prompt future studies with larger numbers of participants.
Additionally, the cohort examined was from a
single center. Further validation from additional study
cohorts, or a multi-center analysis is likely warranted.
A total of 13 study participants presented with an initial
sUA in the hyperuricemic range, which could make
the conclusions obtained from that group imprecise.
This small sub-population size could be the reason why
a threshold sUA level above which conversion to hyperuricemia
is less likely could not be proposed. Additionally,
the enrollment criteria of the parent SURPHER
study requiring an initial sUA of ≥5.0 mg/dL for men
and ≥ 4.0 mg/dL for women does limit our ability to
evaluate serum urate variability in these individuals with
very low sUA levels [18].
Several of the measurements of sUA took place outside
of the planned 2-to-4 week intervals to maintain
consistency in relation to the menstrual cycles of the
subjects. This could have limited our ability to compare
measurements between subjects, but our demonstrated
variability in sUA over time remains valid despite this
limitation.
The presence of placebo and allopurinol dosing in between
analyzed measurements could have affected our
results, though we attempted to minimize these effects
by confirming dissipation of the effects of allopurinol by
examining carry-over effects with a two sample t-test.
There was also exclusion of 14 out of 99 individuals who
did not complete all required sUA checks, which could
affect our data if the reason for these omissions were associated
with factors affecting serum urate fluctuations.
Participants did receive monetary compensation for
their participation in the trial, which could have influenced
the characteristics of the study population [18].
Conclusions
Our data is consistent with previous studies which have
found significant variation in sUA levels over time, even
when controlling for commonly identified influencers of
sUA levels. This finding diminishes somewhat the value
of a single sUA check, and even a second measurement
was not found to add significant reliability in excluding
future hyperuricemia in those who are initially normouricemic.
Future studies could examine the reliability of
sUA checks in those with gout, as well as those on ULT,
to determine whether a treat-to-target approach for gout
flare suppression may be subject to these same fluctuations
in sUA levels.
