Background
Behçet disease (BD) is an inflammatory vasculopathy
with multisystemic involvement. The clinical course usually
follows a relapsing-remitting course with heterogeneous
clinical manifestations [1]. Despite extensive
research dedicated to the underlying mechanisms of BD,
we still have a long way to understand the complexity of
Behçet disease. While the etiology is unknown, a strong
correlation with human leukocyte antigens, specifically
HLA-B51, has been observed. Behçet disease has been
reported all over the world, but the prevalence is particularly
high in the middle east, far east, and the Mediterranean.
BD is also referred to as the ‘silk route
disease’, acknowledging the fact that the highest incidence
of BD has been reported along this ancient route.
Turkey has the highest prevalence of BD, followed by
Iran, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Israel, northern China, and
Korea [2, 3].
There are no pathognomonic laboratory tests to
diagnose BD, and as such, the diagnosis is based on
clinical criteria. Clinical manifestations of BD are heterogeneous
and may involve virtually all organ systems.
BD was first described as a dermatologic
disease, and the mucocutaneous lesions are the hallmarks
of the disease. However, ocular, cardiovascular,
articular, neurological, and gastrointestinal manifestations
are also common and may be present simultaneously
or not, which adds to the difficulty of reaching
the diagnosis [3–5]. The International Criteria for
Behçet Disease (ICBD) was born from the collaboration
of experts from 27 countries to address the
diagnostic dilemma and the shortcomings of the previous
criteria [6]. One lesson from this collaborative
effort is that while the ICBD criteria is highly sensitive
and specific, there are still differences in clinical
manifestations of the disease among ethnicities and
countries.
Patients at Behçet referral centers might have a different
and occasionally have atypical presentation, which
renders the diagnostic approach more complicated.
There is a knowledge gap in how the current diagnostic
criteria perform in the setting of a dedicated ambulatory
BD center. We, therefore, designed this study to
characterize the clinical manifestations of the patients
referred to a national, multidisciplinary referral Behçet
clinic and to determine the discriminatory characteristics
in patients with Behçet disease.
Methods
In a retrospective cohort study, data from patients
referred to the Behçet clinic of the Rheumatology Research
Center (RRC) at Tehran University of Medical
Sciences were reviewed from November 2018 to August
2019. RRC is the only national referral center for BD
and is the national authority on guidelines for prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of Behçet disease. A remarkably
high percentage of patients suspected for the
diagnosis are referred to RRC from all over the country,
and as such, would provide a nationally representative
sample of patients suspected for, and diagnosed with
BD. Inclusion criteria included first-time referral from
doctors of medicine, and complete follow-up records, at
least until the diagnosis was proved or ruled out. Patients
with a known diagnosis of BD, and those with incomplete
records or follow-ups, were excluded.
The specialty of the referring physician, as well as their
practice setting (academic, non-academic), were collected.
Demographic data, including age, gender, and
ethnicity, were recorded. A complete history of the
current symptoms was obtained, which included type,
severity, and duration of symptoms, as well as the family
history of BD and drug history. Subsequently, all patients
were examined by a team of multidisciplinary BD
experts, including rheumatologists, dermatologists, and
ophthalmologists. A thorough and systematic examination
looking for mucocutaneous lesions, and ocular,
articular, cardiovascular, and neurological involvement
was performed. Articular symptoms were further evaluated
with a focused physical examination and radiographs
where required, to distinguish between various
etiologies. A Pathergy test was done for all patients.
Results of laboratory tests, including HLA-B5, HLA-B51,
and HLA-B27, were recorded.
The ICBD criteria were used to diagnose/rule-out BD,
dividing patients into two groups (BD, Non-BD), which
were subsequently compared. The definitive diagnosis of
patients who did not meet the ICBD criteria was also
reviewed. For patients with a BD diagnosis, organ systems
involved, disease severity, and the subspecialty consult
requested at the first visit were recorded.
Descriptive statistics were used to determine the frequencies
and central tendencies of the cohort. Groups
were compared utilizing the Student t-test and Mann–
Whitney U test for parametric and non-parametric data.
Chi-Square test was used to compare categorical data.
All statistical analyses were performed with IBM SPSS
Statistics for Windows, Version 22.0 (IBM Corp.,
Armonk, NY). A P value of < 0.05 was considered
significant.
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee
of Tehran University of Medical Sciences (IRB 1398.397, 8/
13/2019). All subjects were informed about the study goal
and methods. They were enrolled after their written informed
consent.
Results
During the one-year period of this study, a total of 238
patients met the inclusion criteria. One-hundred thirty-
one (55%) were female, and 107 (45%) were male. The
mean age of the referred patients was 37.4 years (range,
10–74, SD 12.8). The most common ethnicity among
patients was Turk (93 patients, 39%), followed by Fars
(92 patient, 38.7%), Kurd (23 patients, 9.7%), Lor (22 patients,
9.2%), Afghan (6 patients, 2.5%), and Turkman,
Balouch, and Arab each with one patient (0.4%).
The most common symptom for which patients
were referred, was oral lesions (in 204 patients, 85%),
which was followed by ocular lesions (20 patients,
8.4%), genital lesions (11 patients, 4.6%), back pain (4
patients, 1.7%), articular involvement (4 patients,
1.7%), and other skin lesions (4 patients, 1.7%). Patients
were symptomatic for a mean 91.7months
(range, 10 days to 408 months, SD 94.2 months) before
their visit at our center. For patients with multiple
symptoms, the duration of their earliest symptoms
was used. Twenty-three patients (9.7%) had a family
history of BD, and 72 patients (30.3%) had a family
history of recurrent oral aphthosis.
Rheumatology was the most common specialty of the
referring physicians (91 patients, 38.2%), followed by internal
medicine (63 patients, 26.5%) and ophthalmology
(26 patients, 10.9%). Referring physicians were most
commonly practicing in a non-academic center (87 physicians,
36%).
Table 1 summarizes the frequency of symptoms/signs
on the physical examination, as well as the results of
qualitative laboratory tests, including HLAs. Singleorgan
involvement was present in 114 patients (48%),
followed by two organ systems (51 patients, 21.4%), and
three organ systems (20 patients, 8.4%).
Diagnosis of BD
The ICBD criteria were used to determine a diagnosis of
BD (Table 2). Patients with a score of < 3 were considered
as not having BD. A score of 3 was considered
probable BD, and a score of ≥4 indicated a definitive
diagnosis of BD. Forty patients (16.8%) were diagnosed
with BD, 105 patients (44.1%) had a probable diagnosis,
and BD was ruled out in 93 (39.1%) patients.
The final diagnoses of patients in whom BD was ruled
out are listed in Table 3. It should be noted that in 26
patients in the non-BD group, we did not establish a
specific diagnosis. As these patients were referred for a
second opinion regarding BD, they were not followed to
see whether a subsequent diagnosis was made by the referring
physician.
Post-diagnosis analysis
After applying the ICBD criteria, patients were divided
into two groups for further comparison: those
with a definite diagnosis of Behçet disease (BD, 40
patients), and those in whom BD was ruled out
(Non-BD, 93 patients). There was no significant difference
between the two groups in terms of age, gender,
and ethnicity (all P values > 0.05). The duration
of symptoms was also similar between groups (P =
0.58). In both groups, oral lesions were the most
common reason for referral, and the presenting symptoms
were not significantly different between groups
(P = 0.79).
Patients in the BD group had a significantly higher
prevalence of a family history of BD, 9/40 compared to
5/93 (P < 0.001). They also had a significantly higher
prevalence of a family history of oral aphthosis, 23/40
compared to 20/93 (P < 0.001).
When comparing the specialty of the referring physician,
ophthalmologists were significantly more likely to
refer a patient with the final diagnosis of BD (P < 0.001).
The academic and non-academic practice was not a significant
predictor (P > 0.05). The notable history and
physical examinations of the BD and Non-BD groups, as
well as the results of pertinent lab tests, are summarized
in Table 4. Refer to Table 1 for comparison to the frequencies
within the entire study population.
A positive pathergy test (PPT) is an optional score in
the ICBD criteria, and therefore, might not be performed
by all clinicians. As such, and considering the fact that
we routinely perform a pathergy test for our patients, we
sought to determine how many patients benefited from
the addition of a PPT. Only two patients had a score of
3 prior to the pathergy test, both of whom had oral and
skin lesions only. In these cases, a PPT added the 1 score
needed to establish a BD diagnosis. In the other 38
patients (95%), a diagnosis of BD was made regardless of
the result of the pathergy test.
We also evaluated the performance of the legacy diagnostic
criteria of the International Study Group for Behçet’s disease
(ISG) [7]. The ISG criteria defined Behçet’s disease as
recurrent oral ulceration plus two of the following: recurrent
genital ulcerations, eye lesions, skin lesions, or a positive
pathergy test. When considering the ICBD criteria as the
gold-standard, ISG was only able to detect 26/40 (65%) BD
cases. False negative results all had two criteria, with 10/14
(71%) having oral and ocular lesions, and 4/14 (29%) having
oral and genital ulcers, neither of which is defined as BD
with the ISG criteria.
As seen in Table 4, oral, ocular, and genital lesions, as
well as Erythema nodosum and Pseudofolliculitis were
significant predictors for the presence of BD. The details
of ocular involvement are listed in Table 5.
Multi-system involvement was significantly more common
in BD patients compared to the Non-BD group
(P< 0.001). While 80% of the patients in the BD group
had ≥2 organ systems involvement, compared to only
8.6% of the patients in the Non-BD group.
Discussion
Behçet disease has been a diagnostic dilemma since the
first descriptions of the disease were published. The evolution
of the diagnostic criteria in the last two decades,
which has only been possible with a massive international
collaboration, has led to the birth of ICBD,
which is the most sensitive and specific diagnostic criteria
yet [8]. In this study, we approached this dilemma
from a different perspective. We tried to answer the following
question: when faced with a population of patients
with a high probability of BD, which features
(clinical exam/lab tests) are most predictive of a Behçet
disease diagnosis? To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first study with this novel approach, which was only
made possible by being the single nationally-renowned
referral Behçet clinic in the country.
As expected, oral lesions were the most common reason
for referral, as well as the most prevalent manifestation
in patients finally diagnosed with BD. Oral
aphthosis is the most sensitive symptom of BD, and has
been reported in 90–100% of patients in national reports
[3, 9–12]. However, due to the high prevalence of recurrent
aphthous stomatitis in the general population,
which has been reported as high as 20%, oral lesions are
neither specific nor pathognomonic for BD [1, 13, 14].
As evident in Table 4, oral lesions might not be discriminatory
in cases with a high pretest probability, which in
this study, were the patients referred with a high suspicion
for BD by medical specialists. Letsinger et al. reported
a cohort of 64 patients with complex aphthosis
who were referred to be evaluated for BD [14]. Only 10
patients were diagnosed with BD in that study. Our results
also show a similar pattern, with a high prevalence
of oral aphthosis in patients with and without BD. Additionally,
simple aphthosis was the most common final
diagnosis in patients in whom BD was ruled out. Lichen
planus, isolated ocular lesions, pemphigus, geographic
tongue, and herpes simplex were the other diagnoses in
this cohort, which could be an accurate estimate of the
most common differential diagnoses of BD.
In contrast, genital and ocular lesions were significant
predictors of BD in high-probability patients. Both genital
and ocular manifestations have a heterogeneous
prevalence among studies, with large ethnic and regional
differences [3, 15]. However, they are more specific than
oral lesions. Uveitis is the most common ocular manifestation
in BD [2, 15, 16], which was also the case in
our study. We found that not only ocular lesions in BD
are highly specific in patients evaluated for BD, but also
patients referred by ophthalmologists are significantly
more likely to be diagnosed with BD. The same was not
true for other specialties, even for rheumatology. It
should also be noted that the pattern of the referring
physicians in this study might not be generalizable to
what is practiced worldwide. A significant percentage of
our fellowship graduates have a private practice and are
the main referral source for our BD clinic. In contrast,
the most common pattern in other countries is that BD
patients are referred by dermatologists practicing in the
academic setting.
A positive pathergy test is an optional criterion in the
ICBD, for two main reasons: the test is not part of the
routine care of patients in many countries. Also, there is
no standardized protocol to administer the test, which
decreases its predictive power. That being said, a positive
pathergy test was the most specific diagnostic tool in this
study. While only 45% of the BD patients had a positive
result, none of the Non-BD group showed a positive reaction.
A pathergy test is a part of our routine evaluation
of patients for Behçet disease. We suggest unifying the
protocol for the administration of the pathergy test,
which has been shown to be a highly predictive test.
HLA-B51 is more prevalent in BD than the general
population [17]. Due to low specificity and a variable
prevalence among ethnicities, it is not considered a diagnostic
criterion in the ICBD [6]. However, among BD
patients in this study, a significantly higher percentage
were positive for HLA-B51 than patients in whom BD
was ruled out. This was not the case for HLA-B5 and
HLA-B27. Sixty percent of BD patients in this study
were positive for HLA-B51, while previous studies have
determined a 27% prevalence of an HLA-B51 genotype
in the general population in Iran [3].
This study has some limitations. First, not all patients
suspected of BD are referred to our institution. Patients
with a milder disease might have been managed without
a referral, and we might thus be biased towards more severe
patients with non-typical presentations. Also, patients
from a lower socioeconomic status might have
difficulties in access to health care. Additionally, this was
a retrospective cohort study, and therefore, the followup
of patients in terms of treatment and prognosis was
not done. Therefore, as the manifestations of BD might
be accumulative in time, there is still a possibility that
some patients would later be diagnosed with BD. This
study also has some strengths. This is the first study of a
large national Behçet center to look for the characteristic
of patients referred for evaluation and not only those
with a definite BD diagnosis. Also, all patients were examined
by a multidisciplinary team, and the risk of misdiagnosis
was very low.
Conclusions
To conclude, in a study of 238 patients referred to a national
Behçet clinic, 16.8% of patients were finally diagnosed
with Behçet’s disease. In this cohort of patients,
who presumably had a high probability of Behçet’s disease,
ocular and genital lesions, together with a positive
pathergy test and HLA-B51, are significantly more
prevalent in those who are finally diagnosed with Behçet’s
disease. Also, patients were significantly more likely
to have multi-organ (≥2 organ systems) involvement.
The results of this study could be used by referral Behçet
clinics that face patients with a high probability of Behçet’s
disease and atypical presentations on a daily basis.
Also, the alternative diagnoses established in this study
could be used as the list of the most common differential
diagnoses for Behçet’s disease.
