Background
Retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF) is a rare disease characterized
by the proliferation of fibrous tissue in the retroperitoneum,
most commonly surrounding the aorta from
the renal vessels to the branching of the iliac arteries [1].
The estimated annual incidence is 1.3/100,000, with a
mean age of diagnosis of 64 years and a male to female
ratio > 3:1 [2]. RPF has a number of etiologies, which
include idiopathic, IgG4-related, infectious, malignant,
and drug-induced [1, 3]. However, 75% of cases are of
either idiopathic or IgG4-related disease [1, 3, 4], with
idiopathic cases accounting for approximately 32% of
RPF [4]. The current first-line treatment for idiopathic
RPF (iRPF) is glucocorticoid therapy [1, 3]. Treatment
failure has been found to be as high as 25% [1, 5], while
relapse rates range from 17 to 72% after discontinuation
of treatment [5–7]. DMARDs remain poorly studied [1].
Rituximab has previously been demonstrated as an
effective treatment for IgG4-related disease [8–10]. A
prospective open label clinical trial demonstrated 97%
disease response rate at 6 months post-rituximab therapy
in 30 IgG4-related disease patients, providing strong
evidence that B cell depletion is an effective treatment
for IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) [8]. Although histopathologically
distinct, it is unknown how much pathophysiological
overlap there is between idiopathic
retroperitoneal fibrosis and IgG4-RD, or even whether
many cases of iRPF are in fact IgG4-related but not
meeting histopathologic diagnostic criteria. The effectiveness
of rituximab in IgG4-related disease was the
basis for trialing it in a similar condition.
We assessed the effectiveness of rituximab by quantifying
changes in iRPF diameter on imaging pre- and postrituximab
therapy in 10 iRPF patients as well as response
by lab parameters.
Methods
This study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics
Board at the University of British Columbia. Patient
charts were reviewed from the period of January 2015 to
October 2018 from a single user electronic medical record
(EMR). Patients were identified by radiographic findings
consistent with retroperitoneal fibrosis and a biopsy
consistent with idiopathic RPF. All patients previously
received rituximab treatment, and patients that were
previously treated with prednisone or disease modifying
anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) were included. Patients
with clinical, serologic or pathologic evidence of IgG4-
related disease were excluded. All patients were actively
flaring at the time of treatment. Ten patients were selected
based on these criteria, with 9 retrospective patients
and one prospective patient who was undergoing
rituximab treatment at the time of the study.
Out of the 10 selected patients, all except one patient
who declined biopsy had histopathologic proof of their
idiopathic RPF diagnosis. Tissue samples were obtained
through laparoscopic resection of pathological tissue
surrounding the ureter in all 9 biopsies. The biopsies
were reviewed by one pathologist who specializes in
reviewing RPF cases (MS). Histological confirmation of
disease was defined as cases having dense fibrosis with
variable amounts of inflammation, predominantly mononuclear
(lymphohistiocytic) and/or occasional lymphoid
aggregates. These cases lacked evidence of another etiology,
i.e. no granulomas, no cytologic atypia or other
evidence of malignancy, no overt necrosis, no significant
neutrophilic or eosinophilic inflammation, no vasculitis,
no significant plasma cell component, no significant
storiform fibrosis, no endarteritis or obliterative phlebitis,
and no increase in IgG4 positive plasma cells (as
defined by IgG4 related disease consensus criteria) [11].
All 10 patients were previously treated with 2 doses of
rituximab (1000 mg) approximately 2 weeks apart as part
of their routine care. Pre- and post-therapy contrast
enhanced cross-sectional abdomen and pelvis imaging,
of which 19 were CTs and 1 was an MRI, were compared
by radiology (HA, SC). In all patients, the thickest
portion of the peri-aortic disease was measured in the
axial and coronal planes. The presence of acute and/or
long standing unilateral or bilateral back pressure related
renal findings were also documented (e.g. hydronephrosis,
presence of stents, renal atrophy, and involvement of
ureter, renal vessels, or common iliac vessels). Details of
clinical visits including patient demographics, symptoms,
past treatments, disease duration, biopsies, concurrent
treatments were collected pre- and post-therapy
(Table 1). Pre-treatment laboratory values for IgG4
levels, albumin, creatinine, CRP, WBC, and hematocrit
were also collected. Statistical analysis was performed
using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. A probability of
p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The relationship
between disease duration and response to treatment
was assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation.
Results
The average age of disease onset was 58.5 ± 11.6 years
(Table 1). Eight of 10 patients were male and only 2
were female. The most common symptom at presentation
was flank pain, followed by abdominal pain, nausea;
some patients’ retroperitoneal fibrosis was identified incidentally.
Prior to rituximab, 4 patients were treated
with at least one course of prednisone. Three of the 4
patients who were previously treated with prednisone
continued the treatment concurrently with rituximab.
Three patients were previously on azathioprine 100 mg,
with all 3 developing significant side effects resulting in
discontinuation of this treatment within 5–6 weeks of
commencement.
On those patients where biopsies were available, there
was a varying degree of fibrous thickening and disruption
of the connective tissue. Although, there was a varying
degree of inflammation and some cases with
occasional lymphoid aggregates. As fully described in the
Methods, there were no features of malignancy or infection,
none of the cases met consensus criteria for IgG4-
related disease, and no other apparent etiology (e.g.
sarcoidosis, vasculitis, etc.) was identified.
The GFR increased from 65.3 ± 16.0 to 67.4 ± 16.8, the
creatinine decreased from 105.3 ± 19.8 to 102.4 ± 21.3,
and the CRP decreased from 14.5 (1.7–44.1) to 4.0 (0.9–
15.3) when comparing mean values before to after
therapy, respectively, although none of these results met
statistical significance in this cohort (Fig. 1).
A comparison of pre and post-rituximab imaging studies
were available in 10 patients and revealed statistically
significant improvements in iRPF diameter following
treatment with rituximab on imaging in the axial and coronal
planes (Table 2). The RPF diameter around the aorta
before and after therapy decreased from a mean of 16.1 ±
4.6mm to 10.4 ± 6.2mm, respectively (p < 0.01), as shown
in Fig. 1. The craniocaudal iRPF mean length decreased
from 108.6mm± 40.4mm to 90.6mm± 45.9mm (p =
0.02). Figure 2 demonstrates marked improvement on
comparison of pre and post-imaging of one patient. All
pre and post-treatment imaging were CTs, with the exception
of one post-treatment MRI. Pre-treatment imaging
was done, on average, 6.5 months (mean) prior to rituximab
therapy, and post-treatment imaging was completed
5 months (mean) after treatment.
Pre-rituximab, 7 of 10 patients had renal hydronephrosis
on imaging, while 4 out of 10 patients had
hydronephrosis post-treatment (p = 0.37). Five of 10 patients
had unilateral renal atrophy on initial imaging and
6 of 10 patients had atrophy on post-rituximab imaging.
The number of patients with renal stents increased from
1 out of 10 to 4 out of 10 post-therapy (p = 0.3). All 10
patients had ureter involvement before and after rituximab,
with unilateral involvement increasing from 3 patients
to 5 patients, and bilateral ureter involvement
decreasing from 6 patients to 5 patients. Renal vessel involvement
remained similar pre and post-rituximab,
with 3 out of 10 patients showing involvement on imaging.
Similarly, common iliac vessel involvement was
present in all 10 patients both pre and post-treatment,
although 1 patient who initially had bilateral iliac vessel
involvement had only 1 sided involvement postrituximab.
Infrarenal IVC involvement was present in all
10 patients pre-treatment, and 9 patients post-treatment.
There was a moderate correlation between greater percent
reduction of RPF in the axial plane and shorter
disease duration prior to treatment with rituximab
(Spearman’s coefficient = 0.58), and a weak correlation
between greater percent reduction of RPF in the craniocaudal
plane and shorter disease duration prior to rituximab
(Spearman’s coefficient = 0.25).
Symptomatically, 5 of the 8 symptomatic patients reported
some improvement in symptoms. Three of the 4
patients who initially presented with flank pain reported
at least some improvement in symptoms.
Eight patients tolerated the rituximab infusion without
any side effects. One patient developed hives despite
administration of diphenhydramine and was unable to
complete the first infusion. He was later able to
complete both infusions utilizing a lower infusion rate
and different pre-medicines. One other patient developed
throat irritation and rhinorrhea at their second
round of rituximab infusions but was able to finish the
infusion following administration of diphenhydramine.
Discussion
In summary, idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis, as distinguished
from histopathologically documented IgG4-
related retroperitoneal fibrosis, appears to have a similar
response to rituximab treatment. There was a nonstatistically
significant improvement in the CRP, GFR,
and creatinine values post-therapy, potentially attributable
to such a small sample size. When comparing iRPF
diameter on imaging pre and post-rituximab, there was
a statistically significant reduction in both axial and coronal
planes. It is unknown how the efficacy of rituximab
compares to prednisone alone, DMARDs or placebo in
this observational case series.
A more recent study of rituximab therapy in RPF
looked at 26 patients, 7 of whom were diagnosed with
iRPF [12]. The remaining 19 patients had IgG4-RD.
Treatment response was defined as either improvement
in RPF symptoms, shrinkage of RPF on imaging, or resolution
of laboratory markers (IgG4, CRP or ESR). On
post-treatment imaging, 21 of the 25 patients (84%) had
treatment response, as defined by improvement in RPF
size in at least 2 imaging planes. This study, however,
chose not to delineate improvement in the iRPF patient
population from those with IgG4-RD. Another recent
study by Urban et. al. [13] looked at 20 iRPF patients
with relapsing/refractory disease or with contraindications
to glucocorticoids, of which 8 patients were biopsy
proven. At 6 months following treatment with rituximab,
a significant reduction in periaortic and peri-iliac
thickness, and CRP was found. These findings are consistent
with those of our study, although our CRP reduction
did not reach statistical significance, likely due to a
small sample size. This study also found a statistically
significant reduction in ureteral involvement. In our
study, pre and post-rituximab imaging was used to determine
the number of patients with ureter involvement,
vessel involvement, and renal stents. The pre-treatment
imaging was often done months prior to start of treatment,
and therefore may not have accurately reflected
the true ureter and vessel involvement prior to
treatment. On chart review, it was found that the patients
had less ureteral stents following rituximab (3 unilateral,
1 bilateral) than prior to treatment (2 unilateral,
2 bilateral), which suggests that the imaging data likely
overestimated the progression of ureter involvement
despite treatment with rituximab.
We noted several interesting trends in our study. Firstly,
there was one patient who was previously treated with steroids
and still benefitted from rituximab therapy, with further
improvement seen on imaging post-treatment. It was
also noted that 3 patients were on concurrent prednisone
at time of RTX treatment. Two of these patients had the
best radiological response post-RTX, with 1 achieving
complete resolution on imaging, while the other improved
by over 50% when reviewing maximal aortic thickness on
post-treatment imaging. The third patient on concurrent
steroids, who had been successfully treated with steroids
in the past, had a less impressive improvement in RPF
thickness, of approximately 18%.
Based on this study, there appears to be a role for
rituximab in treating idiopathic RPF. While there were
statistically significant changes in disease on imaging
post-treatment, the clinical improvement of patients was
more difficult to assess. Although patients seemed to
have some improvement based on clinical records, it is
our suspicion that RPF may cause lumbosacral plexus
nerve damage given the proximity of those nerves that
may result in chronic pain. More studies are needed to
assess patients’ long-term outcomes.
This study focused on rituximab as a treatment for idiopathic
RPF and did not explore the efficacy of disease
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) in treating this
condition. There is likely a role for DMARDs in idiopathic
RPF, but this is yet to be established through further
research. One strength of rituximab that was noted in this
study was its favorable side effect profile. Only two
patients had an allergic reaction during their infusion, but
this was quickly mitigated with diphenhydramine and
both patients were able to complete treatment. The
patient who developed a more severe reaction initially
took prednisone 50 mg orally in the evening prior to the
first infusion. During the infusion, the patient received
diphenhydramine 50 mg IV over 2–3 minutes followed by
hydrocortisone 100 mg IV to mitigate the allergic reaction.
Prior to the second infusion, this patient took the
prednisone 50 mg orally in the morning prior to infusion
and was then able to tolerate the infusion well.
There were several limitations to this study. As RPF is
a fairly rare condition, the study was only able to include
10 patients who met iRPF criteria. Patients were ruled
out to have IgG4-related disease using the histopathological
classification by Deshpande et. al. [11]. Since the
writing of this manuscript, new consensus guidelines
have been published [14]. As a retrospective study, there
was no opportunity to have a control group of iRPF
patients. Future research comparing iRPF patients on
prednisone to patients treated with rituximab would provide
valuable information on the efficacy of rituximab in
comparison to the current standard first-line treatment.
There was variation in disease duration prior to treatment
as well as previous therapies that were trialed prior to
rituximab. In addition, this study included patients who
were previously treated with prednisone, as well as
patients on concurrent prednisone. Therefore, the effects
of prednisone versus rituximab are not fully clear. Again,
future studies that include comparison of prednisone to
rituximab are needed to further understand the roles of
prednisone and rituximab in treating iRPF.
Some questions about rituximab in iRPF still remain.
At this time, it is unclear how long to continue treatment
with rituximab for iRPF patients who have seen
benefit from treatment and when the medication can be
stopped. The most feared complication of untreated
retroperitoneal fibrosis is end stage renal disease [11].
Re-treatment should be considered with the goal of preventing
persistent hydronephrosis and reflux nephropathy.
Although stenting and ureterolysis are utilized to
treat hydronephrosis, the added role of medical therapy
is not known at this time.
There are several strengths to this study. This study
specifically selected for idiopathic RPF patients, with
most having biopsies showing no evidence of any other
etiology. As far as we are aware, this is the largest study
to date of rituximab in an iRPF population. The primary
outcome, improvement of disease by imaging as an
objective measure of disease progression, showed a
significant response to rituximab.
Conclusion
Given the older patient population in iRPF, rituximab
may be a steroid-sparing alternative in this glucocorticoid
sensitive patient population. Rituximab may also
have added treatment benefit for patients who have
already been treated with steroids. However, many questions
remain, and more studies are needed to establish
this medication’s role in treating idiopathic RPF.