Background
The concept of mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD)
as a unique connective tissue disease has persisted for almost
50 years. MCTD was first described by Sharp et al.
in 1972 [1]. Shortly thereafter, the initial reports of juvenile
onset MCTD (jMCTD) emerged [2, 3]. MCTD
and jMCTD are characterized by overlapping features of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), polymyositis (PM)
and dermatomyositis (DM), and systemic sclerosis (SSc)
with high titers of antibodies targeting the U1 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein particle (U1snRNP) in the peripheral
blood. Subsequently, it was found that MCTD
patients can also have rheumatoid arthritis (RA) manifestations
with a similar inflammatory arthritis pattern
(Fig. 1) [4]. A juvenile presentation, defined as disease
onset prior to the age of 16, occurs in 7–23% of all
MCTD cases [5, 6]. The female: male ratio in jMCTD is
6:1 [7].
The etiology of MCTD and jMCTD, like other systemic
autoimmune rheumatic diseases, is unclear.
Current models support a hypothesis involving chronic
immune activation after exposure to an environmental
or exogenous trigger in individuals with a predisposing
genetic background. Certain major histocompatibility
complex (HLA) genes have an important role in the
presentation of antigens to the immune system. Specifically,
HLA-DR4, HLA-DRw53, HLA-DRB1*04:01 and
HLA-B*08 have all been found to play a role in the creation
of anti-U1snRNP antibodies and ultimately the
clinical manifestations of the disease [8–10].
The classification of MCTD that seems dependent on
this single serological finding has fostered doubts that
MCTD is in fact a unique disease entity [11, 12]. Some
researchers theorize that MCTD represents instead an
overlap syndrome or an early and unspecific phase of
another defined connective tissue disease. However, the
concept of MCTD as a defined entity is supported by
the existence of a specific and repeated clinical pattern,
a characteristic antibody, and associated specific immunological
and genetic findings [13]. This pattern and
the risk for similar end-organ disease manifestations appears
similar in jMCTD and MCTD [14, 15].
MCTD definition further suffers from a lack of consensus
regarding disease classification criteria. Multiple
sets of classification criteria for MCTD have been published,
including: Sharp [16], Kasukawa et al. [17], Alercón-
Segovia and Villareal [18] and Kahn and Appeboom
[19]. Regardless of their variability, the criterion common
to all is the detection of anti-U1 RNP antibodies. In
jMCTD, Kasukawa criteria are used most frequently in
published series (Table 1) [20]. It is important to
emphasize that all of these models constructed classification
criteria for MCTD and not jMCTD.
Perhaps the best attempt to describe jMCTD is as an
undifferentiated connective tissue disease represented
mostly by Raynaud’s phenomenon and anti-U1snRNP
antibodies. The most commonly described symptoms of
jMCTD are Raynaud’s phenomenon, polyarthritis or
polyarthralgia, myositis, sclerodactyly, edema of the
hands and fingers, and esophageal dysmotility. The most
common disease characteristics in jMCTD are summarized
in Table 2 [7].
There are no treatments available specific to MCTD.
According to the first descriptions of the disease, MCTD
patients were characterized by an excellent response to
glucocorticoid treatment and a favorable prognosis [4].
However, therapy needs to be individualized and
adapted according to the severity of the manifestations
at the time of presentation and organ involvement.
As stated, Raynaud’s phenomenon, which can be primary
(idiopathic) or secondary, is a major clinical feature
of MCTD and jMCTD. Nailfold videocapillaroscopy is a
non-invasive, inexpensive, and reproducible imaging
method allowing the evaluation of structural changes in
the peripheral microcirculation that can be associated
with Raynaud’s phenomenon. The most important indications
for performing capillaroscopy include determining
primary versus secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon,
as well as assessment and diagnosis of scleroderma
spectrum disorders. Nailfold capillaroscopy findings are
usually classified as normal, non-specific, or
scleroderma-like (SSc-like) [21]. In MCTD, Raynaud’s
phenomenon may precede the development of additional
symptoms and so capillaroscopy provides an ideal opportunity
to diagnose the earliest stages of damage to
the microcirculation.
In this case report we present a patient diagnosed with
MCTD in whom capillaroscopic findings at diagnosis revealed
SSc-like capillaroscopic disease manifestations.
Case presentation
At the age of 13 our Caucasian male patient, a competitive
baseball player, living with his biological parents and
siblings, suffered the progressive onset of right shoulder,
arm, and hand pain. Although, there was no preceding
trauma, since he was a baseball pitcher, he visited various
medical providers with the understanding that this
was secondary to a baseball related injury. He underwent
6 months of physical therapy, yet the shoulder pain only
progressed. He was not referred to rheumatology. Three
years later, with persistent and progressive symptoms,
the patient presented again to the medical system with
persistent pain, redness, and swelling of his right elbow
and right hand. However, by now the symptoms had also
progressed to include pain, swelling and stiffness, especially
in the morning, of the bilateral fingers, hands, elbows,
shoulders, hips, knees, and ankles.
He was referred to our adolescent rheumatology clinic
in December 2018 for assessment of these symptoms.
He was at the time of our first assessment,16-years-old,
66 kg, 182 cm (BMI 20 kg/m2). Following specific inquiry
and review of systems, he also endorsed long-standing
difficulty with gastrointestinal symptoms (including certain
food intolerances, abdominal pain and cramping,
diarrhea, rare nausea and occasional dysphagia) for
which previous providers had diagnosed him with irritable
bowel syndrome. In addition, the patient confirmed
symptoms of Raynaud’s phenomenon that included triphasic
color changes with associated pain of years duration.
On examination, he had normal vital signs for his
age and inflammatory arthritis. Specifically, he had a reduced
and painful jaw excursion; pain on motion in the
right shoulder; arthritis with reduced range of motion in
the right elbow; bilateral swollen hands with arthritis of
the bilateral wrists, multiple bilateral metacarpalphalangeal
joints, multiple bilateral proximal interphalangeal
joints, bilateral knees, and bilateral ankles; and
tenderness without obvious inflammation in the bilateral
feet and metatarsal phalangeal joints. His skin exam, excluding
capillaroscopy described below, was normal
without any digital pits or ulcers and without rash, skin
tightening, nodules, calcinosis, or mucosal ulceration.
Muscle strength was normal. The remainder of his
examination including cardiopulmonary and gastrointestinal
systems was normal.
His nailfold video-capillaroscopy revealed an ‘active’
scleroderma pattern (Fig. 2). Nailfold video-
capillaroscopy was performed in a quiet, temperaturecontrolled
room (22–24 °C) according to previously published
expert recommendations [22]. The nailfolds of the
bilateral second, third, fourth, and fifth fingers were
examined and analyzed by our investigator (MR) who
was blinded to the results of biologic and radiologic assessments.
Nailfold examination and analysis was performed
using optical probe videocapillaroscopy
equipped with a 200x magnification contact lens and
connected to image analysis software (Inspectis AB,
Solna, Sweden).
Serologic analysis included an elevated anti-nuclear
antibody (ANA) and anti-U1-snRNP antibody with an
otherwise negative result for other extractable nuclear
antigen and other clinically relevant antibodies (Table 3).
Complement was normal. Inflammatory markers were
only mildly elevated. CBC with full differential and
metabolic panel were normal. Urine analysis was bland
without protein, red blood cells, white blood cells, or
casts. Radiographs of the chest, bilateral feet, and bilateral
hands were normal with normal bone density and preserved
joint spaces. Radiographs of bilateral knees were
with small to moderate effusions but otherwise normal.
Infectious disease screening including HIV, hepatitis B,
hepatitis C, and tuberculosis was negative. He was diagnosed
with MCTD, with presumed juvenile onset given
the duration of his undiagnosed symptoms [23].
He was started on subcutaneous methotrexate with folic
acid (increased over several weeks to 25mg subcutaneously
given weekly), hydroxychloroquine 300 mg daily (5
mg/kg/day) and oral glucocorticoids 20 mg daily. He had
rapid symptomatic improvement. High-resolution computed
tomography (CT) scan of the chest, complete transthoracic
echocardiogram (TTE), and pulmonary function
tests (PFT) over the next 8 weeks were normal.
Ophthalmological examination was normal. Oral glucocorticoids
were slowly tapered, at intervals of 5 mg every
few weeks, and he was completely weaned by early April
of 2019. As of September 2019, despite apparent medical
compliance, he was developing refractory arthritis similar
to his original presentation, mild muscle ache with a normal
creatinine kinase, worsening Raynaud’s phenomenon,
and unchanged capillaroscopy abnormalities. His therapy
was escalated to include abatacept (125 mg subcutaneously
given weekly) and extended release nifedipine (30
mg daily). These agents were chosen to target his ongoing
active synovitis and Raynaud’s phenomenon. While tumor
necrosis factor a inhibition (TNFi) was considered, given
the possibility of systemic lupus erythematosus features in
MCTD, we did not want to risk drug-induced lupus symptoms
from a TNFi therapy. Pulmonary function tests and
echocardiogram have not yet been repeated. To date he
has developed no additional signs or symptoms. There
have been no additional changes in routine laboratory
monitoring.
Discussion and conclusions
There is no international consensus on how, when, and in
whom MCTD should be diagnosed as there is no current
consensus regarding the disease classification criteria.
Generally, the classification of rheumatic diseases is quite
challenging because of protean and frequently overlapping
clinical and laboratory manifestations [24, 25]. The purpose
of classification criteria, of course, are to identify patients
with a similar clinical entity for research, and
classification criteria are not synonymous with diagnostic
criteria. Additionally, although classification criteria will
usually mirror those used clinically for diagnosis, classification
criteria are generally more standardized, less inclusive,
and thus less sensitive compared to clinical diagnosis
[26, 27]. In the absence of a single diagnostic test that can
define or confirm MCTD, four sets of classification criteria
have been developed [16–19]. There has been no evidencebased
or cultural consensus on a single accepted classification
criterion for MCTD and so all should be considered
[27]. Similarities between the criterion include that MCTD
is likely in an anti-U1snRNP-positive patient presenting
with Raynaud’s phenomenon and diffuse hand edema
(“puffy hands”) with at least two of the following features:
arthritis, myositis, leukopenia, esophageal dysmotility,
pleuritis, pericarditis, interstitial lung disease or pulmonary
hypertension. Raynaud’s phenomenon may precede the development
of additional symptoms of MCTD and Raynaud’s
phenomenon with “swollen” or” puffy” fingers or
hands is a key clinical criteria in all recent classification criteria
(Table 4) [16–19]. Recent study indicates that the classification
criteria of Kasukawa et al. are the most sensitive
(75%) compared to those of Alarcon-Segovia and Villarreal’s
(73%) and Sharp’s (42%) in classification of patients
with MCTD, throughout disease progression [28].
In a systemic disease in which vascular damage is one
of the pathogenetic factors, abnormalities in capillary
morphology should be observed long before the onset of
clinical symptoms. In patients already diagnosed with a
vasculopathic systemic disease, damage to the capillaries
may reflect the involvement of internal organs and help
determine the stage of the disease [29]. A long history of
Raynaud’s phenomenon is usually reported in MCTD
patients, even prior to diagnosis, and Raynaud’s
phenomenon is often the only, or one of few, MCTD
symptoms at the time of suspected diagnosis [5].
Notably, capillaroscopy has been included in the updated
2013 American College of Rheumatology/ European
League Against Rheumatism (ACR/EULAR)
classification criteria for SSc (a disease with phenotypic
overlap to MCTD and a similarly understood vascular
pathology and microangiopathy) and is considered a key
investigative tool in the early phase of the disease [30,
31]. In 95% of SSc patients, peripheral microangiopathy
follows a typical scleroderma pattern, consisting of ‘early’
(combination of few enlarged/giant capillaries, few capillary
microhemorrhages, a relatively well-preserved capillary
distribution, and no evident loss of capillaries);
‘active’ (frequent giant capillaries, frequent capillary
microhemorrhages, moderate loss of capillaries, mild
disorganization of the capillary architecture, and absent
or mild ramified capillaries);and ‘late’ (few or absent
giant capillaries and microhemorrhages, severe loss of
capillaries with large avascular areas, and presence of
neoangiogenesis defined by irregular enlargement of the
capillaries, disorganization of the normal capillary array,
and ramified/bushy capillaries) phases [32].
MCTD similarly seems to have a pattern of microangiopathy.
Granier et al. reported a scleroderma-like pattern
in 64% of MCTD patients, with bushy capillaries as
a dominant feature [33]. Giant capillaries are another
dominant feature observed in 54% of MCTD patients
[34]. The sensitivity of giant capillaries’ presence, one of
the most characteristic capillaroscopic findings, has been
estimated to be 56% for MCTD [35]. In a recent study, a
plurality (44%) of MCTD patients have demonstrated an
‘early’ scleroderma pattern on capillaroscopy [36]. Another
study found that the ‘early’ pattern was associated
with a positive anti-RNP antibody [37]. Interestingly,
MCTD might have a differing underlying microvascular
pathophysiology with less avascular areas or capillary
drop-out compared to patients with SSc [37]. In a large
prospective study with 3029 patients with primary Raynaud’s
phenomenon (mean follow up period of 4.8 years)
a scleroderma-like pattern was also significantly associated
with the development of MCTD, and the number
of MCTD patients with the scleroderma pattern on
capillaroscopy increased over time [38, 39]. Additionally,
recent study has shown that giant capillaries, as seen in
our patient, might be a promising marker for interstitial
lung disease in MCTD patients, especially among those
with a short disease duration [40]. This is particularly interesting
as it could suggest peculiarities of MCTD related
pulmonary disease that point to an independent
disease pattern.
Similar to MCTD, jMCTD is usually described as beginning
with polyarthritis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, hand
edema (“puffy hands”), and sclerodactyly. Later in the
disease course, jMCTD clinical manifestations can include
esophageal dysmotility, nervous system manifestations,
pulmonary hypertension, and interstitial lung
disease [7]. Typical findings of systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) and PM or DM-like features are more evident
at the time of diagnosis in jMCTD compared to MCTD,
and several studies have confirmed that SLE-like features
are more common among jMCTD patients compared to
adult onset disease [6, 7, 41, 42]. The frequency of these
manifestations however decreases during the course of the
disease, giving way to the prevalence of SSc-like manifestations.
Furthermore, jMCTD patients with SSc-like features
seem to have a higher mortality in the case of
internal organ involvement, and SSc-like changes may appear
as long as 10 years after the initial diagnosis of
jMCTD. Hetlevik et al. reported that all patients with
jMCTD had Raynaud’s phenomenon early in the disease
course, and that 94% had this clinical manifestation during
the mean follow-up period of 16.2 years [41]. In this study
the most common disease manifestations were Raynaud’s
phenomenon (100%), arthritis (94%), puffy hands (77%)
and pulmonary manifestations (58%). In a French cohort
of 19 jMCTD patients, with a mean follow-up of 3.2 years,
the most common disease manifestations were: arthritis
(100%), Raynaud’s phenomenon (84%), pulmonary manifestations
(47%) and sclerodactyly (42%). In more than half
of these jMCTD patients with Raynaud’s phenomenon
pathological nailfold capillaroscopic findings have been
demonstrated (enlarged capillary loops, loss of capillary
loops with avascular areas and neoformation of capillaries)
[43]. Overall, more than half of patients with MCTD and
jMCTD demonstrate a ‘scleroderma pattern’ on nailfold
capillaroscopy, and this has been reported to be associated
with the development of internal organ complications.
Specifically, scleroderma-like abnormalities in MCTD
often (76% of patients) accompany interstitial lung disease
(ILD) [44].
Consistent with this described presentation, our patient
presented to our adolescent rheumatology clinic with previously
unrecognized Raynaud’s phenomenon and subsequent
nailfold video-capillaroscopy which confirmed an ‘active’ SSc
pattern. This has guided and informed his work-up and will
continue to do so moving forward. Nailfold capillary changes
in MCTD and jMCTD seem to be an early identifiable and
dynamic process that could predict end-organ disease
manifestations. Hence, we argue that nailfold videocapillaroscopy,
which is the gold standard for detection of
microvascular abnormalities and already a critical component
of the systemic sclerosis classification criteria, should be
considered as an early screening tool for the detection of microangiopathy
in patients with the diagnosis of MCTD and
jMCTD. Additionally, given its prevalence in this population
at disease diagnosis, we recommend consideration be given
to nailfold video-capillarscopy as a potential classification criterion
for jMCTD and MCTD in the future.
In summary, based upon the existing research in this
area, and as outlined in our above case, we propose that
nailfold video capillaroscopy be included in the early assessment
of all patients with MCTD and jMCTD. It
should be considered in future classification criteria, as a
screen for early detection of disease, and as part of routine
follow-up for patients diagnosed with or who
present with suspicion for MCTD and jMCTD.