Background
ANCA (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody) associated
vasculitides (AAV) is characterized by an autoimmune
small vessel inflammation [1] and autoantibodies, ANCA.
AAV can be divided into three clinical diagnoses: eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (GPA) and microscopic polyangiitis
(MPA).
The antigens of the autoantibodies are proteinase 3
and myeloperoxidase, that primarily are found in
primary granules in neutrophils and peroxidase positive
lysosomes in monocytes. Both monocytes and neutrophils
are frequently found around the inflamed vessel
walls and are thought to be the main effector cells.
Primed neutrophils in AAV patients can be stimulated
by ANCA through binding to membrane bound PR3 or
MPO and in response to this they produce reactive oxygen
species (ROS), de-granulates and form neutrophil
extracellular traps (NETs). However, it is not known why
ANCA is formed or what primes PMNs in vivo. Since
eosinophils express PR3 [2] and eosinophil peroxidase
(high structural homology to MPO) on their surface,
ANCA might bind and activate also this cell type.
Eosinophils have for a long time been considered as
nonspecific cytotoxic cells playing a role in parasitic infections
and allergy. However, during the last couple of
years a more complex view has evolved, stating eosinophils
as multifunctional cells with for instance immunoregulatory
properties [3]. At baseline, eosinophils are
present in several tissues, as bone marrow, adipose tissue
and gastrointestinal tract [4]. They contain more than 30
different pre-synthesized and stored proteins in their
cytoplasmic granule and express receptors for proinflammatory
cytokines, chemokines, lipid mediators,
complement factors and immunoglobulins [5, 6]. Eosinophils
could also selectively suppress Th1 cells via a constitutive
expression of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, an
enzyme important for tryptophan catabolism [7] and
they have proven to be essential for the survival of
plasma cells by supplying necessary cytokines into the
plasma cell niches [8].
Extracellular DNA traps formation was first described
in neutrophils but is now considered as a common
mechanism for the innate immune system. A main difference
between NETs and EETs (Eosinophil Extracellular
DNA Traps) is the association of intact granules to
DNA in EETs [9]. Moreover, viable eosinophils can form
EETs by releasing mitochondrial DNA and granule derived
proteins [10].
We hypothesize that eosinophils are hyper reactive in
situations of chronic inflammation, e.g. AAV, and can
rapidly be recruited to tissues by for example innate
lymphoid cell in response to microbes or other triggers.
The activated eosinophil will accentuate the inflammation
by releasing cyto- and chemokines, ROS production,
deposition of free granules and EET formation.
Moreover, neutrophils, monocytes and cells within the
adaptive immune system will be recruited and give rise
to additional tissue damage and pathology.
EGPA is characterized by eosinophilia and necrotizing
eosinophil inflammation but very little is known about
the role of eosinophils in GPA and MPA. Hence, the
aims of this study are to characterize eosinophils from
GPA and MPA patients, in regard to function and activation
in order to understand their role in the disease.
Methods
Patients and controls
Non-dialysis dependent patients with MPA and GPA
were recruited to the study at their scheduled visit at the
outpatient clinics of Nephrology or Rheumatology,
Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. The diagnosis
was determined using to the method described by Watts
et al. [11]. 98 GPA and MPA patients were included in
the study: 74 patients with GPA, and 24 patients with
MPA. Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score version 3
(BVAS3) [12] was used to assess disease activity. Clinical
characteristics are presented in Table 1. ANCA levels
and specificity was performed with ELISA at Wieslab
AB, Malmö, Sweden. One hundred twenty-one controls,
ages 21 to 72, were collected from healthy blood donors
at the Blood center in Lund and from healthy volunteers.
The Regional Ethics Board in Lund, Sweden (LU) approved
the study and written informed consent was obtained
from all participants.
Flow cytometry
The expression of selected surface markers on phagocytes
was analyzed using flow cytometry. Briefly, heparinized
peripheral blood (4-6 mL) was lysed, by adding 45 mL
0.84% ammonium chloride and incubated for 10min. The
lysed blood was centrifuged for 10 min at 250 g. The cells
were washed once with PBS and after centrifugation resuspended
in 100 μl PBS with 0.5% BSA. The cells were
divided into two tubes and incubated for 20 min with antibody
mix 1 and 2 respectively (Mix 1: CD10-PECy7,
CD14-V500, CD16-APC-H7, CD88-PE, CD49d-APC,
CD62L-FITC, CD11b-v450, CD11C-PerCPCy5.5 and Mix
2: CD10-PECy7, CD14-PerCPCy5.5, CD16-APC-H7,
CD35-FITC, CD49D-APC, CD64-v450, CD193-v500,
Siglec-8-PE. All antibodies were from BD Biosciences except
CD11c and Siglec-8 that were purchased from BioLegend.
The cells were then washed by adding 3mL PBS
and centrifuged for 3 min at 250 g and resuspended in
25 μL PBS and analyzed using a FACSCanto II and the
DIVA software (Becton Dickinson Biosciences, New York,
USA). Doublet cells were excluded by plotting FSC height
against FSC area and the single cells were divided into
monocytes, lymphocytes and granulocytes based on FSC
and SSC plots. CD14 positive cells were excluded from
the granulocytes and eosinophils were selected as CD16−/
CD10− and CD49d+, Siglec-8+
and/or CD193+ cells.
30,000 events in the granulocyte gate were recorded. Surface
expression were measured as mean fluorescence intensity
(MFI) by calculating the geographic mean for the
respective peak.
Oxidative burst
Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in peripheral
blood eosinophils was investigated using the PhagoBurst
assay, (Glycotope Biotechnology, GmBH, Germany), according
to the manufacturer’s protocol, after ex vivo activation
with phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) or
opsonized E. coli. After the fixation of the cells, they were
labelled by a Siglec-8-PE antibody (BioLegend) and
analyzed by flow cytometry. At least 15.000 PMN were
collected based on forward and side scatter properties.
Eosinophils were defined as Siglec-8+ granulocytes
(Additional file 1). After fixation and lysing (according to
the manufacturer’s protocol), it was possible to select
eosinophils also by their forward and side scatter properties.
No patient with ROS deficiency was observed.
Isolation of blood eosinophils and neutrophils and
detection of extracellular DNA traps
Eosinophils and neutrophils were purified from peripheral
blood collected in EDTA tubes for ETosis experiments.
The cells were isolated using Histopaque 1119
(Sigma) followed by Percoll (GE Healthcare) gradient
following the manufacturers protocols [13]. The eosinophils
were thereafter separated from the granulocytes
using MACS Eosinophil Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotech)
according to manufacturer’s instruction. The cells that
were removed during the eosinophil purification step
were regarded as neutrophils. Viability at isolation was
determined with Trypan blue. Cytospin preparations
stained with May-Grünwald Giemsa were used to determine
the cell purity. (Additional file 2A and B). The
purified neutrophils and eosinophils were used to measure
NET/EET production after stimulation with PBS,
TNFα, C5a and PMA (see below).
100 μL of purified eosinophils or neutrophils at a concentration
of 1 × 106 /mL in 0.5%HSA/RPMI were
seeded on Poly-L-lysin treated coverslips (Sigma). Neutrophils
and eosinophils from healthy controls (n = 7)
were stimulated with PBS, C5a (150 ng/mL), TNFα (5
ng/mL) or PMA (25 ng/mL) for 180 min at 37 °C and 5%
CO2. The cells were fixed with 2% PFA (BD Cytofix, BD
Biosciences) for 10 min at room temperature. The coverslips
were carefully washed three times with washing
buffer (3% BSA in PBS) before the cells were permeabilized
for 5 min (PBS containing 3% goat serum, 3%
cold water fish gelatin, 1% BSA, 0,05% Tween20, 0,5%
TritonX100) at room temperature. The coverslips were
then washed carefully three times with washing buffer.
To block unspecific binding coverslips were incubated
for 30 min (PBS containing 3% goat serum, 3% cold
water fish gelatin, 1% BSA, and 0,05% Tween) at room
temperature and then washed twice with washing buffer.
The cells were incubated with an anti-nucleosome-Alexa
594 (final concentration 5μg/ml, (B6.SLE-1) a kind gift
from Anders Bengtsson, Lund University, labelled using
Alexa Flour 594 Antibody Labeling Kit from Molecular
Probes) for 1 h, 37 °C 5% CO2, and then washed three
times with washing buffer. Finally, the coverslips were removed
from the wells and mounted on slides with mounting
medium (Prolong Gold antifade reagent with DAPI,
Molecular Probes) and stored in dark at 4 °C until analysis.
The slides were analyzed using a Zeiss AX10 fluorescence
microscopy. Five representative photographs were taken
from each slide and the percentage of cells that had released
NETs/EETs were calculated by two independent
persons.
Isolation and stimulation of blood eosinophils for EET
analysis after ANCA stimulation
To investigate if ANCA can stimulate eosinophils to
produce EET we purified eosinophils using the MACSXpress
® Eosinophil Isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotech) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. By using this kit,
the eosinophils can be isolated without the density centrifugation
steps and resulted in less pre-activation of
the eosinophils. Briefly, erythrocytes are aggregated and
sedimented, while non-targeted cells are removed by
immunomagnetic depletion. The eosinophils remain in
the supernatant and are carefully collected into another
tube. Viability at isolation was determined with Trypan
blue. Cytospin preparations stained with May-Grünwald
Giemsa were used to determine the cell purity. (Additional
file 2C).
The eosinophils from five healthy controls and five
GPA or MPA patients were seeded on coverslips as described
above. As the number of eosinophils were limited,
especially in samples taken from patients, we chose
C5a over TNFα to prime the eosinophils prior to IgG
stimulation. The eosinophils were primed for 15 min
with PBS or C5a (150 ng/mL) at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
After priming, the eosinophils were stimulated by
addition of purified IgG from ANCA positive patients
(250μg/mL) (one MPO-ANCA and one PR3-ANCA),
purified IgG from a healthy control (250μg/mL), PBS
(negative control) and PMA (positive control – PMA
was not used in combination with C5a) and incubated
for 180 min at 37 °C and 5% CO2. After the incubation
the glass were treated as described above.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed on GraphPad Prism
8.0 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).
Correlations were determined by Spearman’s correlation
test and linear regression analysis. Mann-Whitney U-test
was used for two group comparisons. Kruskal-Wallis and
Dunn’s multiple comparisons test for three or more
groups. When comparing NET and EET from the same
donor Wicoxon matched-pair signed rank test was used.
All p-values were considered significant at p < 0.05.
Results
AAV patients have decreased numbers of eosinophils
Ninety-eight patients with GPA (n = 74, 76%) and MPA
(n = 24, 24%) were included in the study and clinical and
demographic data at time of sampling are shown in
Table 1. Most patients were PR3-ANCA positive (n = 62,
63%), 30 patients were MPO-ANCA positive (30%)
and five were ANCA negative. ANCA specificity from
one patient was missing and one was double positive.
The majority of the patients were in remission (n =
76). Twenty-two patients had an active disease, with a
median activity score according to the BVAS3 of 5
(range 1 to 16).
The frequencies of neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils
were measured in peripheral blood of patients and
controls by flow cytometry. In line with our previous results
[14], the patients have increased percentage of
PMNs in peripheral blood (p < 0.0001), represented by
an increased percentage of neutrophils (p = 0.0037,
Fig. 1) In addition we observed a decreased percentage
of eosinophils compared with healthy controls (p <
0.0001). No difference was observed in the percentage of
basophils (p = 0.06). Since there were no white blood cell
counts available for the healthy controls, we are not able
to compare absolute numbers. Corticosteroid treatment
has been reported to affect the number of eosinophils in
peripheral blood and we saw a weak but significant correlation
between corticosteroid treatment, prednisone in
all of our cases, and the absolute number of eosinophils
(r2 = 0.088, p = 0.008) (Fig. 2a). However, the
decreased levels of eosinophils could not completely
be explained by corticosteroid treatment as no correlation
was found in the group with active disease
(r2 = 0.077, p = 0.27) (Fig. 2b) and no significant difference
of the percentage of eosinophils was observed
between patients with active disease with or without
corticosteroid treatment (p = 0.5728). When dividing
all patients into 3 groups based on corticosteroid
dose (0, > 0 to 5, and > 5 mg/day) the only difference
found was between the group without corticosteroids
and the group with a daily dose above 5 mg (Fig. 2c).
To see if disease activity or diagnosis influenced the frequencies
the patients were divided into active disease
(BVAS3 ≥ 1) or inactive disease (BVAS3 = 0). Patients with
active disease had significantly lower frequencies of both
eosinophils and basophils compared to patients with inactive
disease and HBD, but no difference were found between
GPA and MPA patients (Additional file 3).
Expression of eosinophil surface markers
To characterize the status of eosinophils in peripheral
blood, the expression of CD16 (FcγRIII), CD64 (FcγRI),
CD35 (CR1), CD193 (CCR3), CD88 (C5aR), CD11c,
CD11b, Siglec-8 and CD62L were investigated.
The patients have increased surface expression of the
low affinity FcγRIII (CD16, p < 0.0001), the high affinity
FcγRI (CD64, p = 0.0035) and the eosinophil eotaxin receptor
CCR3 (CD193, p = 0.0002), and decreased expression
of the complement receptors CD35 (p = 0.0022),
CD88 (p < 0.0001) as well as CD11b (p = 0.0061), CD11c
(p < 0.0001) and Siglec-8 (p = 0.0015) (Fig. 3). No differences
were observed in the surface levels of CD62L.
When the patients were divided into active (BVAS3 ≥ 1)
or inactive disease (BVAS3 = 0) the patients with active
disease expressed lower levels of CD88 (p = 0.0033),
CD11c (p = 0.0020) and CD62L (p < 0.0001) compared
with patients in remission (Fig. 4). No difference was seen
between the GPA and MPA groups (Additional file 4).
Decreased ROS production in eosinophils from AAV
patients
ROS production is one of the major effector functions of
phagocytes in their anti-microbial defense. Moreover, ROS
play an important regulatory role of both the innate and
adaptive immune system [15, 16]. Previous studies have
shown that neutrophils from AAV patients have decreased
intracellular ROS production. In this study we can show
that this is true also for eosinophils. Peripheral whole
blood from patients (n = 98, Table 1) and controls (n =
121) were stimulated with PMA (protein kinase C activator)
or opsonized E.coli and intracellular ROS production
was measured by flow cytometry using the Phagoburst kit.
Eosinophils from GPA and MPA patients showed a significantly
decreased ROS production both when stimulated
with PMA (p < 0.0001) and E.coli (p < 0.0001, Fig. 5) compared
with healthy controls.
Eosinophils form extracellular traps more easily than
neutrophils
Extracellular traps released from neutrophils and eosinophils
are thought to play an important role in the
defense against pathogens and in inflammatory processes.
Eosinophils and neutrophils were purified from
peripheral blood of healthy donors (n = 7) and stimulated
with PBS (negative control) TNFα, C5a or PMA
(positive control). Eosinophils were more prone to release
extracellular traps than neutrophils, when stimulated
with TNFα (p = 0.0006) or C5a (p < 0.0001) but no
significant difference was observed using PMA stimulation
(p = 0.1970) (Fig. 6a and b). Eosinophils also produced
more EETs in the negative control where they
were incubated with PBS alone.
ANCA stimulation enhanced extracellular trap formation
in eosinophils from patients
AAV are characterized by ANCA autoantibodies that
binds mainly to PR3 or MPA. Eosinophils express PR3
[2] and eosinophil peroxidase (high structural homology
to myeloperoxidase) on their surface, indicating that
ANCA could bind and stimulate also this cell type.
To investigate if ANCA could affect the release of EETs,
eosinophils were purified using the MACSExpress eosinophil
kit from five AAV patients (3 GPA and 2 MPA) and
healthy controls (n = 5). The eosinophils were primed with
either PBS or C5a followed by incubation with PBS (negative
control), PMA (positive control), IgG from healthy
controls or IgG from ANCA patients (one PR3-ANCA
and one MPO-ANCA). Stimulation of eosinophils from
the patients with C5a followed by ANCA gave a higher
level of EETosis (p = 0,0088, Fig. 6c). This was not seen
among healthy controls. EETs from these stimulations
are shown in Fig. 6d. Eosinophil purification using the
MACSExpress kit generated less pre-activated eosinophils
from healthy blood donors as the percentage of
EETs in the negative control (PBS incubation) was
much lower (22% versus 5.5% in Fig. 6a and c respectively).
Nonetheless, stimulation of eosinophils with C5a
alone generated more EETs (61% in Fig. 6a and 24% in
Fig. 6c) compared to NETs in experiments done on
neutrophils (0.4% in Fig. 6a).
Discussion
Eosinophils are multifunctional cells with both pro-inflammatory
and immune-regulatory properties that have
been suggested to regulate local tissue immunity, repair
and remodeling [17]. Moreover, eosinophils seem to be
important for B cell activation and the homing and survival
of plasma cells [18]. There is some evidence that
eosinophils have a protective role in autoimmunity e.g.
Finlay et al. showed that activated eosinophils conferred
protection against experimental allergic encephalomyelitis
[19]. Here we show that the percentage of eosinophils
were decreased in peripheral blood in GPA and MPA
patients and showed altered surface marker expression
and function. Moreover, ANCA stimulation enhanced
EETosis in GPA and MPA patients a phenomenon not
seen in healthy controls. The altered surface expression
and low ROS production in eosinophils is true for both
patients in remission and with active disease and no difference
were seen between GPA and MPA patients. The
results are in line with our previous findings for neutrophils
in AAV patients [14].
Glucocorticosteroid treatment has been reported to
affect the number of eosinophils in peripheral blood, by
inducing apoptosis and inhibiting pro-survival signals by
cytokines e.g. IL-5 and GM-CSF [20, 21]. In line with
earlier observation we saw a weak correlation between
corticosteroid treatment and the number of eosinophils
in blood (r2 = 0.088, p = 0.008). However, the decreased
levels of eosinophils could not completely be explained
by corticosteroid treatment as no significant correlation
was observed between patients with active disease with
or without corticosteroid treatment (p = 0.27). Two patients
were newly diagnosed and both of them had low
levels of eosinophils already before treatment was
started. Even if the pro-apoptotic effect of steroids on
eosinophils is widely accepted, there are reports suggesting
that it depends on the activation status of the
eosinophils [22]. This could be one explanation to why
we could not detect any correlation in patients with active
disease. Moreover, dexamethasone has been reported
to increase eosinophil differentiation and
proliferation from CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells [23].
Why GPA and MPA patients have decreased frequencies
of eosinophils in peripheral blood is not known. A possible
explanation could be that activated eosinophils are
recruited to sites of inflammation and play an active role
in the pathogenesis of AAV. Mononuclear cells have
been reported to be the most frequent cell type in interstitial
infiltration of ANCA-positive renal biopsies from
patients with suspected systemic vasculitis, however eosinophils
and neutrophils were found in 20 and 27% of
the cases respectively [24].
An important feature of eosinophils is the binding of
antibodies and of complement proteins via specific receptors,
events that will induce degranulation and antibody
mediated cellular cytoxicity and eventually killing
of invading microbes or host cells [25]. Here we showed
that AAV patients have increased surface expression of
the low affinity FcγRIII (CD16) as well as the high affinity
FcγRI (CD64), a phenomenon described earlier in patients
with allergic conditions [26]. In several conditions,
including EGPA, an increased expression CD69 and
CD11b and shedding of CD62L are markers of activated
eosinophils [25, 27]. In this study we found less CD62L
on eosinophils from patients with active disease but
lower levels of CD11b. Recently, Lingblom et al. described
a naturally occurring CD16+ eosinophil subset in
peripheral blood, able to suppress T cell proliferation
[28]. In line with our observation, these CD16+ eosinophils
also showed decreased expression of some surface
markers including CD88 and CD11a, whereas surface
molecules associated with T cells suppression e.g. PD-L1,
CD54 were up-regulated. The importance of this eosinophil
subset in AAV needs further investigation.
NET depositions have been observed in kidney biopsies
from AAV patients. We and others, have previously
shown that ANCA could stimulate NET formation by
neutrophils. Moreover, sera from AAV patients seem to
degrade NETs more slowly than healthy controls [29].
Interestingly, Kraaij et al. recently showed that ANCAs
did not influence NET formation by neutrophils from a
healthy donor, but autologous serum induced increased
formation of NETs in neutrophils from three out five
studied patients [30], suggesting that it is not ANCA per
se that induces enhanced NETs formation rather the
combination of ANCA and neutrophils from AAV patients.
In line with these results, we show that addition
of ANCA increased EETs formation in eosinophils from
AAV patients. How ANCA induce formation of extra
cellular traps in neutrophils and eosinophils is not
known. The high affinity IgG receptor FcγRI (CD64) has
been shown to be induced on blood eosinophils by
IFN-γ [27] and human FcγRI expressed in mice was sufficient
to trigger autoimmune arthritis [31]. The high
CD64 expression on eosinophils, that is further increased
in AAV patients, may explain the increased EET
formation in eosinophils from AAV patients compared
to healthy controls when stimulated with ANCA. An increased
influx and following EET formation in the inflamed
tissue could partly contribute to the lower levels
of circulating eosinophils. EETosis in the tissue could
also mean deposition of intact eosinophilic granules
(Additional file 5) in the tissue further increasing the inflammation
[9]. The presence of free eosinophil granules
in tissue from AAV patients still needs to be proven.
ROS are major effector molecules in inflammatory
processes and tightly linked to EET formation [9, 10].
During the last decade, an increasing amount of data support
an immune modulating role for monocyte and granulocyte
produced ROS [15, 32–34], as ROS can affect
redox sensitive pathways [35]. We have previously reported
that PMN and monocytes from AAV patients had
decreased capacity to phagocytose and impaired ROS production,
which was associated with disease activity [14].
In this study we show that AAV eosinophils have decreased
capacity to produce ROS compared with healthy
controls. Even though eosinophils seem to produce sufficient
amounts of ROS to form EETs, it may have an impact
on immune regulation.
Conclusions
The frequency of eosinophils was decreased in peripheral
blood in AAV patients and they showed altered surface
marker expression and function. They also produce
less ROS when stimulated with opsonized E.Coli or
PMA. Moreover, eosinophils produce EETs when stimulated
with TNFα or C5a and addition of ANCA further
increase the number of EETotic cells, suggesting that eosinophil
can contribute to the autoantibody driven inflammatory
process in AAV.