Background
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is the most common idiopathic
systemic vasculitis in persons aged 50 years or
older [1] and demonstrates a predilection for involvement
of the aorta and its primary branches. The clinical
presentation of GCA is variable and is based on the distribution
of vascular involvement with most patients
demonstrating classical cranial manifestations (headache,
scalp tenderness, jaw claudication, vision loss) while
others present primarily with constitutional and/or musculoskeletal
symptoms. Less commonly, arterial occlusive
disease of the extremities leads to symptoms of
vascular claudication. Histopathologic examination of a
temporal artery biopsy (TAB) specimen remains the
gold-standard method of diagnosis, although vascular
imaging studies are increasingly used in conjunction
with, or instead of, an invasive biopsy. The aetiology and
pathogenesis underscoring the development of GCA are
still incompletely understood. Nevertheless, several advances
in genetic and immunology research have led to
a greater insight into the pathomechanisms that initiate
and sustain vascular inflammation in GCA. Despite the
availability of effective biologic agents for other autoimmune
conditions, the treatment options for GCA, todate,
have been limited. Although glucocorticoids (GC)
have been the standard-of-care for over six decades,
treatment is not curative and is associated with significant
morbidity. Therefore, the ongoing identification of
key immune mediators in disease pathogenesis is encouraging
the pursuit of clinical trials with targeted therapeutic
agents. The aim of this article is to summarize the fundamental
pathogenic mechanisms and new potential
therapeutic options for the treatment of GCA. In order
to accomplish this, we searched PubMed for the following
search terms: “giant cell arteritis”, “large vessel vasculitis”,
“temporal arteritis”, “arteritis” and “vasculitis”.
Publications from the past 10 years were analyzed for
pathogenic and therapeutic studies. Case reports were
not included, unless providing unique insights into
pathogenic pathways. The date of the last search was 1
July 2017.
Main text
Genetic associations
Several independent studies have implicated associations
between GCA susceptibility and certain human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) class I and class II alleles. In particular,
carriage of HLA-DRB1*0401 and DRB1*0404 haplotypes
have been consistently identified in multiple GCA
cohorts [2–7]. A large-scale, international, genomewide
association study has further reinforced the importance
of the HLA class II region [8]. Comparison of
2134 patients with GCA to 9125 controls demonstrated
strong independent signals associated with conferring
predisposition to GCA located in the HLA regions between
HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB1 as well as between
HLA-DQA1 and HLA-DQA2 [8]. Over-representation
of these HLA class II genes strongly suggests that GCA
is mediated by an antigen-driven immune response.
While HLA class II genetic factors have demonstrated
the strongest association with risk of GCA development,
several single nucleotide polymorphism risk signals in
loci among non-HLA regions have also been recognized
(Table 1). However, it should be noted that most studies
evaluating genetic associations in GCA have included
small groups of patients and will require validation in
larger patient cohorts. Nevertheless, the wide array of
potentially involved cellular pathways associated with
GCA susceptibility underscores the polygenic nature
and complex immunopathogenesis employing both the
innate and adaptive immune response in this condition.
Infection
Isolation of identical T cell clones from different vasculitic
sites suggests a response to a specific antigenic
stimulus [9] and studies have proposed that arterial wall
dendritic cells may be activated by environmental infectious
agents or autoantigens [10]. Several microorganisms
have been suggested as a possible infectious trigger including
Chlamydia pneumoniae [11, 12], Mycoplasma pneumoniae
[13], Burkholderia pseudomallei [14], parvovirus
B19 [15, 16], herpes simplex virus [17] and Ebstein-Barr
virus [18]. Although infection-induced autoimmunity
leading to loss of self-tolerance through mechanisms of
molecular mimicry, bystander T-cell activation and
epitope spreading is plausible, direct evidence of such
remains elusive. Indeed, attempts to identify pathologic
organisms in temporal artery biopsy specimens have
produced inconsistent results for any specific causal
infectious agent [15, 19–21].
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) has received recent focus
as a potential associated infectious aetiology. The presence
of VZV antigen by immunohistochemistry was
identified in 68 of 93 (73%) patients with histologically
confirmed GCA and 45 of 70 (64%) patients with
biopsy-negative GCA, compared to only 11 of 49 (22%)
normal controls [22]. The same investigators identified
VZV DNA by PCR amplification in a blinded analysis in
3 of 3 TAB-positive GCA patients and 4 of 6 TABnegative
GCA patients [23]. These investigators have
proposed that the VZV is transported along the afferent
nerves to the temporal artery inciting an inflammatory
process resulting in arteritis. Consequently, Gilden et al.
have advocated for use of the antiviral medication
acyclovir in the treatment of patients with active or refractory
GCA [24]. The presence of VZV as a causative
agent for GCA, however, has not been substantiated by
other groups. Muratore and colleagues evaluated 79
formalin-fixed and fresh-frozen temporal artery biopsies
(34 TAB-positive GCA, 15 TAB-negative GCA, and 30
controls) by immunohistochemistry and PCR analysis
[25]. Only 1 of 34 patients with TAB-positive GCA had
evidence of VZV antigen whereas VZV antigen was not
detected among any of the TAB-negative GCA patients or
controls. Furthermore, VZV DNA was not found in any of
the formalin-fixed or fresh-frozen TAB samples. In a recent
prospective study, Procop and colleagues similarly
did not identify VZV DNA from surgically sterile temporal
artery and thoracic aortic samples from patients
with large-vessel vasculitis [26].
In addition to histopathology evaluations, population
level studies have failed to show a causal role of VZV in
GCA. In comparing 204 cases of incident GCA diagnosed
between 1950 and 2004 to 408 matched controls from the
same geographic location, Schäfer and colleagues found
no associated risk of incident VZV among patients with
GCA compared to the general population [27]. Rhee et al.
performed a population-based case-control study evaluating
a larger sample of patients with GCA (n = 4559) and
controls (n = 22,795) and similarly concluded there was
minimal-to-no association of clinically overt VZV with
GCA [28]. At current, conclusive evidence does not
support direct infection with VZV as a causal process
for the development of GCA and the use of acyclovir
as an adjunct to, or in lieu of, immunosuppression is
unsubstantiated and not recommended.
Innate immune system
Vascular dendritic cells
Although the specific immunostimulatory trigger(s) is
unknown, the immunopathology of GCA appears to originate
from a dysregulated interaction between the vessel
wall and both the innate and adaptive immune
systems [29, 30]. Unlike small vessels which rely primarily
on oxygen through luminal diffusion, large vessels
require a microvascular network (vasa vasorum) to distribute
oxygen to the media-adventia vascular cell layers.
Arteries with vasa vasorum contain vascular dendritic
cells (vasDCs) at the media-advential border where they
are thought to participate in immune surveillance. In
normal arteries, vasDCs are immature and lack the capacity
to stimulate T cells [31] allowing arteries to maintain
immune privilege and self-tolerance. In vasculitic
lesions immune privilege is lost and vasDCs become activated
via Toll-like receptors (TLRs), redistributing
throughout the vessel wall [32]. Activated vasDCs are
able to attract and activate T lymphocytes and macrophages
through production of specific chemokine and
cytokine signatures, providing a microenvironment necessary
for initiating and sustaining arterial inflammation
and granuloma formation [29]. This central role of
vasDCs in arteritis has been demonstrated using a model
in which human temporal arteries were engrafted into
immunodeficient mice, following which targeted depletion
of CD83+ vasDCs resulted in marked reduction of
observed vasculitis. Due to their role early in the disease
process, prevention of initial vasDCs activation is an unlikely
therapeutic target. However therapies addressing
persistently activated vasDCs remain a viable option.
Macrophages
GCA is a granulomatous vasculitis and multinucleated
giant cells, a key feature of macrophage involvement, are
a considered a pathognomonic hallmark of arterial lesions.
Giant cell formation is present in approximately
50% of positive temporal artery biopsies. Macrophages
recruited by activated vasDCs and T lymphocytes infiltrate
the arterial wall through the vasa vasorum and further
differentiate into M1 and M2 phenotypes according
to the arterial microenvironment. In the adventitia,
activated M1 macrophages primarily secrete proinflammatory
cytokines (IL-1 and IL-6) [33] while M1 macrophages
in the medial layer degrade the arterial matrix
through secretion of matrix metalloproteinases and
damage vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and
endothelial cells (ECs) through local oxidative stress
mechanisms [34]. On the contrary, M2 macrophages colocalize
to the intima-media border and produce proangiogenic
growth factors (vascular endothelial growth factor,
fibroblast growth factor and platelet-derived growth
factor) which results in myofibroblast proliferation, relocation,
and the marked thickening of the arterial
intima.
The emerging paradigm of personalized medicine is
encouraging development of nanoparticle-based theranostic
agents, which integrate therapeutic and imaging
functionalities. These molecules are being explored in
cancer and inflammatory diseases [35]. Selective targeting
of specific macrophage phenotypes may overcome
the toxicity associated with macrophage inhibition
through non-selective cytotoxic drugs. Preclinical models
for imaging and treatment of pathogenic macrophages
have shown initial promise [36]; however, further advances
in this evolving field will be needed prior to consideration
of selective macrophage ablation, inhibition, or phenotype
modulation in GCA.
Adaptive immune system
T lymphocytes
Normal arteries are devoid of CD4+ T cell infiltration.
In GCA, T cells are recruited via chemokines secreted
by activated vasDCs, enter the arterial layer initially
through the vasa vasorum, polarize into effector cell
types and infiltrate the arterial layers. Two distinct
CD4+ T effector cell subtypes have been identified as
key regulators in vasculitic lesions of GCA; type 17
helper T cells (Th17) and type 1 helper T cells (Th1)
[37]. These T cell lineages are likely to be stimulated
by independent signals from distinct antigen presenting
cells (APC) with Th17 cells dependent on IL-1β, IL-6,
IL-21 and IL-23, while the Th1 pathway requires APCs
secreting IL-12 and IL-18 [30, 37].
Studies conducted in patients with active, untreated
GCA show that both Th1 and Th17 lineages are present
in the inflammatory arterial infiltrates and are expanded
in the peripheral circulation [38, 39]. The Th17 pathway
appears to be very responsive to treatment and glucocorticoids
(GCs) rapidly reduce the Th17 effector cytokine
production of IL-1, IL-6, IL-17 and IL-23 [30, 38] with
simultaneous depletion of both circulating and tissue infiltrative
Th17 cells.
The rapid decline in these cytokines upon GC initiation
contributes to the prompt decrease of systemic inflammatory
features. Despite the effective reduction of
the Th17 pathway, a Th1 cell response persists, both in
blood samples and arterial specimens from patients
treated with high-dose GC [38]. The Th1 cytokine signature
identified in chronic vasculitis in GCA is associated
with production of IL-2 and interferon-gamma (IFN- γ)
and is poorly susceptible to GCs. It is likely that persistence
of vascular Th1 cellular infiltrates despite prolonged
courses of GCs is responsible for the chronicity
and relapsing nature observed in GCA [30].
In addition to Th1/Th17 effector T cells, regulatory T
cells (Tregs) appears to have an important role in GCA
pathogenesis. Tregs, which are tasked with maintaining
tolerance and prevention of autoimmunity, are decreased
in the blood and arterial lesions of patients with
GCA [39]. Compared to healthy controls, Tregs in patients
with GCA appear to be defective and potentially
pathogenic, exhibiting decreased proliferation and increased
production of IL-17 [40]. While GC appear to
be ineffective in modifying Treg dysfunction in GCA
[39], IL-6 blockade was recently shown to revert the
Treg abnormalities detected in active GCA [40].
Further confirmation that T cells are implicated in the
development of large-vessel vasculitis is provided by the
demonstration of T cell immune check point dysregulation
in GCA. Checkpoint molecules, particularly cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and
programmed death-1 (PD-1), play a key role in downregulating
T cell activation, maintaining self-tolerance and
limiting autoimmunity. T cell activation requires antigen
recognition through the T-cell receptor as well as a
second signal delivered by co-stimulatory molecules.
CTLA-4 and its homologous protein, cluster of differentiation
28 (CD28), are expressed on activated T cells and
participate in the co-stimulatory check point. Binding of
CD28 to the CD80/86 molecules on APCs results in T
cell activation and clonal expansion. On the contrary,
down regulation of the immune response occurs through
binding of CTLA4 to CD80/86, which results in T cell
anergy. Checkpoint blockade immunotherapy is now being
utilized in cancer treatments [41, 42]. Competitive
inhibition of CTLA-4 by the immunostimulatory medication,
ipilimumab, increases cytokine production, leads
to persistent T cell activation and enhances T cell mediated
immune responses to tumors [43]. However, use
of ipilimumab has been associated with development
of autoimmune conditions and organ-specific inflammation,
including drug-induced giant cell arteritis [44].
The receptor molecule PD-1 provides inhibitory signals
by binding to programmed cell death ligand 1 and 2
(PD-L1 and PD-L2), resulting in T cell anergy, apoptosis,
or polarization to Tregs [45]. Recent transcriptome analysis
of temporal arteries positive for GCA has demonstrated
an inefficiency of the PD-1/PD-L1 checkpoint.
Specifically, inflamed arteries of patients with GCA lack
the inhibitory ligand PD-L1 and are enriched for PD-1–
expressing T cells [46]. PD-1 blockade in a mouse model
with engrafted temporal arteries worsened vascular inflammation,
promoted PD-1+ effector T cells and increased
effector T cell cytokines IL-17, IL-21, and IFN-γ
[46]. These pre-clinical findings have been corroborated
with recent reports of GCA developing in patients
treated with pembrolizumab, a monoclonal antibody
directed against PD-1 [47, 48].
B cells
Currently, the role of B cells in GCA is not fully
understood. While plasma cells have been observed in
positive temporal artery specimens in up to 83% of cases,
the functional role of these cells remains indeterminate
[49]. Associations with humoral immunity have been suggested
by the presence of auto-antibodies directed against
cardiolipin [50], ferritin [51, 52], endothelial cells [53] and
recently 14–3-3 proteins [54]. However detection of
auto-antibodies overall lacks specificity, has not been
universally replicated, and is of unknown significance
in the pathogenesis of GCA.
Although a major immunologic role of B cells is the
production of antibodies, B cells can also regulate T cell
responses in auto-immunity through the secretion of
both pro-inflammatory (TNF-α and IL-6) and antiinflammatory
(IL-10) cytokines [55]. In a prospective
study, patients with active GCA were observed to have
low levels of circulating B cells, particularly IL-6 secreting
effector B cells, with a return to near normal levels
during GC-induced remission [55]. It is hypothesized
that the B cells are distributed into secondary lymphoid
organs and/or inflamed tissues and then on normalization
of the inflammatory process return to the peripheral
blood. However, the reservoir for B cells during active
disease is incompletely known and remains an area of
ongoing research.
One potential location for B cell redistribution during
disease is within artery tertiary lymphoid organs
(ATLO). Ciccia and colleagues evaluated temporal artery
biopsies from fifty patients with active, untreated
GCA and found distinct artery tertiary lymphoid organ
structures in the medial layer among 60% of patients
with biopsies positive for GCA [56]. These structures
were organized into specific T cell areas, B cell follicles
and associated with a network of follicular dendritic
cells. Compared to patients without ATLOs and
healthy controls, arteries with ATLOs had a high level
of B cell activating factor (BAFF) and a proliferation
inducing ligand (APRIL), proteins which are strongly
correlated with the differentiation and proliferation of
B cells. Production of these proteins was primarily
driven by endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle
cells highlighting an interaction between myointimal
cells and B cells, an area that requires further exploration
and confirmation [56].
Although a potential role of B cells exists in the
pathogenesis of GCA, the efficacy of B cell depletion is
largely unknown. Rituximab, an anti-CD20 monoclonal
antibody, has only been reported in two patients with
GCA with observed benefit [57, 58]. Further investigation
of this agent in prospective trials is needed before
considering as a viable treatment option in GCA.
Endothelial cells
Endothelial cells, the interface between the circulating
blood and vessel wall, are active participants in the
regulation of inflammation and angiogenesis. The
intercellular adhesion molecules expressed on endothelial
cells mediate leukocyte trafficking, migration,
and development of inflammatory infiltrates. Increased
expression of endothelin-1 and endothelin-B receptor
immunoreactivity has been seen in higher concentration
in the medial layer of temporal arteries from
patients with GCA compared to controls and this immunoreactivity
has been observed to correlate with the
degree of systemic inflammation [59]. In addition, the
endothelin system is increased at the protein level in
temporal artery lesions in patients with GCA, creating
a microvascular environment that is predisposed to
develop ischemic complications, which is not immediately
abrogated by glucocorticoid administration
[60]. Indeed, upregulation of endothelin-1 in GCA
lesions promotes migration of vascular smooth muscle
cells to migrate towards the intima, leading to development
of intimal hyperplasia and resulting in vascular
occlusion [61]. Blockade of endothelin receptors using
macitentan, a dual endothelin-A/endothelin-B receptor
antagonist, has been shown to reduce vascular smooth
muscle proliferation in biopsy-proven GCA and may
prove to be a promising future adjunct in the treatment of
GCA [62].
Novel treatments
For over six decades, treatment with high-dose GCs
has been the mainstay for both induction to remission
and maintenance therapy in GCA. Unfortunately, GCs
contribute substantial toxicity and GC-associated adverse
events are nearly universal [63, 64]. In addition,
despite adequate treatment with GCs, relapses are frequent
[65] and chronic arterial inflammation can persist
despite clinical and biochemical remission [38, 49]. Therefore,
a great unmet need has existed for safe and effective
GC-sparing agents for both induction and maintenance
therapy in GCA.
Methotrexate was evaluated in 3 small clinical trials
for treatment of GCA, and results were variable.
According to expert consensus, methotrexate has been
generally recommended as a second-line agent after
GC in patients with relapsing or severely active disease
or in patients with high-risk for GC-associated adverse
events [66]. However, an individual patient data metaanalysis
of the three clinical trials evaluating methotrexate
found only a modest benefit in decreasing relapse
risk and reducing GC exposure. Moreover, the
effect of methotrexate on reducing relapse risk only
became significant after about 48 weeks of treatment,
and GC-related adverse effects were not diminished
[67]. Limited to no benefit has been observed among
other oral conventional immunosuppressive agents including
azathioprine [68], leflunomide [69, 70] and
mycophenolate mofetil [71].
Due to the limited success of conventional immunosuppressive
agents, targeted therapeutics have gained
greater interest and investigation for control of GCA.
Early reports of increased expression of tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha in temporal artery specimens among
patients with GCA [72] and dramatic benefit of TNFinhibitors
in other autoimmune diseases (e.g. rheumatoid
arthritis) led to evaluation of TNF-alpha blockade in this
condition. Unfortunately placebo-controlled trials utilizing
TNF-inhibition with infliximab [73], etanercept [74], and
adalimumab [75] have failed to show significant therapeutic
efficacy in patients with GCA and did not result in
significant reduction of GC use or adverse events. Despite
the inadequate results of TNF-alpha inhibition, several
other targeted therapeutics are being investigated (Fig. 1).
Interleukin-6 inhibitors
IL-6 is produced locally in the arterial vasculitic lesion
[9], and is expressed in circulating monocytes from patients
with GCA [33]. IL-6 is known to be a critical
factor in the induction of acute-phase proteins, which
are typically markedly elevated in patients with GCA
and are used in clinical practice to monitor disease activity.
Moreover, although IL-6 is highly elevated in untreated
GCA, levels drop promptly with GC therapy.
Indeed, IL-6 levels correlate with disease activity and
can be a useful biomarker in evaluating disease activity
[76, 77]. Tocilizumab (TCZ), a humanized anti IL-6
receptor antibody has shown efficacy in both newly diagnosed
and relapsing patients in several small observational
series [78–85] and two double-blind, placebocontrolled
trials [86, 87].
In the first reported double-blind, placebo-controlled
phase 2 trial evaluating TCZ in GCA, Villiger and colleagues
randomized 30 patients with GCA (23 newly diagnosed,
7 relapsing) to receive prednisolone taper with
intravenous tocilizumab (8 mg/kg/4 weeks) or prednisolone
taper with placebo infusions [87]. Among the 20 patients
receiving TCZ, complete remission at 12 weeks
(85% vs. 40%) and relapse-free survival at 1 year (85% vs
20%) were significantly higher in the treatment group
compared to placebo. On the contrary, serious adverse
events were less frequent in the TCZ group (35% vs.
50%). Only one relapse was observed in the TCZ group
and no relapses occurred after discontinuation of prednisolone
in patients receiving TCZ.
The benefit and safety profile of TCZ has further
been confirmed in the tocilizumab in GCA (GiACTA)
trial [86]. GiACTA constitutes the largest international,
multi-center, placebo-controlled trial in GCA
to-date and the first to employ a blinded prednisone
taper and a dual-assessor strategy to avoid bias created
by knowledge of inflammatory markers [86]. In this
phase 3 trial, Stone and colleagues recruited 251 patients
(119 newly diagnosed, 132 relapsing) to one of
four arms: weekly TCZ (162 mg, subcutaneous) plus a
26-week prednisone taper, every other week TCZ plus
a 26-week prednisone taper, weekly placebo plus a 26-
week prednisone taper, or weekly placebo plus a 52-
week prednisone taper. Patients were diagnosed based
on modifications to the 1990 American College of
Rheumatology criteria for classification of GCA [88],
which permitted inclusion of patients based on evidence
of large-vessel vasculitis (LVV) on cross-sectional imaging.
Whereas 62% of patients had a positive temporal biopsy,
37% of patients were ultimately enrolled on the basis of
radiographic findings of LVV, regardless of temporal artery
biopsy results.
The primary outcome, sustained remission at 52-
weeks, was significantly higher among patients receiving
weekly TCZ (56%) and every other week TCZ (53%)
compared to the placebo groups (placebo plus 26-week
prednisone taper, 14%; placebo plus 52-week prednisone
taper, 18%; respectively). Disease flares occurred less frequently
in patients receiving weekly TCZ (23%) and
every other week TCZ (26%) compared to the 26-week
(68%) and 52-week (49%) placebo arms. Over the 12-
month trial, GC exposure in the treatment arms was approximately
half compared to the placebo arms. Overall
adverse events were frequent in all groups (92–98%);
however, serious adverse events were lower among patients
receiving weekly TCZ (15%) and every other week
TCZ (14%) compared to placebo plus 26-week prednisone
taper (22%) or 52-week prednisone taper (25%).
Despite the accelerated GC taper, permanent vision loss
did not occur in any arm and only one patient receiving
every other week TCZ had transient visual loss, which
recovered with glucocorticoids.
The landmark findings of TCZ safety and efficacy reported
in GiACTA have led to the United States Food and
Drug Administration to approve TCZ 162 mg administered
subcutaneously weekly for the treatment of GCA;
the first-ever medication to receive such distinction. The
successful results of TCZ have prompted further investigation
into additional novel anti-IL-6 molecules in this disease.
A phase 3 trial utilizing sirukumab (human anti-IL-6
monoclonal antibody) is currently in progress (Clinical
Trials.gov Identifier NCT02531633) and an upcoming trial
of sarilumab (anti-IL-6 receptor monoclonal antibody), is
planned. The results of these studies will strongly influence
whether additional candidate IL-6 blockers will be
evaluated in GCA; including clazakizumab, olokizumab,
and vobarilizumab. While the benefit of IL-6 blockade in
treatment of GCA is apparent, 44–47% of patients receiving
TCZ in GiACTA were still unable to reach sustained
remission at 52 weeks [86]. In an earlier report, a patient
with GCA who achieved apparent clinical remission on
TCZ was noted to have evidence of persistent and active
vascular inflammation at autopsy, despite normalization of
inflammatory markers [85]. Active disease despite IL-6
blockade highlights that other immunologic pathomechanisms
are present in ongoing inflammatory states in
GCA and further investigation into other novel therapeutics
is still needed.
Abatacept
Whereas the checkpoint inhibitor ipilimumab has led to
the generation of arterial inflammation, inhibition of costimulatory
T cell signalling via CTLA-4 is a possible
target for controlling GCA. Abatacept is a fusion protein
composed of the Fc region of the immunoglobulin IgG1
fused to the extracellular domain of CTLA-4 and blocks
the co-stimulatory signal required for T cell activation.
Langford and colleagues investigated the safety and efficacy
of intravenous abatacept (10 mg/kg) in patients
with newly diagnosed or relapsing GCA [89]. Following
a remission induction phase, 41 patients in remission at
week 12 were randomized to receive either placebo infusions
or monthly abatacept. Relapse-free survival at
12 months, the primary outcome, was achieved by 48%
on abatacept and 31% receiving placebo (p = 0.049). In
addition, the duration of remission was on average
6 months longer in patients receiving abatacept compared
to placebo. No difference in adverse events was
observed. Although considered statistically and clinically
significant findings, the effectiveness of abatacept in
GCA needs to be confirmed in larger cohorts prior to
incorporation of this agent in routine clinical care.
Ustekinumab
Tocilizumab, through blockade of IL-6R, mediates its effect
largely on the Th17/Treg imbalance, without significant
impact on the Th1 cellular pathway. On the contrary, ustekinumab,
a monoclonal antibody directed against IL-12/
23p40 has the potential to disrupt both Th1 (IL-12) and
Th17 (IL-23) pathways. The effect of modulating the Th1/
Th17/Treg imbalance has been demonstrated by Samson
and colleagues in a refractory GCA patient treated with
ustekinumab [90]. Compared to baseline, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells evaluated after three injections of ustekinumab
(45 mg weeks 0, 4, 16) demonstrated that Th1
and Th17 cells each fell by 50%, cytotoxic T lymphocytes
reduced by 64%, and Tregs increased 5-fold. This dramatic
improvement in T cell homeostasis is promising and the
benefit of ustekinumab has been observed in a small openlabel
study. Conway and colleagues studied 12 patients
with relapsing GCA and administered ustekinumab 90 mg
at weeks 0, 4, and then every 12 weeks for a median of
8 months [91]. During the course of treatment GC requirements
were noticeably reduced (median 23 mg prior, 5 mg
after). Three patients were able to discontinue GC and
eight patients were able to stop additional baseline immunosuppressives.
No relapses were observed during treatment
with ustekinumab but two of three patients
experienced a flare following cessation of therapy. These
findings demonstrate the potential efficacy of ustekinumab
as a treatment option for GCA and a phase 2 trial to confirm
these results is ongoing (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier
NCT02955147).
Janus kinase / signal transducers and activators of
transcription inhibitors
The Janus kinase–signal transducers and activators of
transcription (JAK-STAT) signalling pathway is involved
in cellular regulation and has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of several inflammatory and autoimmune
conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory
bowel disease, and psoriasis [92]. Ligand binding of immune
relevant mediators (e.g. IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-9,
IL-12, IL-15, IL-21, IL-23, IL-27, type 1 interferon,
interferon-gamma) to their cell surface receptors leads
to activation of associated JAKs [93]. The activated JAKs
increase their kinase activity, recruit, bind and activate
STATs. The STAT molecules then form hetero- or
homo-dimers which translocate to the nucleus and induce
transcription and expression of target genes, which
in the context of pro-inflammatory cytokines can lead to
increased inflammation and autoimmunity [94]. As a result,
targeted intervention of the JAK-STAT signalling
cascade is attractive and being investigated for several
autoimmune and cancer disorders.
JAK-STAT signalling has been identified as having a
potential role in sustaining vascular inflammation. In
particular, STAT-1 signalling appears to regulate the
activity of vasDCs as well as controlling T cell trafficking
and retention of inflammatory T cells in the vascular lesions
[95]. Hartmann and colleagues evaluated the presence
of STAT-1 transcripts in an experimentally induced
vasculitis of human temporal arteries grafted in immunodeficient
mice and found STAT-1 abundantly expressed in
arteritic tissue lesions. Interferon-gamma, the major inducer
of STAT-1, was, 10-fold higher in patients affected
by GCA compared to controls. In the experimental model,
while high-dose GCs effectively suppressed the activity of
vasDCs and reduced IL-6 in the lesional tissue, the Th1
cellular infiltrate was not affected. Conversely, administration
of the JAK/STAT inhibitor, tofacitinib, effectively
prevented Th1 cell accumulation in the vessel wall and
reduced interferon-gamma production [95]. Compared to
TCZ, which mediates its effect primarily through the
IL-6/gp130/STAT3 signalling axis [96]; JAK inhibitors can
exert control over multiple pathogenic cellular lineages by
impeding the proinflammatory signal of more than one
cytokine signalling pathway (Fig. 2). The benefit of
JAK inhibition in patients with GCA is currently unknown
but a phase 2 trial evaluating baricitinib (oral
selective JAK1, JAK2 inhibitor) in patients with relapsing
GCA is currently ongoing (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier NCT03026504).
Future treatment options
The Notch signalling pathway is critical for regulating
cellular proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and
homeostasis. Dysregulation of this highly preserved
pathway has been associated with several malignancies
and autoimmune conditions [97, 98]. Interaction between
lymphocytes and vascular smooth muscles cells
and endothelial cells involves the activity of the Notch
pathway. Immunohistochemical and gene expression
analysis of inflamed temporal arteries have identified
overexpression of Notch receptors and their associated
ligands (Jagged1, Delta1). Blockade of Notch signalling
in a humanized vasculitis mouse model effectively depleted
both Th1 and Th17 cells from vascular infiltrates
[99]. In addition, it has been shown that systemic vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) can trigger aberrant
Notch signalling through upregulation of the Notch
ligand Jagged1 and induces pathogenic effector cell function
via adventitial microvascular endothelial cells [100].
The arterial microvascular network appears to be essential
in the recruitment of activated T cells and may
therefore provide additional therapeutic targets. Multiple
phase 1 and phase 2 trials evaluating different classes of
Notch inhibition are underway in treatment of various
forms of cancer, but Notch inhibition as of yet has not
been attempted in patients with GCA.
The role of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1-beta
in GCA is uncertain; however, expression of IL-1-beta
has been found in 60–80% of circulating monocytes in
patients with untreated GCA and 20% of macrophages in
temporal artery lesions produce this cytokine [33]. Limited
information is available to determine the clinical efficacy of
IL-1 blockade in patients with GCA but a small case series
utilizing the IL-1 inhibitor, anakinra, showed benefit in
three refractory cases [101]. A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study evaluating gevokizumab (monoclonal
antibody targeting IL-1 beta) for the treatment of
patients with relapsing GCA is ongoing and has recruited
13 patients to date (EudraCT number 2013–002778-38).
Conclusion
Recent advances have provided a greater understanding
of the pathomechanisms involved in GCA; however, further
studies are required to fully elucidate the aetiology
and pathogenesis of this inflammatory vasculopathy. The
complex interaction of genetics, vascular factors and immunologic
pathways in this disease is responsible for the
variability in both the clinical presentation and response
to immunosuppressive therapy. After decades of treating
GCA almost exclusively with glucocorticoids, clinicians
are finally able to reach for novel and targeted biologic
agents. IL-6 is a key mediator in GCA and tocilizumab
is the first agent to show a profound effect on disease
control and GC reduction. This agent is quickly being
incorporated into the treatment algorithm of both newly
diagnosed and relapsing patients with GCA. More information
is needed to understand tocilizumab’s effect on
long-term outcomes and the optimal length of therapy
required for maintenance in this disease. Abatacept and
ustekinumab have shown preliminary evidence of potential
efficacy in the treatment of GCA but confirmation
in larger trials is needed before either is utilized in clinical
care. The proposed benefit of JAK-STAT inhibition
seen in preclinical studies of vasculitis is encouraging
and the evaluation of baricitinib in patient trials is
underway. The era of glucocorticoid monotherapy for
GCA may be coming to a close, a most welcome
prospect for patients with this condition.