Background
Lightweight is a division of rowing in which athletes are
required to weigh below a certain criterion 2 h prior to
competition to be eligible for racing [1]. As greater height
and lean mass is related to superior performance [2], it is
common for athletes to weigh above the criterion and utilize
weight loss techniques over the 24 h before competition
to qualify for racing [1]. Dehydration is a common
technique used to achieve weight loss because it allows
for temporary reductions in weight without muscle
protein loss, and hydration status can be at least partially
restored over the 2-h rehydration window between
weigh-ins and racing [3]. However, dehydration may still
reduce performance [4].
Rowing performance relies on multiple components
including an athlete’s efficient use of the aerobic and
anaerobic energy systems, and capacity to produce power
[5]. Additionally, the neuromotor system controls stroke
execution and balance maintenance by continuously
adapting the execution signal in response to sensory
feedback [6, 7]. These systems have been demonstrated
to be vulnerable to weight reduction via dehydration in
settings outside of rowing [8]. It is unclear how and if
changes in these systems contribute to changes in rowing
performance following weight-reducing dehydration
practices.
Some research suggests that the effect of weight-reducing
dehydration practices may depend on the dehydration
technique used [8, 9]. Four common options exist
for rowers to achieve weight loss through dehydration
before weighing in: diuretics, exercise, thermal exposure,
and fluid abstinence [10]. As use of diuretics is illegal in
elite sport [11] and exercise-induced dehydration appears
to impair aerobic [12], anaerobic [9], and balance performance
[13] to a greater extent than other dehydration
techniques, these are poor candidates for rowers. Instead,
rowers may choose to reduce weight by using either
thermal exposure or fluid abstinence. Previous work [3,
4, 14–17] has demonstrated effects of large amounts of
dehydration on 2000 m rowing performance: a common
performance test in rowing. Within a pilot study [18],
we found that this performance test may be negatively
affected by smaller amounts of dehydration but that this
effect depended on the technique used to elicit dehydration.
Currently, there is a need to better understand
how smaller amounts of dehydration effect rowing performance,
the physiologic systems involved, and whether
the dehydration technique used matters.
The present study examined elite collegiate rowers
within an exploratory, quasi-experimental, within-participants
design to investigate whether changes in weight
resulting from mild weight-reducing dehydration practices
are related to changes in bodily systems involved in
rowing. Further, we sought to determine whether these
relationships were dependent on the technique through
which weight loss was achieved. We examined proxies
of the aerobic energy system, anaerobic lactic energy
system, anaerobic alactic energy system, and the neuromotor
control system following weight loss via thermal
exposure and fluid abstinence. Affected systems
may contribute to poorer rowing performance following
weight-reducing practices.
Methods
Participants
A total of 6 heavyweight and 6 lightweight competitive
male rowers participated in the study (Table 1). Females
were not included because body weight and total body
water vary idiosyncratically with the menstrual cycle
[19]. Participation was restricted to individuals ≥ 16 years
who had competed at least 1 season at the university
level or were members of a Canadian National Rowing
Hub. All methods, including the study experiments and
dehydration protocols (developed in consultation with
coaches and athletes), were approved by the Trent University
Research Ethics Board (REB#25493) and complied
with the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants
provided informed written consent prior to participating
in the study.
Design
Rowers completed an incremental VO2max
test, peak
power test, and 3 visuomotor tasks after 3 different
weight loss conditions: once following weight loss
through thermal exposure (SAU), once following weight
loss through fluid abstinence and thermal exposure
(FA + SAU), and once following no weight loss (CON).
These hydration manipulations were used to achieve
varying amounts of weight loss that further varied in the
amount of each dehydration technique used to cause it.
We quantified the observed amount of weight loss owed
to each dehydration technique by measuring the change
in weight across the timespan allotted for it on each of
the 3 testing days. We summed these values to get the
total weight change on each day. Through this process, we
obtained a weight loss for each participant on each testing
day associated with fluid abstinence, thermal exposure,
and their sum (which approached zero on CON
day because they were unexposed during the timespans).
These changes in weight were used as the independent
variables in our analyses (further details follow). Participants
were tested on 3 separate days within a 2-week
period and experienced the weight-loss conditions in a
counterbalanced order. Blood osmolality, urine osmolality,
and 2 dehydration questionnaires were recorded with
body mass to assess whether this weight loss could be
attributed to dehydration.
Procedure
Baseline body weight, from which the weight reduction
was calculated, was determined from a series of 5 baseline
weigh-ins that were completed on non-test days
immediately prior, during, and immediately following
the study period. On the first testing day involving weight
loss, participants attempted to achieve a weight reduction
of 2.5% their average body mass by an official weigh-in
time. This target weight loss was used as a guide to enable
participants to reasonably match weight loss on future
testing days. This target weight loss was selected based
on findings from a pilot study [18]. On a participant’s second
testing day involving weight loss, they attempted to
match their previous weight loss. In all conditions, participants
were required to fast from midnight until after
the official weigh-in to minimize the impact of differing
food consumption on body weight.
On the SAU day, the participants achieved weight loss
by sitting in a sauna. On the FA + SAU day, participants
were instructed to abstain from fluid intake for 15 h over
the evening and night prior testing to achieve weight loss.
Similar fluid restriction protocols have been previously
employed by other authors [16, 17, 20, 21]. This fluid
restriction protocol has been previously used over 12 h
within a pilot study to induce 1–2% body mass loss [18].
This was followed by time in the sauna, if necessary. In
both conditions, exposure to the sauna (70 °C) was provided
in 15-min increments up to a total of 60 min. Temperatures
within this range have been previously used to
elicit dehydration [22, 23] and were used within our pilot
study [18]. If at the end of any of these 15-min increments
the target weight loss was achieved, the participant
was exempt from further time in the sauna and maintained
their weight loss until the official weigh-in time.
Sauna exposure on FA + SAU day was included to enable
matched weight loss across testing days and to ensure
that total weight loss was not correlated with dehydration
technique. On the CON day, the participants’ weight was
not manipulated. Participants waited in the laboratory
until their official weigh-in time for a matched amount of
time (1 h and 15 min); their hydration was not restricted
during this time.
Mimicking international competition, participants
were provided 2 h to rehydrate between their official
weigh-in time and exercise testing. It was recommended
they rehydrate aggressively. Water, sport electrolyte
drinks and breakfast foods were provided, and participants
recorded the fluid and food they consumed. They
completed a 24-h diet recall for the day prior (50 min following
their official weigh-in) and a battery of visuomotor
tests (80 min following their official weigh-in). This
24-h diet recall was also completed the day prior to testing
to assess fluid and food intake 2 days prior testing.
Participants then completed a 10-min warm up period
at a self-prescribed intensity, a peak power test, and,
finally, an incremental VO2max
test. All tests were completed
within 90 min of the end of the rehydration window.
All protocols were completed between 7 am and
1 pm under thermoneutral conditions.
To track weight loss/dehydration over the testing
day(s), participants were weighed and completed thirst
and dehydration symptomology questionnaires upon
arrival, at the time of the official weigh-in and following
the rehydration window. Blood and urine samples were
taken at the time of the official weigh-in and following
the rehydration window.
Instruments and tasks
Body mass change
All body mass measurements were completed postvoided
on a scale in pre-weighed clothes that were factored
in (Health-O-Meter 349KLX, Health-O-Meter
Professional, McCook, USA). Baseline body mass measurements
were completed in the morning (6AM-9AM)
after fasting from midnight onwards (without restricting
water consumption). These baseline body mass measurements
were completed on non-test days (CON, SAU,
FA + SAU). Weight changes were expressed as percent
changes in body mass (%BMC).
The total change in weight (total%BMC), the change
in weight due to thermal exposure (thermal%BMC),
and the change in weight due to fluid abstinence
(abstinence%BMC) was calculated for each testing day
(CON, SAU and FA + SAU; see equations in Additional
file 1). Each measure should approach 0 on CON day.
Weight changes due to fluid abstinence and thermal exposure
were considered the observed weight changes over
the time allotted for each (i.e. abstinence%BMC = the
weight change at arrival; thermal%BMC = the weight
change between arrival and the official weigh-in). The
change in weight over the rehydration window was also
calculated. The equations for determining total%BMC
and partitioning abstinence%BMC and thermal%BMC
are provided in the supplementary material.
Additional measures of hydration
We checked our hydration manipulation by assessing
the athlete’s blood plasma osmolality (mmol/L) and
urine osmolality (mmol/L). Blood was collected in BD
PST Gel and Lithium Heparin vacutainers according via
standard phlebotomy procedures [24] and immediately
centrifuged (relative centrifugal force: 1000; 10 min).
Urine samples were self-collected mid-stream. Blood and
urine samples were aliquoted and subjected, in triplicate,
to freezing point depression osmometry (3320 Single-
Sample Micro Osmometer, Advanced Instruments, Norwood,
USA). The average osmolality was recorded for
each specimen.
Additionally, questionnaires were used to measure rowers’
perception of thirst (Visual Analogue Scale of Thirst;
VAST) [25] and dehydration symptomology (Symptom
Evaluation Subscale [SES] of the Sport Concussion
Assessment Test 3; SCAT3) [26] and assessed relative to
scores recorded during the baseline weigh-in sessions.
The SCAT3 has previously been used to assess the effects
of dehydration due to its overlap in symptomology with
concussion [27].
Visuomotor tasks
Three tests were used to assess aspects of visuomotor
control: the double-step, stop-signal, and interception
tasks [28]. The tests were coded in Matlab (The
Mathworks, Inc., Natick, USA), using the Psychophysics
Toolbox extensions [29–31] and were presented on the
detachable touchscreen of a personal computer (Surface
Book 2, Microsoft, Redmond, WA). The code is available:
https:// github. com/ liana bro/ Table tTask s4Mat lab.
In brief, the double-step task assesses the participants’
ability to adjust ongoing movements to an unexpected
change in target location. Targets jumped unpredictably
(on 25% of trials) either forward or backward along
the movement path. Movement time (ms) and endpoint
accuracy (mm) to the final target location were
recorded. The stop-signal task assesses the ability to
interrupt a planned and signaled movement in response
to a variably-delayed signal to halt the movement (50 ms,
100 ms, 150 ms, 200 ms). The proportion of trials in
which the participant was able to successfully interrupt
their response in the most challenging delay condition
(200 ms) was analyzed. The interception task assesses the
ability to detect, predict, and use visual motion information
to precisely intercept a moving target that varied in
speed (13.5 cm/s, 21.4 cm/s, and 26.5 cm/s) and acceleration
(0 cm/s [2] and 0.18 cm/s [2]). The percentage of
successful hits and interception position and timing (ms)
were analyzed for the most challenging speed (26.5 cm/s)
and acceleration (0.18 cm/s [2]) condition. All testing was
performed in a quiet, well lit room. The order of the visuomotor
tasks was counterbalanced across participants
but consistent over the testing days.
Rowing ergometer performance
Participants completed a maximal peak power test
and an incremental VO2max
test on a rowing ergometer
(Concept II model D, Morrisville, USA). The same
ergometer was used for all testing. Verbal encouragement
was provided.
During the peak power rowing test, rowers completed
two 10-stroke efforts on the rowing ergometer with
the drag factor set to 200 (≤ 40 strokes/minute). The
10-stroke effort consisted of 6 preparatory strokes followed
by 4 maximal strokes. Rowers were provided a 30 s
rest between efforts. The highest wattage was recorded
and averaged across the 2 tests. This test is a modified
version of similar 5–15 stroke power tests that have been
previously employed [32, 33]. This version of test was
familiar to our athlete participants.
During the incremental VO2max
test, rowers completed
a stepwise-then-ramp incremental VO2max
test
to exhaustion with intermittent blood lactate sampling
using a portable lactate meter (The Edge Lactate Analyser,
ApexBio, Hsinchu, China). Expired gases were
measured breath-by-breath using a metabolic cart (Cortex
Metalyzer 3B, Cortex Medical, Walter-Köhn-Str. 2d,
Leipzig, Germany). Wattage production and stroke rate
were measured stroke-by-stroke using PainSled software
(PainSled Indoor Rowing Dashboard [Version 0.7],
Exerscreen).
The test began with a 1-min familiarization period at
a wattage (W) equal to the first stage of the test. This
starting wattage was calculated using a procedure that
was adapted [34] and modified to calculate a wattage
instead of split-time: 32 s was added to the rower’s selfestimated,
current 2000 m test split-time; this split-time
was converted to a wattage; and 35 W was subtracted
from this number. The immediately proceeding stepwise
portion of the test consisted of 3-min stages, separated
by a 1-min rests, that increased by 35 W each stage. The
ramp portion of the test began on the stage following the
rest period at which blood lactate exceeded 4 mmol/L.
A final a 1-min break was provided, and ramp portion
began at 35 W higher than the last completed stage. During
this portion, the wattage increased by 35 W every
minute without breaks. A final 15 s maximal sprint was
conducted when 3 consecutive strokes could not be
completed at the prescribed wattage. Blood lactate was
sampled within the first 30 s of each rest period and
immediately following the final sprint.
Rowers were instructed to keep their stroke rate consistent
across tests for each stage. The ergometer drag
factor was set to the level at which the athlete trained
most commonly and was consistent across tests. Data
from the test was used to calculate the total wattage
produced during the test, maximal and submaximal
oxygen consumption/stroke efficiency (
VO2max, VO2
at 2 mmol/L blood lactate, and VO2
at 4 mmol/L blood
lactate), lactate production (wattage at 2 mmol/L blood
lactate, wattage at 4 mmol/L blood lactate, blood lactate
at test completion [maximum blood lactate], blood lactate
prior test initiation [resting blood lactate]). Details
regarding the calculation of these variables follow in the
“Results” section.
Dietary assessment
An online 24-h diet recall tool (Automated Self-Administered
24-Hour-Canada [ASA24-Canada] Dietary Assessment
Tool 2016; https:// epi. grants. cancer. gov/ asa24/)
was used to determine total calorie, carbohydrate, fat,
protein, sodium, and water intake for the 2 days prior
testing. Food and fluid consumption recorded during the
rehydration period was separately translated into these
nutrient categories using the nutrient label on each food
and fluid item.
Statistical analysis
For each performance outcome variable we sought to
determine: 1) whether the dehydration-related performance
change was better explained by total%BMC or by
the %BMC achieved via each technique (thermal%BMC
and abstinence%BMC; i.e. does dehydration technique
matter?), and 2) the magnitude of the dehydrationrelated
performance change [change in the outcome
measure for a 1% change in BMC (1%BMC)].
To do this, 2 linear mixed-effects models were used to
assess the association between the weight change measures
and each outcome variable (using participant ID
as a random intercept term). In the present study, this
model can be thought of as a within-subjects regression
model from which the model weights (b) describe
the change in the outcome measure for a 1% change
in BMC. The first model contained only total%BMC
and the second model contained thermal%BMC,
abstinence%BMC, and their interaction. We compared
the models using a likelihood ratio test. When the likelihood
ratio test was significant, suggesting that dehydration
technique affected the outcome, we interpreted
only the second model. Otherwise, the first model was
interpreted (the interpreted model is bolded, when
significant, in all Tables; the uninterpreted model is
italicized). Because thermal weight loss in the sauna
(when necessary) always followed fluid abstinence, this
interaction term can be interpreted as the added effect
of dehydrating in the sauna after abstaining from fluid
overnight, accounting for the individual effects of thermal
exposure and fluid abstinence.
Model weights were assessed for significance using the
Wald Test. Pairwise dependent 2-tailed t-tests were also
used to check our hydration manipulation. Measures of
central tendency are reported: mean ± standard deviation.
Values greater than 3 standard deviations from the
mean were removed within levels and conditions of the
raw data. All models were assessed visually and revealed
no violations of any statistical assumptions. Alpha was
set to 0.05. All analyses were completed in the R programming
language (Version 1.1.453, RStudio, Inc., Boston,
USA).
Results
Weight loss manipulation check
All participants completed study testing. Participants
completed a mean of 53.58 ± 11.79 min in the sauna
during the SAU condition and 36.41 ± 21.65 min in the
sauna during the FA + SAU condition. The 3 hydration
conditions successfully resulted in ranging total%BMC
(1.73% − -3.88%), abstinence%BMC (1.68% − -2.36%),
and thermal%BMC (0.47% − -4.09%; Table 2). Positive
values represent a gain in weight and negative values
represent a loss of weight.
Comparisons (pairwise dependent t-tests) of the
weight changes across the 3 weight-loss conditions
indicate that the total%BMC, abstinence%BMC, and
thermal%BMC are related to the hydration manipulations,
as expected (Table 3). SAU and FA + SAU
days resulted in greater total weight loss and thermal
weight loss than CON days. FA + SAU days resulted in
greater fluid abstinence weight loss than SAU or CON
days. Participants on average consumed 223% of their
total weight loss in water (kg) during the rehydration
window.
Hydration variables
Perception of thirst, symptom number, and symptom
severity scores on test days were converted to Z-scores
before analysis using a mean and standard deviation
that was derived from questionnaires completed on
their baseline weigh-in days (see Table 4). Linear mixedeffects
models demonstrated that the observed changes
in weight were directionally related to these measures
of hydration as would be expected if these weight
changes were due to dehydration (Table 5). Except
for the number of symptoms experienced at the official
weigh-in (LR = 6.23, p = 0.044) and their severity
(LR = 6.84, p = 0.033), measures of hydration were not
better explained by the separation of total%BMC into
thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC (p > 0.05).
While no sole fixed effects were significant alone,
thermal%BMC (b = -0.41, CI = [-0.88, 0.05], p = 0.098)
predicted greater increases in symptom number
than abstinence%BMC (b = -0.33, CI = [-1.00 – 0.34],
p = 0.342). Increasing thermal%BMC also predicted
greater symptom severity (b = -0.95, CI = [-2.05, 0.16],
p = 0.108) than equivalently increasing abstinence%BMC
(b = -0.73, CI = [-2.30, 0.84], p = 0.374).
Visuomotor performance
Double‑step task
The average time between target appearance and target
touch (movement time) as well as the average
absolute distance from the target (absolute error) was
calculated. Movement time was explained 17.64 times
(p = 0.001) better by the separation of total%BMC into
thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC (Table 6). While
statistically accounting for the jump direction of the target
and its interactions with thermal and fluid abstinence
weight loss, increasing abstinence%BMC was associated
with a 38.06 ms increase in movement time (b = -38.06,
CI = [-62.09, 14.03], p = 0.004) for every 1% increase
in %BMC. By contrast, increases in thermal%BMC
(b = 30.44, CI = [13.64, 47.23], p = 0.001) and its interaction
with abstinence%BMC (b = -30.49, CI = [-60.09,
-0.89], p = 0.057) predicted lower movement time. These
changes in movement time could not be explained by
associated changes in the absolute error (p > 0.05).
Stop‑signal task
The logit-transformation of the percent of successful trials
on the stop-signal task was determined. The proportion
of successful trials was logit transformed to produce
a normally distributed dependent measured that was
unconstrained by 0 and 1. No weight change measure
was significantly associated with this variable (p > 0.05).
Interception task
The absolute error in time between finger and target
arrival, the absolute error in position between finger and
target arrival, and the logit-transformation of the percent
of successful interceptions during the interception task
were calculated. No weight change measure was significantly
associated with any of these variables (p > 0.05).
Peak power test
The average of the highest wattage achieved on the two
10-stroke ergometer tests was calculated. No weight
change measure, other than abstinence%BMC, was significantly
associated with this variable (p > 0.05; Table 7).
While greater abstinence%BMC (b = 12.14, CI = [1.96,
22.31], p = 0.029) was related to a 12.14 W reduction in
performance for every %BMC achieved within the model
containing abstinence%BMC and thermal%BMC, we
required the model containing abstinence%BMC and
thermal%BMC to better explain the data than model containing
total%BMC in order to be interpreted.
Incremental VO2 max test
Total test wattage
The wattage produced on each stroke of the incremental
VO2max
test was summed to determine the total
test wattage produced. Total test wattage was explained
6.59 times better (p = 0.037) by the separation of weight
loss into thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC (Table 7).
While thermal%BMC (b = -1874.35, CI = [-3798.05,
49.35], p = 0.070) and the interaction of thermal%BMC
and abstinence%BMC (b = 3412.85, CI = -31.69,
6857.39], p = 0.066) failed to demonstrate an association
with total wattage production, weight lost through fluid
abstinence was associated with a 4261.51 W decrease in
the total wattage produced for every 1%BMC achieved
(b = 4261.51, CI = [-1502.68, -7020.34], p = 0.006).
VO2max
To calculate VO2max
per kilogram body weight
(
VO2max/kg), the highest 30 s average of oxygen consumption
during each incremental VO2max
test was
retrieved and divided by the participant’s baseline weight
(kg). No weight change measure was significantly associated
with this variable (p > 0.05).
Submaximal oxygen consumption
To obtain measures of submaximal oxygen consumption,
oxygen data from each stage of the incremental VO2max
test was trimmed (to allow oxygen consumption to plateau
and limit influences of participant behaviour) to
include 1 min and 45 s of data occurring 2 min before
the end of the stage. The trimmed oxygen data was averaged
for each stage and the first stage was dropped to
limit influence from the rest period. The average stroke
wattage for these periods was similarly recorded. A loglinear
(oxygen consumption, wattage) model was fit to
the data from each test and used to determine the oxygen
consumption (L/min) at the wattage that produced
2 mmol/L blood lactate and 4 mmol/L blood lactate on
CON day. No weight change measure was significantly
associated with either of these variables (p > 0.05).
2 mmol/L and 4 mmol/L blood lactate
The wattages that elicited 2 mmol/L and 4 mmol/L
blood lactate was determined for each incremental
VO2max
test by fitting a cubic-linear model to the lactate
readings and wattage data collected during the test
and solving for these values. The 2 mmol/L (LR = 12.78,
p = 0.002) and 4 mmol/L (LR = 12.78, p = 0.002) blood
lactate variables were both better fit by the model
that included thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC
(Table 8). In the 2 mmol/L (b = 27.84, CI = [14.69,
40.99], p < 0.001) and 4 mmol/L (b = 20.45, CI = [8.91,
31.99], p = 0.002) models, each 1%BMC achieved
through fluid abstinence predicted a reduction of
27.84 W and 20.45 W in the wattage required to elicit
these blood lactate concentrations, respectively. By
contrast, weight lost thermally did not have a meaningful
effect on the wattages required to elicit concentrations
of 2 mmol/L (b = -9.50, CI = [-18.68,
0.31], p = 0.055) and 4 mmol/L (b = 0.22, CI = [-4.31,
4.74], p = 0.926) blood lactate. The effect of preceding
thermal weight loss with fluid abstinence had inconsistent
effects on 2 mmol/L (b = 22.46, CI = [6.18, 38.75],
p = 0.013) and 4 mmol/L (b = -0.97, CI = [-9.02, 7.07],
p = 0.815) blood lactate. No weight changes measures
were meaningfully related to resting or maximal blood
lactate values (p > 0.05), suggesting that the observed
faster rate of lactate accumulation is not explained by a
higher lactate at the start of exercise or a lower achievable
lactate concentration.
Ruling out alternative explanations
Order effects
The effect of testing order (i.e. familiarity and learning)
were ruled out by repeating each significant model in
analysis and including testing order as a fixed effect. No
significant effects of order or meaningful changes in the
model weights retrieved were discovered (p > 0.05).
Foods and fluids over 48 h prior and during the dehydration
window
To determine whether the amount of fluids (mL), carbohydrates
(g), fats (g), proteins (g), sodium (mg) and total
calories (kcal) consumed over 48-h prior to each testing
day could explain the performance changes observed, linear
mixed-effect models were created for each measure
of dietary intake. No relationship between total%BMC,
thermal%BMC, abstinence%BMC, or the interaction
of thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC, and any of the
food and fluid variables was observed (p > 0.05).
Similar models were used to assess food and fluid
consumed during the rehydration window. Greater
total%BMC predicted greater consumption of carbohydrates
(b = -8.66, CI = [-14.04, -3.28], p = 0.004) and fluids
(b = -238.04, CI = [-359.70, -116.39], p < 0.001). Splitting
total%BMC into thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC
did not improve the fit of either the model (p > 0.05).
Protein consumption was 6.07 times (p = 0.048) better
explained by thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC than
total%BMC alone. Greater thermal%BMC was associated
with less protein consumption (b = 2.37, CI = [0.18, 4.55],
p = 0.046) while greater abstinence%BMC was unrelated
to protein consumption, b = -1.29, CI = [-4.41, 1.83],
p = 0.427. No interactive affect was discovered, b = 0.00,
CI = [-3.79, 3.80], p = 0.999. The total number of calories
and amount of fat consumed was unrelated to any marker
of dehydration (p > 0.05). Differences in protein consumption
following thermal%BMC and abstinence%BMC
may or may not contribute to our findings. However, this
seems unlikely as it would suggest that less protein intake
during the rehydration window was protective against
weight loss.
Discussion
Understanding the effect of weight-reducing dehydration
practices on rowing performance is important to lightweight
rowing coaches and athletes. We investigated the
combined and individual effects of mild weight loss via
fluid abstinence and thermal exposure on proxies of bodily
systems that contribute to rowing performance: the
aerobic system, the anaerobic lactic system, the anaerobic
alactic system, and the neuromotor control system.
Manipulation checks suggest that the employed weightreducing
techniques successfully resulted in weight
loss that can be attributed to dehydration and can be
partitioned by the protocol used to achieve it. Our primary
finding was that in every case that increasing total
weight loss was related to a measured proxy, the proxy
was better explained by the separation of weight loss
into the amount achieved through fluid abstinence and
thermal exposure (i.e. dehydration technique matters).
Our secondary findings were that weight lost through
fluid abstinence but not thermal exposure, was associated
with: (1) lower total wattage produced on the incremental
VO2max
test, (2) lower wattage at 2 mmol/L and
4 mmol/L blood lactate, and (3) slower movement time
on the double-step task. In sum, our findings suggest that
some bodily systems involved in rowing performance
are vulnerable to weight-reducing dehydration practices
within the weight loss range studied. This vulnerability
seems to depend on the weight loss protocol used with
fluid abstinence, but not thermal exposure, producing
performance effects.
The present study supports existing evidence that
weight-reducing practices can reduce aspects of rowing
performance. To date, 6 randomized controlled trials
have tested the effects of weight-reducing dehydration
practices on rowing [3, 4, 14–17]. All used a withinsubjects
design, an enveloping marker of rowing performance
(2000 m time trial performance) and allowed a 2-h
rehydration window following dehydration. Four of these
studies, which did not control the technique used to
elicit weight loss, generally suggest rowing performance
is reduced (~ 2 s slower) when body mass is decreased
by 4–6% [3, 4, 14, 15]. However, 1 study which required
athletes to engage in a period of fluid abstinence found
much larger effects on performance (22 s slower) [16].
The final study utilized a similar weight loss protocol but
failed to adjust for within-subjects’ dependencies in their
analysis, making comparisons challenging [17]. All studies
represent large effects relative to the estimated smallest
meaningful change in on-water rowing performance
(1.0–1.5 s for a 2000 m race) [35].
We found that fluid abstinence was more consistently
associated with performance decrements than thermal
exposure. No other studies have examined the effect of
differing weight-reducing dehydration techniques in the
rowing setting. However, a few studies have investigated
this in other contexts and support an effect of dehydration
protocol on performance. Caldwell et al. (1984)
found that weight loss using diuretics and sauna exposure
reduced performance more than exercise-induced weight
loss on VO2max,
work capacity, and measures of submaximal
lactate at 4.1% BMC in 62 athletes [23]. Sauna
weight loss (3.4% BMC) has also been associated with
worse performance relative to diuretics (3.8% BMC) on
measures of leg strength and leg force in track and field
athletes and volleyball players [22]. Additionally, 2 metaanalyses
have found weight-reducing dehydration practices
that involve exercise and/or fluid abstinence result
in poorer muscle endurance [9], lactic and alactic anaerobic
capacity [9], and cognitive performance [36] than
passive techniques such as sauna exposure. These studies
identify weight-loss protocol as a moderator of the relationship
between weight loss and performance but are
inconsistent in which weight loss protocol is reported as
the least harmful. Future research should investigate if
the type of performance task or the provision of the rest/
rehydration window prior performance influences which
weight loss protocol is superior.
We discovered that weight loss through fluid abstinence
was related to poorer performance on incremental
VO2max
test, but not the peak power ergometer test.
Interestingly, weight loss through thermal exposure was
more strongly positively related to the number and severity
of dehydration symptoms than weight loss through
fluid abstinence. We used the peak power ergometer test
as a proxy of the anaerobic alactic energy system and did
not find reductions in performance with weight loss. This
finding is in agreement with other studies of moderate
(2–3%) weight loss via dehydration which also found preserved
peak power performance [37, 38]. Notably, greater
amounts of weight loss (3–4% BMC) do seem to be able
to produce poorer power performance [39]. Thus, it may
be that while power and strength performance can be
reduced by weight-reducing dehydration practices, our
investigation did not employ a large enough magnitude of
dehydration to observe performance effects.
Performance on the incremental VO2max
test is more
apt to test the lactic anaerobic and aerobic energy systems
given its longer duration (~ 20 min). The identified relationship
between increasing weight loss via fluid abstinence
and lower total wattage production on this test
may be due to changes in 1 or both energy systems. However,
we report no effect of any of our weight loss measures
on maximal aerobic capacity, making the aerobic
energy system an unlikely candidate for this decline in
performance. Instead, it may be that changes to the lactic
anaerobic system explain changes in performance.
We found an earlier onset of lactate accumulation with
increasing weight loss through fluid abstinence. Previous
investigations in other athlete populations have
found higher blood lactate at submaximal intensities with
weight-reducing dehydration practices [40, 41]. Nine recreationally
fit males demonstrated elevated blood lactate
at all time points during a constant-load cycle-ergometer
task following a 2%BMC via a warm water bath the previous
evening [40]. Similarly, a study of intercollegiate
wrestlers has demonstrated a lower treadmill velocity
required to achieve the lactate threshold following exercise
in a rubberized sweat suit [41]. Weight-reducing
dehydration practices (4–6%BMC) have further been
demonstrated to reduce muscular endurance performance
(e.g. 30 s horizontal isometric rowing, 6-min arm
crank ergometer), which should act as proxies of the
anaerobic lactic system, even when a rehydration window
between weight loss and performance is provided [41,
42]. Earlier lactate accumulation following weight-reducing
dehydration practices exercise has been explained by
increased muscle temperature and resultant greater carbohydrate
oxidation [43].
In addition, we examined how neuromotor control
(assessed by the visuomotor tests) and stroke efficiency
(assessed by submaximal VO2)
may be affected by
weight-reducing dehydration practices. We found evidence
for a reduction in participants’ capacity to alter
an on-going movement (double-step task), but not their
capacity to inhibit planned movements (stop-signal task)
or coordinate motor timing with a moving target (interception
task) when assessed part way through the rehydration
window. Further, we did not find a relationship
between weight loss and stroke efficiency during incremental
VO2max
test. Our findings suggest that some
elements of neuromotor control may be affected by mild
weight-reducing dehydration practices and that these
effects depend on technique used to elicit weight loss.
How/if these changes in neuromotor control impact rowing
performance either on the rowing ergometer or onwater
requires further investigation.
Previous research has demonstrated an effect of fluid
abstinence on various tests that rely heavily on neuromotor
control [44, 45]. Only 1 investigation has examined
an effect of weight-reducing dehydration practices (4–6%
BMC) on neuromotor control when a rehydration period
was allowed. They demonstrated poorer reaction and
movement time during wrestling matches despite 12 h to
rehydrate and refeed before performing [46]. By contrast,
weight-reducing dehydration practices that relied on
sauna exposure have less consistently demonstrated an
effect on neuromotor control. After eliciting 2.8% BMC
in via sauna exposure in 2 separate experiments, Cian,
et al. (2000) and Cian, et al. (2001) were unable to detect
a change reaction time task performance in either experiment
or a change in performance on a joystick tracking
test in the second experiment [47, 48]. In the first experiment,
sauna weight loss degraded joystick tracking performance
before but not after 2 h of rehydration [47].
More work is needed to learn how potential changes in
neuromotor control with weight-reducing dehydration
practices might influence stroke performance mechanics
and race outcomes.
Strengths
Using experienced rowers and protocols that mimic
international competition, we demonstrate relationships
between weight-reducing dehydration practices
and proxies of a wide number of bodily systems involved
in rowing. Our statistical approach (to use %BMC as
the unit of analysis) allowed us to report our findings as
a change in a performance measure per %BMC which
may prove valuable to some stakeholders. Further, this
approach should improve statistical power of our analysis
if (1) the effect of weight-reducing dehydration practices
relies on the amount of weight lost through the protocol
as opposed to exposure to the protocol itself, and (2)
weight loss is related to performance in a dose–response
relationship that can be approximated linearly. Previous
work supports these assertions [8, 12, 36].
Limitations
In the current study, rowers were unblinded to the weight
manipulation which may have affected their performance.
However, a lack of blinding is less likely to have
affected this study given participants’ perceived dehydration
symptomology was inconsistent with the effects
observed. Further, all participants were high-level athletes
and were aware that some data related to performance
would be provided to them following all testing
to be used for monitoring training, motivating them to
perform. Our experimental design did not allow us to
randomly assign the observed changes in body mass (the
unit of analysis). As such, our study is quasi-experimental
in nature and can only suggest causal relationships. Our
random assignment of participants to counterbalanced
testing order, careful control of the experiment environment,
and assessment of potential sources of uncontrolled
variance (e.g. establishing a relationship between
%BMC and other markers of dehydration, diet logs)
improve the likelihood that our demonstrated relationships
are causal. Because the present study allowed rowers
to rehydrate ad libitum, we cannot be certain that all
rowers in the present study rehydrated optimally. While
this may have introduced error into our findings, we
chose this approach because 1) this mimics the applied
setting where fluid and food consumption is unprescribed;
2) we expected rowers to attempt to rehydrate
optimally because they were aware that they had experienced
dehydration, were provided fluids demonstrated to
maximize rehydration [15], and were advised to rehydrate
aggressively; 3) this allowed a consistent experience of
satiety prior testing and minimized gastric upset resulting
from over or under feeding; and 4) it would have been
impossible to maintain our design and prescribe fluids/
foods directly in accordance to weight changes as baseline
body weight measurements were recorded before,
during, and after the testing period. Despite these limitations,
our study provides a strong investigation of weightreducing
dehydration practices in rowers.
Conclusions
We sought to determine whether mild weight-reducing
dehydration practices compromise rowing performance.
The total weight loss achieved was related to
some aspects of rowing performance. When split by the
manner in which it was achieved, the weight loss due to
fluid abstinence, but not thermal exposure, was related
to a lower total wattage produced on the incremental
VO2max
test, lower wattages required to elicit 2 mmol/L
and 4 mmol/L blood lactate, and slower movement time
on a visuomotor task. It may be that reductions in these
bodily systems contribute to poorer rowing performance
following weight-reducing dehydration practices.
Overall, our findings suggest that proxies of bodily systems
involved in rowing performance may be negatively
affected by mild weight loss practices and that the technique
by which weight loss is achieved is important.