Background
Exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD) is associated
with various negative symptoms, such as delayed
onset muscle soreness, impaired muscle function, and
increased inflammation [1, 2]. Consequently, the use of
recovery interventions purported to accelerate recovery
has become increasingly prevalent. There is an emerging
interest in the effects of the non-nutritive compounds
(poly)phenols as recovery aids following strenuous exercise.
As such their popularity as a nutritional aid has
increased in athletes and recreational exercisers, likely
because these plant-based bioactive compounds have
numerous additional health benefits [3].
The term (poly)phenol refers to a variety of bioactive
compounds including flavonoids, stilbenes, phenolic
acids and lignans [4]. The largest subclass, flavonoids, can
be further classified into flavonols, flavanols, flavanones,
anthocyanins, flavones and isoflavones. Of these subclasses,
the majority of research has focused on flavanols
with particular attention on cocoa, not only because of
the palatability of chocolate [5] but due to the high proportion
of monomers such as catechin, epicatechin and
gallocatechin; collectively referred to as cocoa flavanols
(CF). These monomers are found in the largest quantities
in cocoa when compared with other flavanol containing
foodstuffs such as tea and fruits; however, the
amounts vary considerably. For cocoa, the flavanol content
depends on the bean, such as the seed it grows from
[6], the manufacturing process, such as heavy alkalisation
and temperature of roasting [7], and the final product,
(e.g., milk chocolate versus dark chocolate) [8].
Cocoa flavanols have been shown to possess antiinflammatory
and antioxidant effects, with epicatechin
the most potent monomer of the flavanol group [9]. Currently,
cardiovascular benefits, such as improved flow
mediated dilation and reduced blood pressure, have
been observed following various doses of CF, such as,
918 mg [10], 701 mg [11], 750 mg [12], and 917 mg [13]
and epicatechin intakes as low as 25 mg [14] and 46 mg
[15]. Regarding epicatechin, greater efficacy has been
reported at higher epicatechin doses (see review [16]).
These benefits have been observed following supplementation
periods ranging from the same day of testing [11,
13], to seven days [10], and 30 days [12]. Additionally,
CF may be beneficial for reducing markers of oxidative
stress (defined as an imbalance in the generation of various
reactive species and antioxidants [17]) and inflammation
[18, 19]. The role of CF in modulating inflammation
may stem from their capacity to influence signalling
cascades, i.e., via an alteration to eicosanoid production
[20], and reducing the activation of certain inflammatory
transcription factors, e.g., nuclear factor kappa-beta [21].
Given that exercise-induced muscle damage (EIMD) is
thought to partly stem from inflammation and oxidative
stress, CF may be able to attenuate functional symptoms
that impede athlete recovery, such as muscular soreness
and deficits in muscle function [19, 22].
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced as part
of normal metabolic processes, such as cellular respiration,
and in certain scenarios, such as exercise, ROS
are produced in high amounts [2]. Various ROS molecules
are involved in a plethora of functions at a cellular
level, including, growth and proliferation [23],
immune response [24] and apoptosis [25]. Additionally,
it is believed that ROS act as signalling molecules in
various tissues; however, this is still not fully understood
due to the numerous ROS produced at rest and during
exercise [26]. Antioxidant defence systems maintain a
balance between ROS production and neutralisation; if
the production of ROS outweighs their neutralisation,
then proteins, lipids and DNA may be oxidised altering
their function [27]. This process is typically referred
to as oxidative stress. Alternatively, if cells are exposed
to low levels of ROS, such as during moderate intensity
exercise, they may act as signalling molecules for skeletal
muscle adaptations [28]. Such adaptations include an
increase in endogenous antioxidants such as superoxide
dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase, reduced
oxidative damage from exercise and an improved resistance
to oxidative stress [29]. The mechanisms by which
CF modulate redox metabolism and oxidative stress are
not entirely clear, but activation of the nuclear factor
erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) transcription pathway,
which activates a battery of cytoprotective protein with
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory functions is a potential
candidate [30]. For example, it has been observed
that supplementation with catechin results in an increase
in the expression of heme-oxygenase 1, an enzyme with
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory functions (31), via
upregulation of Nrf2 activity [30]. Moreover, cells treated
with CF induced an increase in glutathione peroxidase
and glutathione reductase, likely via Nrf2 activation [32].
In addition, CF treatment has been shown to prevent
a depletion in reduced glutathione and replenish glutathione
peroxidase, as well as effectively limiting lipid
and protein peroxidation [33]. Collectively, these studies
suggest CF may modulate oxidative stress, at least partly
via redox sensitive pathways, e.g., stimulating Nrf2 which
in turn leads to an increase in redox enzyme expression.
Strenuous exercise may generate large amounts of
ROS that leads to oxidative stress. The ROS produced is
thought to stem from the increase in cellular respiration,
and/or immune cells like neutrophils [1,34]. Leukocytes
that accumulate in the muscle after EIMD evoke a respiratory
burst, whereby macrophages and neutrophils
produce large amounts of ROS to lyse cellular debris and
begin regeneration. However, it has been proposed that
during this process ROS may also induce lipid peroxidation
in nearby healthy tissues [35]. It is thought that this
damage to neighbouring cells might contribute to EIMD,
and at least partly explain why decrements in muscle
function and increased muscle soreness can persist for
several days after strenuous exercise [36].
Therefore, the aim of this narrative review was to critically
examine research on the effects of CF on oxidative
stress, inflammation, muscle function, perceived
soreness, and exercise performance. This review builds
on previous work by Decroix, Soares 19] that reviewed
the effects of CF on exercise performance. The present
review includes research completed since the aforementioned
article and unlike Decroix and colleagues focuses
on CF and EIMD.
To identify the appropriate literature, an in-depth, systematic
search of five separate databases was performed
(PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, ScienceOpen and
MEDLINE) using specific search terms (‘cocoa flavanols,’
OR ‘dark chocolate,’ AND ‘muscle damage,’ OR ‘muscle
recovery,’ OR ‘exercise recovery,’ OR ‘exercise-induced
muscle damage,’ OR ‘exercise’). All reviewed studies conducted
the investigations in humans.
Impact of cocoa flavanols on exercise‑induced oxidative
stress « Table 1»
Antioxidants maintain redox status by neutralising
ROS produced by metabolic reactions [37]. However, as
explained in the introduction, the upregulation of ROS
can lead to oxidative stress if cellular antioxidant capacity
is overwhelmed. Oxidative stress in skeletal muscle
decreases force output [38], likely through a reduction in
calcium (
Ca2+) sensitivity in the myofibrils and reduced
activity of calcium ATPase, suggesting contractile dysfunction
partly due to the accumulation of Ca2+
[39,40].
Therefore, an increase in antioxidant capacity may lead
to improvements in performance and recovery through
reductions in fatigue associated with ROS during and
after exercise.
Two studies that examined the effects of CF on markers
of oxidative stress observed significant interaction
effects following a 14-day sub-chronic supplementation
period [41,42]. Allgrove and colleagues observed that
F2-
isoprostanes and oxidised low density lipoprotein
(markers of oxidative stress) were significantly lower
in the treatment group, supplementing 197.4 mg CF
and 77.4 mg epicatechin, versus placebo post 90 min
of cycling at 60% V̇O2max, interspersed with 30 s efforts
at 90% V̇O2max every 10 min [42]. Similarly, Fraga and
colleagues [29]) found that regular CF intake (168 mg)
alongside soccer training and match play over a 14-day
period resulted in a 12% decrease in malondialdehyde
(MDA; a marker of lipid peroxidation), whereas in
the placebo condition values increased by 10%, indicating
a reduction in oxidative stress associated with
training and match play. A study by Decroix, Tonoli
[43] observed that although cycling time trial exercise
increased MDA concentrations, CF had no significant
impact compared to placebo. Wiswedel, Hirsch [44]
also found no significant treatment effect of CF on
MDA concentrations following cycling exercise. Interestingly,
Wiswedel, Hirsch [44] included a no exercise
control and found that the high flavanol group
had a lesser increase in MDA than the low CF group
four- and six-hours post-ingestion. In contrast, when
supplementing 1765 mg of cocoa extract (containing
530 mg CF) for six days in the lead up to exercise
and once more immediately before, CF blunted the
exercise-induced rise in MDA concentrations [45].
These changes imply that sub-chronic consumption of
CF may reduce exercise-induced oxidative stress more
effectively than an acute dose. The results suggest that
CF may be a potent antioxidant, with plasma MDA levels
decreasing from baseline over a 14-day period of
168 mg of CF consumption a day [41]. These findings
may have applicability to clinical populations as it has
been reported previously that CF supplementation prevents
systemic oxidative stress (measured via plasma
MDA and urinary prostaglandin F2α) in type II diabetes
and cancer [46]. Notwithstanding, the other markers
of oxidative stress and antioxidant activity were not
affected by the treatment (8-oxo-2-deoxyguanosine and
total relative antioxidant potency respectively), with a
possible explanation being the relatively low amount of
collective epicatechin and catechin in the treatment—
only 39 mg per dose [41], or the markers were not sensitive
enough to detect changes in soccer players.
Where Allgrove and colleagues found a significant difference
for F2-
isoprostanes post-cycling exercise after a
sub-chronic dosing protocol of CF, both Davison, Callister
[47] (246.8 mg, 96.8 mg epicatechin) and Wiswedel,
Hirsch [44] (187 mg) observed that even an acute
dose of CF pre-cycling exercise elicited reductions in
F2-
isoprostanes when compared to placebo in a crossover
design. These were the only acute dose studies to observe
any treatment effect on oxidative stress as the other two
reported no differences between treatments [48,49].
The only study to assess oxidative stress over a chronic
supplementation period had participants consuming
175.2 mg daily for 30 days and found that CF significantly
increased the reduced glutathione/oxidised glutathione
ratio and reduced protein carbonylation [50]. This again
indicates that prolonged supplementation may be more
beneficial than solely acute consumption.
Data regarding uric acid/urate is conflicting across
studies. Decroix, Tonoli [43] reported that an acute dose
of 900 mg CF increased uric acid following two 30 min
time trials. In contrast, Fraga, Actis-Goretta [41] found
that sub-chronic dosing of 168 mg CF per day decreased
urate levels by 11% compared to the beginning of supplementation,
Decroix, Tonoli [45] also found that
1765 mg cocoa extract (530 mg CF) per day over a seven
day period did not influence uric acid concentrations at
rest or post-exercise. However, the contrasting observations
may be attributed to the fact that Fraga, Actis-
Goretta [41] collected blood samples on a rest day, while
Decroix, Tonoli [43] took blood samples immediately
post-exercise; which has been observed to increase uric
acid concentrations 1–2 h post intense exercise [51]. As
Decroix, Tonoli [45] took samples at rest and post-exercise
whilst using the highest dose of CF and found no
impact, this may imply that the mechanism that CF act
as an antioxidant may be independent to the mechanism
behind changes in uric acid concentrations. Uric acid can
be used as a marker of oxidative stress due to its role in
the conversion of xanthine dehydrogenase to xanthine
oxidase, which then increases the production of ROS
[52]. Counterintuitively, uric acid is also one of the predominant
antioxidants found within the plasma [53,54].
The role of uric acid as a pro-oxidant within the cellular
compartment, coupled with its role as an antioxidant in
the plasma, make it difficult to draw practical conclusions
from antioxidant based nutritional studies. Additionally,
certain flavonoids, such as quercetin due to its chemical
structure, may act as an inhibitor of the production of
xanthine oxidase (an enzyme that increases ROS concentrations)
and as such have a direct influence on uric acid
concentrations [55].
However, there are times during an athletes’ training
when reducing oxidative stress may not be desired,
such as during pre-season when adaptations from exercise
are the priority as opposed to accelerated recovery.
The adaptations associated with oxidative stress during
and following exercise include improved cellular repair
systems and reduced production of damaging ROS [56].
However, these exercise related training adaptations may
be hindered by regular high doses of antioxidant compounds
and prevent or obstruct key cellular functions
associated with ROS [57]. Nevertheless, a recent metaanalysis
identified that the evidence for a blunting effect
of (poly)phenol supplementation on exercise adaptations
is equivocal, more research is needed to fully understand
how (poly)phenols may augment exercise adaptations
[58].
Impact of cocoa flavanols on exercise‑induced
inflammation Table 2
Strenuous exercise resulting in muscle damage evokes an
acute inflammatory response [59]. Several studies have
observed systemic increases in markers such as interleukin-
6 (IL-6), c-reactive protein (CRP) and tumour
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) [60,61] following intense exercise.
These markers are typically increased for several
hours following exercise, but may persist for several days
depending on the severity of the damage [62]. Inflammation,
particularly the increase in neutrophils, has been
associated with muscle function loss following exercise,
suggesting the acute inflammatory response plays a role
in recovery after exercise [63].
In vitro studies have shown that CF have anti-inflammatory
properties and can reduce tumour necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α) from inducing an upregulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor activity [64] and inhibit
nuclear factor-kappa beta activation [65]. In humans,
CF supplementation has been shown to decrease
Interleukin-1β and Interleukin-10 levels [66], four weeks
of dark chocolate consumption reduced leukocyte accumulation,
soluble adhesion molecules, and the expression
of adhesion markers on leukocytes [67] (see the recent
review by Goya, Martín [68] for more detail). This may
indicate that dark chocolate or cocoa powder with a high
proportion of CF would perhaps be viable as a therapeutic,
anti-inflammatory intervention.
Studies by Allgrove, Farrell [42] and Davison, Callister
[47] found that prolonged cycling at 60% ˙V
O2max increased inflammatory markers (IL-6, IL-10
and IL-1ra and IL-6, blood leucocyte count and neutrophil
count, respectively) but found no difference
between CF supplementation or placebo. Decroix,
Tonoli [43] used two 30 min time trials separated by
90 min; the first time trial starting 100 min post ingestion
of a 900 mg CF beverage. This resulted in no treatment
or time effect on inflammatory markers (TNF-α,
IL-1 and IL-6), perhaps implying the stimulus was not
intense enough to induce inflammation in a cohort of
well-trained cyclists. However, as both Allgrove, Farrell
[42] and Davison, Callister [47] used relatively low
doses of CF (197.4 mg and 246.8 mg respectively), a
higher dose of both total flavanols and epicatechin is
perhaps necessary to evoke the purported anti-inflammatory
effects of CF [69], in situations that induce an
increase in inflammatory markers. These effects include
the modulation of particular aspects of the inflammatory
cascade, such as, inhibiting platelet aggregation
[70] and altering cytokine production via stimulation
or inhibition of certain interleukins and growth factors
(Selmi, Mao [71] for a review). Therefore, it is possible
that for CF to confer anti-inflammatory benefits, the
inflammation must be pronounced and/or prolonged.
Furthermore, cycling exercise does not include a significant
eccentric action; the type of contraction that
is most associated with EIMD and as a result may not
cause systemic inflammation to reach the same level of
studies that involve eccentric biased exercise [72].
Currently, the only EIMD study with CF that measured
inflammation was by Morgan, Wollman [48], in
this study no differences between treatment groups
for IL-6 or CRP, following 100 maximal leg extensions
with an elongated eccentric phase (three seconds).
However, the researchers utilised a low dose
(74 mg) of CF which is potentially why no effect was
observed. The lack of studies showing robust changes
in inflammation following exercise suggests that the
anti-inflammatory effects of CF seen in in vitro studies
may not translate to the in vivo environment. It is
pertinent that future research investigates the impact
of CF on markers of inflammation following EIMD
(e.g., TNF-α), potentially including muscle biopsies
to provide measured changes of inflammation in the
muscle. It should be noted that the inflammatory process
is necessary for skeletal muscle adaptation, and
by blunting the initial pro-inflammatory phase, it is
possible that the muscle regenerative phase can be
impaired [73]. Indeed, an adaptation to exercise is the
increased activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor γ co-activator 1α, which may aid the phenotype
switch of macrophages from pro- to anti-inflammatory
and reduce the expression of genes associated
with oxidative stress [74,75]. Therefore, forgoing
an anti-inflammatory intervention may be effective
when adaptations to exercise are the priority, akin to
adaptations related to ROS and oxidative stress. However,
the evidence that long term supplementation of
CF, (poly)phenols, or other antioxidant supplements
(e.g., vitamin C and E) can inhibit training adaptations
is equivocal [76–78]; as such, more research is
warranted to better understand how these compounds
may influence exercise adaptations.
Impact of cocoa flavanols on the recovery of muscle
function « Table 3»
Muscle function is negatively impacted by EIMD, with
reductions in muscle force and power capacity evident
for several days following strenuous exercise. However,
based on the current evidence it seems that CF supplementation
has minimal, if not any, impact on maximal
voluntary contraction (MVC; as measured using
peak torque) with no effect observed on knee extensor
[48,49,79] or knee flexor strength recovery [80]. Interestingly
however, Corr, Field [80] found that at 24 and
48 h post-exercise there were large effect sizes following
an acute high dose of 1245 mg CF compared to the
control for MVC at 30 degrees and MVC percentage
change at 60 and 30 degrees, although no significant differences
were observed. Therefore, it is feasible that the
dose of 1245 mg CF has the potential to be effective but
may require repeated dosing throughout the recovery
period instead of a singular acute dose to be truly efficacious.
Currently, for (poly)phenols it has been suggested
that > three days of supplementation above 1000 mg may
be required to observe an ergogenic benefit [81], however
no CF research has been performed fulfilling that criteria,
with only one study using a dose above 1000 mg of
CF [80].
It is noteworthy that only Morgan, Wollman [42] and
Corr, Field [80] observed notable muscle damage based
on decrements in muscle function across groups [82].
To best understand the mechanisms behind CFs role in
muscle damage recovery, it would be prudent to ensure
symptoms of EIMD such as a decrease in muscle function
are pronounced. In fact, it is noteworthy that the
participants in de Carvalho, Fisher [49] had fully recovered
muscle function (based on peak torque data) 48 h
post-exercise, indicating that the 100 drop-jump protocol
did not elicit significant damage in a group of elite rugby
players. Therefore, in populations with high baseline
strength and power, protocols designed to induce EIMD
need to be of a sufficient magnitude. Similarly, Peschek,
Pritchett [79] observed 2–5% decrements in the control
group and 10–22% in the CF group from pre to 24 h
post, indicating that perhaps CF ingestion exacerbated
muscle damage or only the CF group suffered the deleterious
effects of the EIMD protocol. Interestingly, from
24 to 48 h post-exercise the CF groups muscle function
improved, whereas no changes occurred in the control
group. Nevertheless, as the control group did not experience
pronounced levels of muscle damage, it is possible
that the protocol was not sufficient to adequately study
the effects of CF on muscle function. Nevertheless, if the
protocol is not representative of the training loads regularly
experienced by those individuals, the functional relevance
of investigating EIMD and CF supplementation
becomes questionable. A further measure of muscle
function used was vertical jump height, in which they
found no significant differences between groups [49].
In contrast, Morgan, Wollman [48] found that an acute
dose of CF (74 mg) aided countermovement jump (CMJ)
height recovery as participants returned to 95% of baseline
at 48 h in the CF group compared to 87% in the
placebo group. However, in this study they consumed a
much lower dose than used previously in the literature,
especially the epicatechin content (8 mg). Furthermore,
the researchers utilised a unilateral EIMD protocol yet
the CMJ is a bilateral test, which could have influenced
the findings. Instead, a more appropriate test could have
been implemented, e.g., a single leg CMJ, as differences
between participants’ dominant and non-dominant legs
may have been a confounding variable for jump height.
Impact of cocoa flavanols on perceived soreness «Table 4»
Measures of perceived soreness are predominantly subjective
in nature, typically measured using validated
scales to quantify subjective pain, soreness and discomfort
such as a visual analogue scale (VAS) [83] or lower
extremity functional scale (LEFS) [84]. As muscular soreness
is ubiquitous with EIMD, most studies investigating
muscle damage utilised these measures of perceived soreness
as a way of tracking recovery [48,49,79,80]. Peschek,
Pritchett [79] administered two doses of 350 mg CF post
EIMD which were separated by two hours and found no
effect of treatment on VAS or LEFS scores. Interestingly,
the increase in soreness from baseline to 24 and 48 h post
was not significant. This suggests that the protocol used
(downhill running at a −10% gradient for 30 min) may
not have induced significant levels of muscle damage in a
cohort of well-trained endurance athletes.
Similarly, de Carvalho, Fisher [49] did not find any
interaction effect of the treatment following the EIMD
protocol with only minor changes from baseline at 48 h,
even though this is when DOMS is known to peak [60].
Out of the four studies only Morgan, Wollman [48] and
Corr et al. [54] found a main effect of time on VAS scores
following their respective protocols (100 knee extensions
and 100 isokinetic hamstring curls respectively). Neither
found a significant difference between conditions;
although as mentioned previously Morgan, Wollman
[31] used a small dose of 74 mg CF and a very low dose
of 8 mg epicatechin. This amount is unlikely to exert any
benefit as the required amounts to have a physiological
influence are reported to begin around 400–700 mg [13]
and at an epicatechin intake of 50 mg [14]. However, Corr
and colleagues [54] did find a large effect size for VAS
scores with a greater dose of 1245 mg CF when compared
to the control at 48 h.
Impact of cocoa flavanols on exercise performance
«Table 5»
The impact that CF may have on performance is likely
through the antioxidant potential of the cocoa and
delayed ROS-induced fatigue. Patel, Brouner [85] measured
performance using maximal distance timed sprint
trial, which was completed after 20 min of cycling. It
was found that 259 mg CF consumed daily for 14 days
resulted in participants covering 17% more distance than
baseline and 13% more distance than a white chocolate
control. The mechanism for this increase may be due to
CF decreasing ROS production and thereby attenuating
fatigue [41,42]. An acute dosing strategy with higher
flavanol products did not elicit any cycling performance
benefit, only inducing slightly higher nitric oxide levels
during exercise, which could aid muscle blood flow [86].
Many sports have limited recovery time between competitions.
For example, in field hockey tournaments,
matches are often played 48 h apart; similar recovery
times are evident in soccer and handball. As a result, it
may be pertinent to accelerate recovery and attenuate
symptoms of EIMD in these sports [87]. In one study,
supplementation of CF (616 mg CF for 7 days) increased
distance covered during the Yo-Yo Intermittent test 1 of
9.85% from baseline to 48 h post a 100 drop jump EIMD
protocol. Whereas the placebo group covered 5.8% less
distance [49]. In this study CF may have reduced any
potential oxidative stress that would be associated with
training, exercise or the EIMD protocol, which may subsequently
delay fatigue.
Even though CF supplementation may improve distance
covered in a set amount of time, it may not improve
performance related to completing a set amount of work
or distance in a time trial setting. Decroix, Tonoli [43],
Decroix, Tonoli [45] and Stellingwerff, Godin [88] found
no significant differences between groups (CF vs placebo)
for time trial performance. However, Decroix and colleagues
[37] observed that in a crossover design the CF
group tended to complete the first of the two time trials
faster (29:47 min placebo vs 29:13 min cocoa), although
statistical significance was not reached. It is difficult to
ascertain whether the 34 s difference between groups is
meaningful, as the trial involved participants completing
a set amount of work equivalent to cycling at 75%
peak power output for 30 min as fast as possible. As
each time trial would have been individualised to each
participant any practical conclusions are difficult to
make other than that CF may have allowed participants
to maintain a slightly higher power output than a placebo
[43]. The CF group also produced a higher power
output after 25 min (for the final ~ 5 min of the first time
trial) compared to placebo (PLA 73.09% vs CF 76.75% of
maximal power output). Decroix, Tonoli [45] found no
differences for rating of perceived exertion, heart rate,
lactate or work performed (kilojoules) within the 20-min
time trial between groups in normoxic or hypoxic environments.
Interestingly, Stellingwerff, Godin [88] found
that performance increased for seven participants following
CF supplementation whereas another seven had
improved performance following ingestion of the placebo.
This may suggest that some individuals are potential
‘non-responders’ to CF supplementation, or that the
differences seen were due to chance and not the allocated
treatments. Other studies that investigated performance
and CF supplementation found no significant differences
between groups for 5 km time trial performance or
V̇O2max [41,79,86]. However, recent work by Sadler, Draijer
[89] suggests that 400 mg daily CF supplementation
for seven days improves oxygen uptake during moderate-
intensity exercise, but this benefit was not observed
during high-intensity exercise. Additionally, after threemonths
of supplementing 175.2 mg/day of CF, Taub,
Ramirez-Sanchez [50] observed an increase in participants’
V̇O2max by 2.8 ± 1.2 ml kg−
1 min−
1 and power values
(140.7 ± 11.6 to 148.3 ± 11 watts), whereas there were
no significant differences in the placebo group.
Practical recommendations and future research
The available data suggests it may be beneficial to ingest
a moderate dose of CF pre-exercise, with benefits effects
on oxidative stress observed at doses ~ 200 mg acutely
and if taken more longer term in the lead up to exercise.
Higher doses of polyphenols may elicit greater physiological
effects in vivo [81] and for CF dosage the amount of
epicatechin is an important factor when considering supplementation
(≥ 50 mg).
To maximise absorption and bioavailability, CF can be
ingested as part of a beverage as opposed to a solid (e.g.,
high flavanol powder dissolved into a beverage instead of
solid dark chocolate), potentially due to the faster gastric
emptying associated with liquids [90]. The bioavailability
and absorption of flavanols can be further improved via
the simultaneous consumption of carbohydrates, as consuming
~ 4 kcal·kg−1 body mass alongside CF increases
flavanol concentrations in the plasma by 40% [91,92].
Carbohydrates stimulate and activate sodium-glucose
transport protein-1 and lactase phlorizin hydrolyase both
of which are involved in flavanol absorption and metabolism
[91,93]. From a practical perspective, the consumption
of CF concurrently with carbohydrates post-exercise
may lead to the benefits of both replenishing glycogen
stores and accelerating recovery following muscle damaging
exercise.
Future studies should look to investigate the muscle
recovery process post EIMD alongside the supplementation
of CF. A focus should be placed on
whether regular supplementation of high doses of CF
(> 750 mg) can affect perceived soreness, oxidative
stress, and inflammation post EIMD, and whether it
can influence repeat performance, fatigue, and perceived
effort. Comparisons between different doses
and thus establishing of an optimal dose to elicit benefits
is needed before concrete recommendations can
be made. It is also important that studies investigating
EIMD should use protocols that evoke sufficient
muscle damage (e.g., inflammation, muscle soreness).
Although, such protocols may not be applicable to real
world sport, they will be useful for determining the
potential mechanisms by which CF might alter physiology
and enhance exercise performance and recovery.
Nevertheless, studies should also investigate the effect
of CF supplementation on recovery following real
world exercise or movements that can induce muscle
damage (e.g., repeated sprint protocols) instead of
solely laboratory-based protocols that may not replicate
the demands or damage response that follows
sporting performances. This may lead to greater practical
application within sport settings. Utilising both
variants of EIMD protocol approaches will aid understanding
of the potential ergogenic value of supplementing
CF in an athlete’s diet.
It may be pertinent to investigate prolonged flavanol
supplementation on repeated bouts of exercise, with a
focus on performance and recovery. Moreover, investigating
the impact that CF may have on exercising muscle
is required to develop greater understanding of the
mechanisms in which CF exert any effects, such as their
influence on endogenous antioxidant enzymes and survival
signalling proteins. Indeed, future research should
also look to further the knowledge of CF and their role
in signalling pathways such as nuclear factor-kappa
beta and nuclear erythroid 2-related factor 2, and how
the regulation of these pathways may attenuate muscle
damage.
Conclusion
Few studies have examined the effects of CF on recovery
following EIMD. Of the available data sub-chronic
(~ 7–14 day) supplementation of CF via dark chocolate
solids or in the form of a high flavanol beverage reduces
exercise-induced oxidative stress and has potential for
delaying fatigue during exercise allowing for prolonged
performance. However, data on recovery of muscle
function, and the analgesic and anti-inflammatory
effects of CF is limited. Research should look to investigate
these areas further to identify if CF are viable
as an ergogenic aid used for recovery and potentially
performance.