Introduction
Background
In Hong Kong, among the 578,600 persons with disabilities,
approximately 320,500 individuals (55%) have
restrictions in body movement [1]. The proportion of
people with restrictions in body movement increased
from 2.72% in 2007 to 4.47% in 2013 [1]. This increase is
expected to continue, partly due to the recent aging population
trend in Hong Kong. Researchers have observed
that people with disabilities (PWD) have poorer health,
a higher risk of early mortality, and a higher incidence of
both mental and physical illnesses [2, 3]. PWD also have
lower physical fitness, poorer quality of life, and lower
rates of participation in physical activities (PA) compared
with their peers without disabilities [4]. These lower PA
rates, fitness level, and quality of life are of great concern
to society because they are associated with hypokinetic
health problems (i.e., diseases resulting from the lack of
exercise) such as functional limitations and social isolation
[2, 3]. This health problem is compounded when
PWD become deconditioned and sedentary as they age.
These health concerns are in fact linked to our service
gap that exists in the provision of sports programs
and interventions for people with physical disabilities
[PWPD, 5–8]. In Hong Kong, a consultancy study [9]
on sports programs for people with physical disabilities
(PWPD) concluded that nongovernment organizations,
such as Hong Kong Federation of Handicapped Youth
(HKFHY) provide a lack of sport activities for members
with motor disabilities. The staff of these NGOs reported
their members have insufficient opportunities for participation
in sport or PA. This result was particularly prevalent
when compared with the opportunities provided to
people with other types of disabilities, such as intellectual
disability [9]. Similarly, van der Ploeg, and colleagues [10]
found that planned and structured activities for PWPD
are lacking, particularly after their rehabilitation programs,
and Jaarsma and Smith [11] identified more trials
based on community led research is needed.
Light volleyball and older adults
Light volleyball (LVB), also known as “gas volleyball” in
mainland China, is a popular recreational activity among
older adults in China [12]. Studies in China [13] and
Hong Kong [14] have indicated that older adults gain
physical and psychological health benefits from regular
LVB practice. With the positive results of our mentioned
intervention, we hypothesised that LVB would also bring
positive health impact (e.g., physical and psychological)
to other populations with low levels of physical fitness,
such as PWPD.
Sitting LVB and PWPD
In this study, we extend PI’s previous work [14] aimed
at promoting LVB programs for PWPD. Sitting light
volleyball (SLVB) is a version of Paralympic sitting Volleyball
(SVB), which combines SVB and LVB, may be a
suitable PA for PWPD who have relatively low fitness levels
and sport competence levels. SLVB is similar to SVB
that SLVB is played in a sitting position. Participants are
required to move in different directions by using their
hands to move and slide across the playing court when
receiving, blocking, and serving the ball. SLVB is inclusive
and enables players with and without PDs to play
together and interactively. It also entails the ball bouncing
no more than once in each pass. When a team wins
a rally, irrespective of whether the team has the right to
serve, the teams rotate (clockwise) before the next service.
Throughout every game, participants used their
upper limbs to support and drag their bodies to complete
the rotation requirement. Moreover, this noncontact
team sport can be played on a standard badminton court,
which is smaller than a volleyball court. Sport facilities in
land-scarce Hong Kong tend to be limited, and the use
of a smaller court increases the sites at which SLVB can
be played by PWPD. The relatively lightweight and soft
cover of the ball make playing the ball off the forearms
easier; additionally, the SLVB with lower velocity [15] ball
may be easier to control and more playable (more enjoyable),
and SLVB is also easier to learn, making it accessible
to those with motor disabilities and muscle degradation
[14].
Objectives
There is an increasing proportion of PWPD in Hong
Kong [1], who have decreased levels of fitness, low participation
in PA, lower level of quality of life, and decreased
opportunities for participation in various sports [9]. Our
study examined the physical (i.e., physical fitness) and
psychological (i.e., physical activity enjoyment) health
outcomes of a SLVB intervention program on PWPD
in Hong Kong. We hypothesized that the SLVB group
should significantly improve physical and psychological
health measures of PWPD compared to control group.
Methods
Study design and participants
We applied a non-randomized controlled pre-post study
design. Participants were divided into two groups: an
SLVB group and a control group (CG), initially in 1:1
ratio. However, due to difficulties recruiting participants
in control group, the allocation ratio was not balanced
in the groups. The study flowchart is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Body composition, upper body muscular strength, muscular
endurance, cardiovascular endurance, flexibility,
PA enjoyment, and quality of life were measured as outcome
variables. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (a)
adults aged ≥ 18 years, (b) PWPD registered in the Central
Registry of Rehabilitation, (c) presence of at least one
functional arm, (d) no diagnosis of cognitive impairment,
and (e) no participation in a structured PA program in
the 6 months preceding the study. The exclusion criteria
were as follows: (a) history of cardiovascular disease
that would hinder study participation; (b) severe body
pains, dizziness, and uncontrollable high blood pressure
(> 160/100 mmHg); (c) seeing and hearing difficulties;
(d) physician disapproval to participate in the study
due to a limiting medical and physical conditions; and (e)
inability to communicate in Chinese. All eligible participants
received a form providing a brief description of the
study and were asked to sign a consent form. Research
staff responded to any questions from participants about
the study. This study was approved by the Institutional
Review Board of University (Human Research Ethics
Committee of Education University of Hong Kong,
A2019-2020–0303).
Based on the study of Van den Berg-Emons et al. [16]
that the effect size (Cohen’s d) for daily PA as energy
expenditure after an aerobic exercise program in young
people with cerebral palsy was 1.05. Our power analysis
was conducted using G power [version 3.1.9.2 [17]] and
indicated a total sample (Cohen’s d) of 28 (14 per group)
was required to ensure a power of 80% and an alpha of
.05. Therefore, we recruited at least 18 participants per
group (SLVB group and CG) in expectation of a dropout
rate of 20% [18].
Intervention program
Participants underwent our intervention program for
16 weeks in sport complex of Hong Kong Baptist University
between May and September 2018. The content
of the SLVB intervention was based on an LVB program
designed specifically for older adults [14]. In short, the
content included basic skills and posture of SLVB, its
team tactics, and its rules and regulations. This SLVB
intervention program comprised 32 training sessions,
with two 90-min sessions conducted every week. Our
program was conducted by registered coaches from the
Hong Kong Light Volleyball Association. Each session
began with a 10-min warm-up, drills, game session,
and concluded with a 5-min stretch and cool-down.
During the intervention period, CG participants were
instructed to continue with their regular daily routines.
Safety precautions
Based on professional advice from our partnered physiotherapist,
the movements in the SLVB intervention
were matched with our participants’ physical conditions.
The physiotherapist provided feedback on the
safety protocol, content, and teaching effectiveness of
our SLVB intervention. Participants were given two
elbow pads for protection against possible contusions
(if needed). Pulse oximeters were used to monitor participants’
exercise intensity during the intervention.
Notably, throughout our study, appropriate warm-ups
and cool-downs were conducted, and participants were
given one 10-min rest in the middle of a training session,
as suggested previously [19].
Procedures
Participants were recruited by an insider of HKFHY/
external partner who had access to individual members
of an academy for PWPD during March – May 2018.
This insider posted messages on a WhatsApp group
and placed advertisements in their bimonthly magazine.
PWPD who expressed interest in participating in the
study were informed about the confidentiality of personal
data and voluntary participation in the study. In addition,
trained test administrators, who conducted the tests,
were blinded to group assignment.
At the first testing session prior to the pretest, participants
were briefed on the aims, procedures, and
expectations of the intervention program. They underwent
screening tests (including checks on their history
of cardiovascular disease). After informed consent was
obtained from participants, data collection was conducted
by trained test administrators. The administrators
described the tests to participants and explained what
the tests aimed to assess [20]. Participants were administered
the fitness tests in an order suggested by a previous
study [21] to maximize recovery and minimize fatigue.
The test items were administered to one participant at a
time. Moreover, participants completed a questionnaire,
and their heights and weights were measured [20].
After testing, participants were allocated to the SLVB
group or CG. The intervention began the following week.
After 16 weeks (at the end of the intervention), participants
completed the posttest using the same protocol as
used in the pretest. The pretest and posttest were conducted
in accordance with the recommendations for
administering the Brockport Physical Fitness Test (BPFT)
[20]. Only participants with at least 80% attendance in
the SLVB intervention were allowed to complete posttest
measures. All participants received a supermarket cash
voucher of HK$100 as an incentive for their participation.
Measures
We used the Brockport physical fitness test, BPFT [20]
to measure the physical fitness attributes of participants.
The components of the physical fitness tests adopted for
this study included the dominant grip strength test (to
measure upper body muscular strength), dumbbell press
test (to measure upper body muscular endurance), skinfold
test (at the scapula; to measure body composition,
such as fat ratio), and shoulder stretch test (to measure
flexibility). The BPFT has been demonstrated to be a
valid and reliable physical fitness test for people with different
disabilities [22].
We also used the multistage field test (MFT) [23] to
measure participants’ aerobic endurance. The MFT
was performed according to auditory instructions: participants
were directed to move around in a wheelchair
around a 15-m2 octagonal course delimited by cones.
The velocity with which the participants moved in a
wheelchair was increased every minute until they were
exhausted. The total distance travelled was recorded. The
validity (predictive to maximum oxygen uptake: r = .59)
and reliability (test–retest reliability: ICC = .99) of the
MFT have been demonstrated in a study involving adults
using wheelchairs [23]. In line with an assessment by
Vanderthommen et al. [23], our participants could use
their personal or sports wheelchair for both the pretest
and posttest assessments.
In addition to administering the fitness tests, we measured
participants’ PA enjoyment. The short, Chinese version
of the Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale (PACES)
[24] was used to measure PA enjoyment in this study.
The eight-item PACES has been demonstrated to be
a reliable (test–retest reliability: ICC = .614) and valid
(convergent validity: r = .43) instrument for assessing PA
enjoyment among Chinese adults [24]. Seven polarised
rating items include “I find it pleasurable” (one end) to “I
find it unpleasurable” (the other end). The mean score of
the eight items was calculated to determine the PA enjoyment
score.
Data analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS 26.0. The t test was used
to evaluate baseline differences between the groups. A
series of 2 (group: intervention group vs control group)
by 2 (time: pretest vs posttest) ANCOVA for each outcome
physical and psychological attribute were used
to examine the effects of the intervention on measures
of physical and psychological attributes in the groups.
Participants’ body mass index that correlated with
these attributes were used as covariate. All effect sizes
are reported as partial η2 and they are interpreted as
medium: η2 = .06 and large: η2 = .14 [25]. The alpha was
set at p < .05 for all statistical tests.
Results
Demographic characteristics
The sociodemographic characteristics of participants
are presented in Table 1. Forty participants (SLVB
group, n = 23; men, n = 7; CG, n = 17; men, n = 10) completed
the pretest and our SLVB intervention. Eight individuals
(five from the SLVB group and three from the
CG) did not participate in posttest measurements or they
withdrew from the study before completion, leaving 32
participants (SLVB group, n = 18; CG, n = 14) with analyzable
data. Excluding data from individuals who withdrew
from the SLVB group, the average attendance rate
was 71.81%. The mean age was 48.89 years [standard
deviation (SD) = 14.42]. Over 50% of them aged between
50–58 years old. Approximately 40% of participants were
women. Most participants had secondary (68.75%) or
tertiary (25%) school education and a family income of
HK$30,000–HK$69,999 (68.75%). Approximately half
were either homemakers (18.75%) or retirees (37.5%).
The most common health conditions were poliomyelitis
(n = 28), limb deficiency (n = 4), cerebral palsy (n = 2),
and others (n = 6).
Outcome measures
The differences in pretest scores between the CG and
SLVB group were not statistically different for all outcome
measures, except for PA enjoyment (t (30) = 2.07,
p = .047). Slightly higher levels of enjoyment were
reported by the SLVB group (5.21, SD = .96) than the CG
(4.58, SD = .70).
The means and SDs of physical and psychological
measures of the groups at pretests and posttest
are presented in Table 2. After the intervention, the
SLVB group had statistically significant lower adjusted
fat mass levels [Triceps, F(1,29) = 4.17, p = .050,
η2 = .126] and higher adjusted aerobic endurance levels
[F(1,29) = 4.27, p = .048, η2 = .128] compared with the
CG. There were better improvements in fat mass level
and aerobic endurance level over times in SLVB intervention
group, comparing to control group. No significant
interactive effects were found in other physical measures
(See Table 2).
Psychologically, a significant interaction effect was
found for PA enjoyment [F(1,28) = 5.34, p = .028, partial
η2 = .156]. Intervention group showed greater improvement
in PA enjoyment over time compared with the control
group.
Discussion
This study aimed to examine the effectiveness of an SLVB
intervention program for the physical and psychological
health outcomes of PWPD in Hong Kong. Following
a 16-week intervention that involved participation in
SLVB, compared with CG group, there were improvements
in cardiovascular endurance, body composition
(lower fat mass), and PA enjoyment in SLVB group. There
were no differences in flexibility, upper body strength,
and endurance between groups. Therefore, our main
hypothesis was partially supported; the SLVB intervention
was associated with significant improvements in
physical (e.g., cardiovascular endurance and body composition)
and psychological health (e.g., PA enjoyment)
attributes in PWPD, compared to PWPD not exposed to
the intervention.
Improvements in physical health
Similar to participants in traditional indoor volleyball [26]
or SVB [27], participants in SLVB exhibited significant
improvements in cardiovascular endurance and body
composition at the end of the intervention. Improvements
in cardiovascular endurance were expected due to
the movements involved in playing volleyball in the sitting
position, such as sliding on one’s buttocks and using
(particularly upper) limbs [28].
The duration of the sessions in the SLVB programme
exceeded the World Health Organization PA recommendations
[29], in that adults should participate in at least
150 min of moderate-intensity aerobic activity weekly.
This may be another explanation for the improvements in
cardiovascular endurance observed among participants
in the SLVB group. Increased cardiovascular endurance
resulting from the intervention may have contributed to
lower fat mass of the SLVB group. This result partially
corroborates prior findings that exercises that improve
cardiovascular endurance, improve fat distribution, and
reduce overweight and obesity [30].
Lack of improvements in flexibility, upper body muscular
strength, and muscular endurance. A previous study
[27] confirmed the relationships between flexibility, muscular
strength, muscular endurance, and performance of
SVB skills. For example, serving and blocking were correlated
with flexibility (i.e., shoulder stretch test), whereas
defense, service, and grip strength were correlated. In
addition, higher levels of muscular endurance predicted
higher performance in serving, blocking, and overall performance
of SVB players. Another study [31] also demonstrated
that vertical reach in the seated position is one of
the most crucial factors in the performance of SVB athletes.
However, our findings contrast with these results.
In the present study, inadequate blocking and spiking
during the intervention likely contributed to the nonsignificant
improvement in the flexibility of participants.
Even though we had a training session for practicing both
spiking and serving (underarm or overhead serving),
most participants did not perform much spiking, and
they often served using the underhand technique, which
requires lower upper body muscular strength more than
the overhead movement, during game sessions in our
intervention. In addition, during game sessions in the
intervention, underarm service was dominant among
participants with a lower degree of skill. In addition, tests
such as the grip strength test (forearm strength), might
not fully reflect participant’s upper body muscle endurance
improvement resulting from the intervention. Other
SLVB movement-specific measurements should be considered
in the future. Altogether, these factors explain
the nonsignificant improvement in upper body muscular
ability and flexibility.
Improvement in PA enjoyment
In this study, compared with the CG, the SLVB group
reported greater PA enjoyment. These results are consistent
with our previous results [14] and those of another
study applying water volleyball, another adapted version
of volleyball, to older adults [32]. SLVB is a team sport
in which players cooperate and work with their teammates.
Players must collaborate and communicate with
their team members in the processes of passing, setting,
and spiking. Volleyball is generally played with high team
spirits and may create a greater sense of enjoyment [33],
along with improved competence, physical self-esteem,
and the development of positive habits as was reported
in previous studies [34–36]. In addition to the dynamics
between participants themselves or the feelings of
participants toward the activity, the coaches’ encouragement
and feedback provided in the intervention might
also contribute to participants’ relatedness, as suggested
by self-determination theory [37], and consequently
enhance the likelihood of PA enjoyment. All the above
might explain the greater PA enjoyment of the SLVB
group.
In sum, our above significant results may be because
we used standardized fitness measurements, center- and
group-based interventions, and professional guidance
from intervention coaches. Notably, the adherence rate
for the intervention program was high (71.81%). Approximately
80% of participants completed both pretest and
posttest measures. Thus, our observed 20% dropout
rate corresponded to our expected dropout rate. This
expected dropout rate had been suggested by Hicks et al.
[18], who studied long-term exercise training in people
with spinal cord injury. This low dropout rate might be
because our intervention entailed fun, self-efficacy, and
social contacts, which encouraged participation, and this
also helped overcome barriers such as the lack of opportunities
for participation in sports and accessibility problems,
as suggested in a previous study [38].
Limitations and recommendations for further research
Our study has some limitations. First, this was a study
examining the effects of the SLVB intervention on the
health of a small group of PWPD from one nongovernmental
organisation. Also, given evidence that SLVB was
beneficial to the physical and psychological health of general
PWPD, evidence is warranted to test its impact in a
larger group of PWPD and with specific type of PWPD.
All these will enhance the generalizability of the intervention
findings. Second, SLVB movement-specific measurements
should be considered in future interventions; for
example, measuring aerobic endurance while moving on
the floor using hands. Third, because of resource constraints,
no follow-up was conducted. Fourth, about 8 of
40 participants did not complete our posttest measures.
Therefore, future studies should include follow-up assessment
with a more effective plan to monitor adherence to
the intervention and changes in physical and psychological
measures through study designs such as the wait-list
control trial design. Fifth, in addition to applying quantitative
methods to examine the effects of SLVB on health
among PWPD, researchers may need to adopt a mixedmethods
approach to comprehensively examine both the
training effects and participants’ experience in a future
SLVB interventions program.
Conclusion and practical implication
This is the first study to examine the effects of an intervention
involving an adapted sport, SLVB, on the health
outcomes of PWPD in Hong Kong. Our results showed
that SLVB was beneficial to physical health (i.e., cardiovascular
endurance and body composition) and psychological
heath (i.e., PA enjoyment) among PWPD.
Randomized control trials should be conducted to further
investigate the effects of SLVB on health outcomes in
the community and across multiple service centers. SLVB
is a safe noncontact team sport with an easy-to-control
ball. Moreover, it is playable on badminton courts, which
avoids the problem of space constraints. Therefore, SLVB
is accessible to people with motor disabilities and muscle
degradation in the community. Our study therefore provides
evidence-based information to the government and
related practitioners for the promotion of adapted PA
(such as SLVB) among PWPD.