Background
Controlling exercise intensities has been shown to be
one of the key measures to improve endurance capacity and performance: The concept of using submaximal workload parameters such as lactate (LT) or
ventilatory thresholds (VT) to determine individual
cardio-respiratory fitness and to schedule training intensities is commonly accepted in this context and
has been demonstrated in endurance as well as teamsports athletes [1–3].
Assessment of parameters of the autonomic nervous
system (ANS) has gained pronounced attention. The
concept of testing biomarkers of the ANS for estimating
thresholds is based on the idea that the ANS exerts distinct influences on the cardiorespiratory system during
exercise to regulate heart rate, cardiac contractility and
blood pressure. Recently, different study groups implemented the evaluation of autonomic biomarkers to control training intensities and to detect training-induced
states of fatigue [4]. Measuring ANS biomarkers is
promising as it is non-invasive and cost-efficient. Heart
rate variability (HRV)-derived parameters reflecting ANS
activity showed an association with LT in healthy and
diseased cohorts [5–8]. Despite different methods to assess AT including metabolic markers (lactate, glucose),
ventilatory responses, autonomic markers (e.g. HRVderived markers such as RMSSD) or neuroendocrine
markers (catecholamines), they all determine AT within
close ranges [9]. However, as the physiological downstream is faster in some systems than in others, these
different methods assessing the anaerobic threshold may
show slightly different workloads at the AT. Nevertheless, as all these methods differ in invasiveness, costs,
time-consumption and easiness of determination, new
methods to indicate AT may be helpful.
Sympathetic-activity associated periodic repolarization
dynamics (PRD) is a novel ECG-based parameter, that
reflects influences of efferent cardiac sympathetic activity
on the ventricular myocardium during repolarization
[10, 11]. The non-invasive assessment via highresolution ECG is based on beat-to-beat changes of the
T wave vector (dT°) with periodic components of repolarization in the low-frequency range (≤ 0.1 Hz). Large
clinical trials demonstrated that increased levels of PRD
are strong predictors of sudden cardiac death (SCD) in
patients with ischemic and non-ischemic cardiomyopathy [11–13].
As exercise is known to affect ventricular repolarization crucially [4, 14] we previously tested repolarization
instability (dT° signal) during exercise testing [15]: We
demonstrated that the dT° signal shows a characteristic
three-phasic pattern that allows a reliable and noninvasive estimation of the anaerobic threshold (we called
it ATdT°) in healthy recreational athletes. This pattern at
the anaerobic threshold is characterized by a maximal
discordance of dT° and heart rate and this point highly
significantly correlated with lactate thresholds measured
by the methods of Mader and Dickhuth [15].
In the present study we validated this non-invasive
ECG-based assessment of the anaerobic threshold by
our previously described methods in a cohort of 65 team
sport athletes to check if this method can be transferred
to professional athletes as well as well-trained amateur
athletes who are able to achieve markedly higher maximal workloads during exercise and have increased
workloads at lactate thresholds.
Methods
Study population
We included 65 healthy team sport athletes (14 women,
51 men, mean age 22.3 ± 5.2 year. (standard deviation),
minimum age 14 year., maximum age 36 year.) who
underwent a graded cycle ergometer test until maximal
exhaustion. Our study cohort consisted of 32 professional athletes (1st league and 2nd league European football clubs and 1st league basketball club) and 33
amateur athletes (4th and 6th league European football
clubs). Exclusion criteria were acute or chronic infections, presence of pacemakers or implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs), history of cardiovascular
diseases or risk factors and other contraindications for
performing exercise testing [16].
All individuals gave written informed consent. For participants under 16 years old, written informed consent
was obtained from a parent or guardian. This study was
approved by the local ethics committee (Ethikkommission der Medizinischen Fakultät der LMU München)
and was conducted in accordance to the Declaration of
Helsinki.
Exercise testing
All subjects performed a standardized graded cycle exercise test [17] (starting at 90 W workload) until fatigue
which we defined as not being capable to maintain pedal
cadence above 70 rpm. Increases of 30 W took place
every 3 min while pedal cadence was kept constantly at
70–90 rpm.
Assessment of ECG-based cardiac repolarization
instability and detection of anaerobic threshold via dT°
(AT(dT°))
Determination of AT via dT° signals was carried out
analogously to a previous study by our group [15]. For
details, we thus refer to this publication. In brief, we analyzed high-resolution data from Frank’s orthogonal lead
ECG (1000 Hz, Schiller medilog AR4 plus, Schiller diagnostics, CH) which was recorded throughout the entire
exercise test including a 5 min resting phase prior and
after the end of each cycle test with SMARTlab computer and R peak and T wave detection algorithms [17,
18]. In this process, the obtained spatiotemporal properties of each T wave are then used to assess the angle dT°
between two successive repolarization (T wave) vectors
[11, 13, 15]. When plotted over time dT° displays a variability with typical underlying oscillations in the lowfrequency range (≤ 0.1 Hz) [11, 13, 15]. During exercise
this dT° signal shows a characteristic three-phasic pattern and ATdT° is defined as the point of maximal discordance between dT° signal and heart rate [15].
Figure 1 illustrates an exemplary dT° signal and corresponding heart rate signal during graded exercise test
and shows the moment of maximal discordance between
these signals defined as ATdT°. This point was converted
into power output (W) assuming a linear increase in exercise increments and the corresponding heart rate was
extracted from the ECG signal.
Detection of lactate thresholds via methods by Mader
and Dickhuth
Capillary blood samples were obtained from earlobes
and lactate concentrations (in mmol/l) were measured
(lactate Scout+, EKF Diagnostics, Cardiff, GB) before exercise at rest, during exercise at the end of each incremental step and after exercise. The individual lactate
threshold was calculated using a standardized computer
software (winlactat V 5.2.1.6., Mesics, Münster,
Germany). The calculation of LT was determined
according to the methods by Mader (fixed threshold at 4
mmol/l) and Dickhuth [1, 19]. Dickhuth definded the LT
as the lactate concentration 1.5 mmol/l above the lactate
equivalent (i.e. the lowest value of the lactateperformance ratio marking the onset of the lactate increase during exercise) [19].
Statistics
All results are represented as mean ± standard deviation.
For statistical analyses and graphical illustration, we used
CRAN “R” 3.6.3. Kruskall-Wallis test was performed to
detect statistical differences between mean determined
thresholds (ATdT°, LTMader and LTDickhuth). The relationship between the three different methods was assessed
using the Pearson correlation coefficient test. Intra class
correlation (ICC) was tested for these three methods.
Bland-Altman plots were performed to visualize the differences between the methods and the respective
average.
Results
Baseline characteristics of study participants
Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics of all study
participants (A) as well as of professional athletes (B)
and amateur athletes (C) as subgroups. Altogether 65
healthy team sport athletes (14 women, 51 men, mean
age 22.3 ± 5.2 yrs.) were included in this study. Mean
BMI was 22.7 ± 1.8 kg×m− 2
, mean maximum workload
was 262.3 ± 60.8 W (241.8 ± 64.4 W for amateur athletes
and 283.4 ± 49.5 W for professional athletes). All
participants finished exercise testing until exhaustion.
Table 2 shows performance parameters, heart rates and
lactate thresholds assessed via methods by Mader and
Dickhuth as well as ATdT° for all participants (A) and
professional (B) and amateur athletes (C) alone. To exclude that maximal performance was not reached during
the test, we calculated theoretical maximal heart rate
using the formula 208-(age x 0.7) as described elsewhere
[20] and calculated %HRmax expected for all thresholds.
dT° signal pattern during exercise and determination of
AT(dT°)
We were able to identify the typical, previously described
three-phasic dT° pattern [15] in all participating athletes
during cycle exercise test: We found a low dT° signal at
rest (first 15 min) which immediately increased concordantly to the heart rate with the beginning of exercising.
At ATdT°, dT° and heart rate showed minimal correlation. Then dT° transiently declines before increasing
again until the end of the exercise test (exemplary signal:
see Fig. 1). During recovery the dT° signal drops but
remains higher than baseline levels. ATdT° was determined as previously described [15].
Correlation of ATdT° with LTs by Mader and Dickhuth
ATdT° occurred at 187.6 ± 44.4 W, LTDickhuth at 181.1 ±
45.6 W and LTMader at 184.3 ± 52.4 W. Mean heart rate
at ATdT° was 154.0 ± 14.2 bpm, at LTDickhuth 152.8 ±
14.9 bpm and at LTMader 153.1 ± 14.9 bpm (Table 2).
ATdT° highly significantly correlated with LTDickhuth
(R = 0.96, R2 = 0.92, p < 0.001) and LTMader (R = 0.98,
R2 = 0.96, p < 0.001) (Fig. 2A and C, respectively) investigating power output. Similar results were detectable correlating heart rates at ATdT° with LTDickhuth (R = 0.97,
R2 = 0.94, p < 0.001) and with LTMader (R = 0.92, R2 =
0.85, p < 0.001). Intra class correlation for these three
methods was excellent with intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) of 0.95 (power output) and 0.93 (heart rate).
Bland-Altman plots illustrate close concordance between
ATdT° and LTDickhuth (Fig. 2B) as well as between ATdT°
and LTMader (Fig. 2D) with power output showing a
mean difference of 6.6 W between ATdT° and LTDickhuth,
of 3.3 W between ATdT° and LTMader and of 3.2 W between LTDickhuth and LTMader.
We further investigated thresholds for subgroups of
professional athletes (n = 32) and amateur athletes (n =
33). In professional athletes mean ATdT° was at 204.1 ±
33.9 W, LTDickhuth at 196.2 ± 37.0 W and LTMader at
196.2 ± 37.0 W (ICC = 0.91). Elite athletes had a mean
heart rate of 151.7 ± 14.3 bpm at ATdT° of 151.0 ±
15.7 bpm at LTDickhuth and of 151.3 ± 15.8 bpm at LTMader
(ICC = 0.94). In amateur athletes we detected ATdT° at
171.7 ± 47.9 W, LTDickhuth at 166.5 ± 48.8 W and LTMader
at 170.4 ± 58.6 W (ICC = 0.96). Amateur athletes had a
mean heart rate of 156.0 ± 14.1 bpm at ATdT° of 154.3 ±
14.4 at LTDickhuth and of 154.6 ± 14.1 at LTMader (ICC =
0.93). Figure 3 visualizes the strong correlation between
ATdT° and LTDickhuth for both subgroups of amateur (R =
0.97, R2 = 0.94, p < 0.001, Fig. 3A and B) and professional
athletes (R = 0.93, R2 = 0.86, p < 0.001, Fig. 3C and D) regarding power output. Figure 4A shows box plots for
power outputs at ATdT°, LTMader and LTDickhuth with no
significant differences between methods of threshold determination. Intergroup comparison revealed no significant differences as checked by Kruskal-Wallis test (p =
0.73). Figure 4B shows box plots for heart rates at ATdT°,
LTMader and LTDickhuth with no significant differences
between methods of threshold determination. KruskalWallis test again detected no significant differences between assessment methods (p = 0.91).
Discussion
In the present study we were able to validate a noninvasive cardiac repolarization-based method [15] to determine AT in a large cohort of professional and amateur team sport athletes while performing a standardized
incremental cycle exercise test. We confirmed the characteristic three-phasic pattern in all study participants
who showed a gradual increase concordantly to the heart
rate at the start of exercise, a sudden drop in repolarization instability (here at a power output of mean 187.6 ±
44.4 W) discordantly to the heart rate and a new rise of
the dT° signal at the end of the workout. The moment
of minimal concordance of dT° and heart rate (ATdT°)
correlated highly significantly with lactate thresholds by
Mader and Dickhuth.
Therefore, this pattern has been shown to be characteristic in both young and healthy average-trained athletes as well as professional athletes and very welltrained amateur athletes undergoing standardized incremental cycle exercise tests. It is thus valid and reproducible in both athletes who are only able to perform
exercise until lower maximal workloads and in athletes
capable to continue exercise tests up to very high maximum workloads. This determination of AT is similar to
results previously published by Milagro et al. who also
found changes in the profile of ventricular repolarization
instability as well as of oscillations in the low frequency
spectrum once reaching the anaerobic threshold [21]. It
is noteworthy that these changes in repolarization instability cannot be provoked by increased heart rate or
by fixed atrial pacing [11, 15]. The dT° signal occurs independently of breathing rates and is not associated with
heart rate variability [11]. Emerging data validly attributes the dT° signal to efferent sympathetic cardiac
nerve activity at the ventricular myocardium [11, 22].
Studies have broadly investigated the alterations within
the autonomic nervous system during exercise and the
mechanisms found are dynamic, complex and still remain incompletely understood: It is established that the
activity of the sympathetic ANS gradually increases with
greater workloads shifting from an approximately 4:1
vagal-sympathetic balance to a 4:1 sympatho-vagal balance in the course of an exercise [23]. The change in
autonomic cardiac modulation during increasing workload subsequently results in altered HRV-derived parameters and this has been used to assess AT in athletes [24,
25]. Our present study, studies assessing AT via HRVderived parameters [24, 25] and previous studies investigating the connection of changes in repolarization instability and AT [15, 21] thus suggest that the
autonomic control of the electrical activity of the myocardium, especially on the level of the ventricular myocardium seems to change once reaching the anaerobic
threshold.
While the exact physiological mechanisms underlying
ATdT° remain unclear, our study provides several relevant practical implications for future sports research and
training physiology: (i) We were able to present a
method which is non-invasive and does not require any
puncture to gain blood samples. (ii) Furthermore, as it is
ECG-based it is less cost-intensive as point-of-care lactate measurements. (iii) A link between HRV indices and
blood lactate levels was found during resistance exercise
[6–8], in endurance athletes [5] and team sports athletes
[24, 25]. Of note, HRV indices are dynamic and rather
sensitive to environmental conditions [4]. dT° was
proven to be independent of heart rate and breathing
rate [11]. Nevertheless, up to date there has no study
been conducted comparing the assessment of thresholds
based on HRV indices with repolarization patterns. (iv)
As threshold-based training has been shown to lead to
performance benefits in endurance as well as teamsports athletes [1–3] the investigation of ATdT°-based
training intensities in athletes might be of high interest
and should be investigated in future studies.
Our study has some limitations. First, we investigated
only team sport athletes and the group of professional
athletes contained no female athletes. Whether determination of LTs via ATdT° can be validly transferred to
endurance athletes has to be elucidated in future studies.
Secondly, we only investigated the dT° signal on a cycle
ergometer and not with different methods such as treadmill running. Third, ATdT° was only correlated to LT
and not to ventilatory thresholds as assessed during cardiopulmonary exercise testing. This should be performed
in future studies. Additionally, we performed graded exercise tests. However, the gold standard to determine
lactate thresholds is the assessment of the maximal
steady state during multiple rectangular exercise
protocols. Finally, our study included healthy individuals
without any known underlying cardiovascular diseases.
Whether the assessment of ATdT° can be performed in
patients with cardiovascular disease or on medication influencing the ANS has to be investigated in future
studies.
Conclusions
We demonstrated that ATdT° is a reliable and noninvasive measurement to assess AT. It correlates with
established methods of LT assessment in a large cohort
of professional and well-trained amateur athletes. The
results of this validation study indicate that ATdT° might
represent a promising tool for future routine application.