New findings
What is the central question of this study?
Does spontaneous physical activity (SPA) decrease in
response to an acute bout of moderate exercise at individualized intensity and does this compensation change
as mice age from early adulthood to the transition to
middle age?
What is the main finding and its importance?
 SPA, but not exercise capacity, declines from early
adulthood to the transition to middle age;
 Acute exercise decreases SPA quantity and intensity
in the following 24-48 h;
 The magnitude of the fall in SPA is similar from
early adulthood to the transition to middle age;
 The fall in SPA can contribute to both body mass
increase as a result of aging and to the below-thanexpected effects of exercise on energy balance.
Background
Physical exercise is widely used as a strategy to induce
body weight loss. However, its effects on energy balance
are commonly disappointing due to a processes referred
to as compensation [1]. Among the mechanisms which
may be involved in the exercise below-than-expected energy deficit are increased energy intake [1] and decreased
energy expenditure, including decreased basal metabolic
rate and spontaneous physical activity [2, 3].
Spontaneous physical activity (SPA) consists of daily
life activities excluding structured, purposeful exercise. It
generally comprises low-intensity physical activities
(LIPA), with low energetic costs [4]. Recent studies
showed that LIPA is associated with higher total brain
volume [5] and inversely associated with all-cause mortality [6], highlighting the importance of SPA on health.
The contributions of SPA to energy balance, however,
are less clear, despite studies demonstrating protective
effects against weight gain in response to overfeeding [7]
and an inverse correlation with the rate of body weight
change [8].
In humans, there is no consensus on the role of SPA
in the compensation in response to exercise [1]. In rodents, the results are more consistent. We [9] and others
[10–12] have shown that exercise decreases SPA. Lark
et al. [12] found that this reduction was predicted to attenuate the expected change in energy balance by approximately 45 %. All of the above studies, however,
used running wheel as a model of exercise, which does
not allow for the control of either volume or intensity of
exercise.
To gain further insight into the effects of exercise on
compensation we have investigated in mice the effects of
an acute session of moderate exercise at individualized
intensity on 48 h SPA (amount and intensity) and energy
intake, simultaneously. Moreover, as we have previously
demonstrated, SPA decreases from early adulthood to
the transition to middle age [13], so we also investigated
whether compensation in either SPA or energy intake
following exercise changes with increasing age.
Methods
Experimental design
C57Bl/6j male mice (n = 10), obtained from the Center
for Development of Experimental Models (CEDEME),
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), were first
acclimatized to the animal house of the Department of
Bioscience. They were evaluated when they were 4 (4 M)
and 9 (9 M) -month-old. A separated set of mice (n = 8)
was used to perform a control experiment, as explained
below. According to Flurkey et al. [14], this lifespan corresponds to the beginning of adult life to the transition
to middle age.
Food intake
Food intake was determined individually in the 48 h before and in the 48 h immediately after the acute exercise
session, simultaneously with the measurement of SPA.
Daily food consumption was determined by subtracting
the weight of the remaining food after 24 h from the
weight of food given, with care taken to account for
spillage. Before each acute exercise session (basal) food
intake was calculated as the mean of the two 24 h periods whereas food intake after the exercise was separated in day 1 and day 2.
Maximal exercise capacity test
Mice were familiarized with the treadmill for five days
before each maximal exercise capacity test (MECT),
which was performed at 4 and 9 months. The
acclimatization consisted of placing the mice for 30 min
on a static treadmill on day 1 and, in the following days,
the speed was set at 8 cm/s, which is a very low speed
aimed to make mice familiar with any noise a turned-on
treadmill can produce. On days 4 and 5 the mice spent
an additional 10 min in the treadmill at 12 cm/s.
For the MECT, mice were placed in the treadmill for
an 8-min warm-up at 12 cm/s. The test started immediately after the warm-up with an initial speed of 15 cm/s
increased by 15 cm/s every 45 s until mice were not able
to keep the pace even after gentle prodding by hand
(adapted from [15]). The maximal speed (cm/s) at which
mice completed the 45 s stage (maximal stage completed) was used to calculate the speed for the acute exercise session. The total distance (cm) and the maximal
speed reached (not necessarily completing the 45 s
stage) were also recorded. No electrical shock was applied for either the MECT or the acute exercise session.
Acute exercise session
The acute exercise session was done one week after the
MECT. It was performed for 30 min at 50 % of the maximal speed (cm/s) at which mice completed the 45 s
stage (adapted from de [16]). When necessary, mice
were gently prodded by hand. Two mice at 4 and 9
months of age were not included in the posterior analysis of spontaneous physical activity and food intake for
either refusing to run for the stipulated time or for getting a small injury in the finger during the session,
avoiding any interference on locomotor parameters. As a
control experiment, a separated set of mice was placed
in the treadmill for the same 30 min but without exercising (non-moving treadmill). They were submitted to
the same locomotor (SPA and speed of displacement)
and food ingestion analysis, before and after exposure to
the treadmill. Additionally, on a different occasion, mice
were placed in the actimeter and analyzed for 5 consecutive and uninterrupted days.
Spontaneous Physical Activity (SPA)
Activity was measured individually by infrared beam
sensors using an IR actimeter system composed of a 2
dimensional (X and Y axes) square frame (25 × 25 cm),
each frame containing 16 × 16 infrared beams separated
1.3 cm from each other (Panlab-Harvard Apparatus, Barcelona, Spain). SPA was recorded in the 48 h before and
in the 48 h immediately after the acute exercise session
at 4 and 9 months of age. The software ActiTrack v2.7
(Panlab-Harvard Apparatus, Barcelona, Spain) also generated data on average speed of displacement. Mice were
allowed 2 h of acclimatization in the actimeter cage before basal measurements. SPA consisted of the sum of
stereotypes and locomotion. The software determines
stereotypes by the number of samples where the position
of the mouse is different from its position during the
previous sample and equal to its position from the second sample, back in time; and locomotion by the number of samples where the position of the mouse is
different from its position during the previous sample
and different to the position of the second sample, back
in time. Average speed of displacement (cm/s) is calculated as locomotion (expressed in centimeter instead of
counts) divided by the time mice spent in locomotion.
For basal SPA and average speed, we calculated the
mean of the two 24 h periods (48 h) before the acute exercise session. After exercise, the 48-h analysis was separated in day 1 and day 2.
Statistics
Results are presented as mean and standard deviation
(SD). To evaluate the effect either age (4 and 9 months)
or exercise (basal, day 1 and day 2 post-exercise), data
were analyzed using Generalized Estimating Equations
(GEE) on SPSS, version 20 (IBM). A pairwise Bonferroni
comparison was used if necessary. The probability distribution and correlation matrix structure were chosen
based on the Quasi Likelihood under Independence
Model Criterion (QIC). A significance level of p < 0.05
was adopted.
Results
The results of the maximal exercise capacity test are
shown in Table 1. No effect of age was observed for any
of the parameters evaluated at 4 and 9 months.
Figure 1 shows the effects of aging on SPA, average
speed of displacement, food intake, and body mass.
There was a significant effect of age on SPA (p = 0.01),
which reduced significantly at 9M compared to 4M (Fig.
1A). Average speed of displacement did not differ significantly in the timespan studied (Fig. 1B). Food intake
was also similar from 4 to 9 months of age (Fig. 1C).
Body mass increased significantly (p = 0.0001) from 4M
to 9M (Fig. 1D).
A separated set of mice was submitted to the same
evaluations, but without exercising. Instead, they
remained for the same 30-min in the non-moving treadmill. No difference in either SPA, speed of displacement,
or food intake was observed before compared to after
exposure to the treadmill (Supplementary Fig. 1A-C). In
an additional analysis, mice remained for 5 consecutive
and uninterrupted days in the actimeter and again, no
difference was observed for either locomotor parameters
or food intake (Supplementary Fig. 1D-F).
The effects of an acute exercise session on SPA, average speed of displacement, and food intake in 4-monthold mice are shown in Fig. 2. There was a significant effect of exercise on SPA (p = 0.0001). Exercise decreased
SPA (p = 0.0001) in the 24 h immediately after the acute
session (day 1). On day 2, SPA returned to pre-exercise
levels (Fig. 2A). Exercise also had a significant effect on
average speed of displacement (p = 0.0001). The speed
dropped significantly on day 1 (p = 0.0001) and despite
increasing toward basal levels on day 2, it was still lower
(p = 0.036) than before exercise (Fig. 2B). For food
intake, despite GEE analysis indicated a significant effect
of exercise (p = 0.041), no difference among the times
(basal, day 1, and day 2) was found in the pairwise comparisons (Fig. 2C).
As in the younger age, the acute exercise in ninemonth-old mice significantly affected SPA (p = 0.0001).
SPA reduced significantly on day 1 compared to basal
(p = 0.0001) but was similar to pre-exercise levels on day
2 (Fig. 3A). Likewise, there was a significant effect of exercise on average speed of displacement (p = 0.0001).
The speed fell significantly on day 1 in relation to basal
(p = 0.0001) but, even though it increased on day 2, the
average speed was still significantly lower (p = 0.001)
than before exercise (Fig. 3B). Exercise also had a significant effect on food intake (p = 0.0001) but with a different temporal pattern. Compared to basal, food intake
was not different on day 1 but decreased significantly
(p = 0.0001) on day 2 (Fig. 3C).
Next, we determined whether the magnitude of
changes (% in relation to basal) in SPA, average speed of
locomotion, and food intake in response to exercise was
affected by age. There was no effect of age on the magnitude of change for SPA and average speed of locomotion
either on day 1 (Fig. 4A) or day 2 (Fig. 4B) after exercise.
For the magnitude of food intake change, there was an
effect of age in response to acute exercise only on day 2
(p = 0.001). Whereas food consumption increased to
values higher than pre-exercise at 4 M, it decreased at
9 M (Fig. 4B).
Discussion
In our study, we found that an acute exercise session at
individualized intensity consistently decreased both SPA
and average speed of displacement and that the magnitude of the fall did not increase from young adulthood
to the transition to middle age. Moreover, we showed
that food intake was not a significant contributor to exercise compensation, favoring a role for reduced activity
amount (SPA) and intensity (speed of displacement) in
decrease exercise effectiveness to cause a negative energy
balance.
Analyzing separately the effects of aging, we found a
decrease in SPA at 9 months, as previously observed by
our group [13]. During the same period, no change in
absolute food intake (basal) was observed. Body mass,
however, increased from 4 to 9 months of age. Different
mechanisms participate in body mass gain as age increases, including decreased activity of the somatotropic
axis which begins as early as after puberty, increased fat
to lean muscle mass ratio [17], and reduction in resting
energy expenditure that cannot be fully explained by
changes in body composition [18]. Remarkably, the latter
was found to be more pronounced at early adulthood in
men [18]. Importantly, physical activity is a critical contributor to total daily energy expenditure [19]. Bjursell
et al. [20] showed that exposure to a high-fat diet led to
increased body weight gain throughout the 21 days of
experiment. However, while energy intake was higher
only in the first 24 h, locomotor activity reduced as early
as after 3–5 h and remained lower all over, being the
most important factor for body weight gain induced by
the diet. Thus, taking into account that SPA comprehends all mice movement in the cage, its relevance
on energy balance becomes more evident as well as
the role of the decreased SPA on body mass gain
with age.
The results of the maximal exercise capacity test indicate that mice at the transition to middle age have similar exercise capacity than at the beginning of adult life.
SPA, as previously said, was lower at 9 M compared to
4 M, thus, suggesting that, at least in mice, the mechanism controlling SPA is more sensitive to aging and declines earlier than the function of cardiorespiratory/musculoskeletal systems. Scariot et al. [21] found that
both SPA and exercise capacity declined from 2 to 5-
month-old Wistar rats. Swimming exercise at individualized intensity for 12 weeks, though, avoided the decrease
in SPA but not in aerobic and anaerobic capacity. Despite the differences between ours and Scariot et al. [21]
study, which include distinct animals, age, exercise type,
and method of SPA measurement, they both have in
common the finding that SPA and exercise capacity
seems to be uncoupled.
The inherent drive for movement responsible for SPA
is controlled centrally and several structures and neurobiological modulators have been proposed to its regulation [22]. In a previous study, we found that leptin
signaling was decreased in hypothalamus by the time
SPA first started to fall, at 6 months [13]. How exercise
modulates the circuitry leading to a compensatory decrease in SPA, though, needs further investigation. Exercise can, directly and indirectly, be sensed by the brain.
Peripheral factors released from skeletal muscle, known as myokines, could mediate this muscle-brain crosstalk
[23]. Pontzer et al. [24] proposed the “constrained-energy expenditure” theory, in which physical activity does
not increase total energy expenditure in a dosedependent manner, as an evolved mechanism to maintain energy expenditure within a physiological narrow
range. In line with this theory, some myokines and other
exercise mediators change in plasma according to the
acute metabolic stress induced by exercise [23], which
could signal to the central nervous system to decrease
other energy-demanding behavior/function in order to
minimize the impact on energy balance.
Different than expected, the compensation in either
locomotion parameters or food intake was not more
pronounced when mice were older. In humans, a compensatory decrease in SPA in response to exercise training has been observed in individuals with 56 years or
more [25, 26]. However, in these studies, the results
were not compared with a younger group. We did not
find any study performed with rodents comparing the effects of exercise on SPA at different stages of life. Concerning food intake, a minor to lack of effects of an
acute exercise session is commonly observed in humans,
as reviewed by Caudwell et al. [27]. In mice, contrasting
results can be found, probably, due to varying volumes
of exercise and duration of the energy consumption
measurement [28, 29]. Nevertheless, in Wistar rats, as
they aged from 4 to 11 and from 25 to 27 months, there
was an increase in the effects of appetite-suppressing
factors and a decrease in the appetite-stimulating factors
[30]. If similar alterations take place in mice, it could
help to explain the reduction in food intake in 9-monthold mice 2 days after the acute exercise session.
A limitation of our study is that we evaluated SPA
only in response to a single bout of exercise, and not
after training. A compensatory decrease in cage activity
has been seen in mice even after 10 weeks of wheelrunning [9], implying that exercise training might not
mitigate this behavior. Other authors also reported decreased SPA after chronic 3 to 8 weeks-exposure to running wheel [10, 11]. However, whereas with running
wheel mice are free to exercise as they will, our study
advances as our protocol allowed for the control of both
volume and intensity of exercise, which are key parameters for exercise prescription. Also, it would be interesting to evaluate the same compensatory behaviors in
obese mice, since they would benefit the most from
negative energy balance.
Conclusions
In conclusion, as summarized in Fig. 5, a single bout of
moderate exercise decreases spontaneous physical activity amount and intensity in the subsequent 24-48 h with
minor effects on energy intake. The magnitude of this
compensatory reduction in SPA is similar from early
adulthood to the transition to middle age. The decrease
in both the amount and intensity of SPA may compensate for the increase in energy expenditure induced by
exercise, helping to understand the below-than-expected
effect of exercise interventions in causing a negative energy balance.