Background
Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean pulmonary
arterial pressure (mPAP) of 25 mmHg or greater at rest,
confirmed by right-heart catheterization (RHC) [1]. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare chronic
disease leading to decreased physical activity, right-sided
heart failure and a reduced life expectancy. PAH is characterized by the presence of pre-capillary pulmonary
hypertension and pulmonary vascular resistance > 3
Wood units, in the absence of other causes of precapillary pulmonary hypertension such as severe lung
disease, chronic thromboembolism or other rare causes
[1, 2]. Apart from hemodynamic alterations, including
increased pulmonary resistance, decreased stroke volume and cardiac index, PAH also induces other pathologic changes such as reduced muscle strength and
endurance, decreased inspiratory muscle strength, which
result in decreased peak VO2, progressive fatigue, dyspnea and deterioration in exercise capacity [3].
The main goals of PAH therapy are to ensure an acceptable level of quality of life in the earliest stages of
the disease, reduce disease progression, and improve patient prognosis [4, 5], which remains poor [6, 7]. The
European Respiratory Society/European Cardiology Society (ERS/ESC) guidelines published in 2015 recommend
the implementation of monitored individualized exercise
training as adjuvant therapy for stable PAH patients on
optimal medical treatment [8]. Since then, data regarding the effect of physical activity on disease progression
and prognosis have been published [9–16]. Regrettably,
a clinically useful definition of exercise for pulmonary
hypertension is still not available [17], and diversity in
training forms and models highlights the necessity for
more precise analysis.
According to the ERS statement on exercise training
and rehabilitation in patients with severe chronic pulmonary hypertension [9], there is a pressing need to develop specialized rehabilitation programs, and to identify
the most beneficial training models in further studies.
To date, no optimal rehabilitation program striking the
right balance between potential benefits and possible
risks has been designed. Analyses in the available literature, which confirm the positive impact of regular exercise training not only on muscle function, exercise
capacity and patient quality of life, but also pulmonary
hemodynamics and right ventricular function, concern
inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation models. An inadequate number of studies exploring the home-based rehabilitation model for patients with PAH have been
published to date.
The principal aim of the present study was to evaluate
the safety and effect of a 6-month home-based rehabilitation program on the quality of life, symptoms, physical
endurance, strength of respiratory and skeletal muscles,
and body mass composition of patients with PAH. The
secondary aim of the study was to investigate the effects
of therapy after six months of exercise cessation.
Methods
The present prospective interventional pilot study was
conducted between March 2019 and July 2020 at the Rehabilitation Department of the Medical University of
Bialystok, Poland. Study participants were patients of the
Cardiology Outpatient Clinic and the Department of
Cardiology of the University Hospital in Bialystok. The
study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki Principles for Medical Research Involving
Human Subjects and was approved by an independent
local bioethics committee. The study protocol was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov and was assigned the number
NCT03780803. Both verbal and written consent for study
participation was obtained from each participant prior to
the commencement of the study. All subjects were
informed of the objectives, procedures, and potential risks
or discomfort associated with study participation.
A total of 46 patients with a diagnosis of PAH (Group
1 in the comprehensive clinical classification of pulmonary hypertension according to the ERS/ESC guidelines
[8]) based on right-heart catheterization (mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) ≥25 mmHg, pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) ≤15 mmHg) were enrolled
in the study. All patients were in the World Health
Organization Functional Class II or III (WHO-FC) and
stable during the last three months of the study. Echocardiography, a perfusion lung scan, respiratory function
tests and computed tomography were performed prior
to the initiation of specific treatment to rule out other
causes of pulmonary hypertension. During the period of
study there were no changes in specific PAH therapy.
Exclusion criteria were as follows: significant modification in the treatment of the main disease within three
months of study commencement, severe lung disease,
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or
asthma, loss of consciousness within three months of
study commencement, active neoplastic disease with
poor prognosis, acute inflammation up to four weeks before enrollment, anemia (Hgb < 11 g/dl – male, < 10 g/dl
– female), electrolyte and hormonal disorders within
four weeks before enrollment, other clinical situations
that made it impossible for the patient to participate in
the rehabilitation program, and contraindications in accordance with the applicable standards of Comprehensive Cardiac Rehabilitation. Individuals with intellectual
disability were also excluded from the study.
Patients were randomly assigned to either the intervention or the control group (1:1). Randomization was
performed using Research Randomizer (Version 4.0) by
an investigator who was not involved in the assessment
of study outcomes. Figure 1 shows the flow of participants through the study. Not all participants were included in the final analysis. This was due to withdrawal
of consent for participation in the study (n = 2), failure
to start training within three weeks of receiving instruction (n = 1), termination of training in its initial phase
(n = 1), change of residence (n = 1), and inability to
attend scheduled assessments (n = 1). Most of the data
for one participant were lost. Subjects from the control
group were not assessed because of reluctance to attend
scheduled appointments, which was associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Participants had a full medical history and anthropometric measures taken, and clinical examination performed. Baseline WHO-FC was assessed. As part of the
clinical evaluation, right-heart catheterization (RHC),
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), cardiopulmonary
exercise testing (CPET), the 6-min walk test (6MWT),
measurements of respiratory muscles and handgrip
strength, and body composition analysis using
bioimpedance analysis (BIA) were performed. Blood
samples were collected for the following tests: a
complete blood count, concentrations of N-terminal
brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), and serum
creatinine concentrations. Quality of life was assessed
with the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) and
Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS).
Right-heart catheterization (RHC) was performed in
the study group with a standard technique using a
balloon-tipped 7F Swan-Ganz catheter; cardiac output
was measured by thermodilution method; pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) was calculated with the formula PVR = (mPAP-PAWP)/cardiac output (CO) and
expressed in Wood units (WU).
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed
in accordance with the guidelines published by the
American Society of Echocardiography [18, 19] using the
iE33x Matrix (Philips) echocardiograph.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) was conducted using Schiller Cardiovit CS-200 ErgoSpiro system
(Schiller AG, Baar, Switzerland) according to the standard treadmill ramp protocol in accordance with guidelines published by the American Thoracic Society and
American College of Chest Physicians [20]. A symptomlimited exercise treadmill test was performed. The speed
and incline were increased gradually every 20 s. Patients
were monitored three minutes before, during the test,
and three minutes after exercise (electrocardiography,
pulse oximetry). Blood pressure was measured prior to
and following the test. Gas analysis was also performed
during the test. Parameters such as peak oxygen consumption (peak VO2, ml/kg/min), exercise ventilatory
efficiency defined as the slope of the linear relationship
between ventilation and carbon dioxide output (VE/
VCO2 slope), and anaerobic threshold (AT) were
assessed.
The 6-min walk test (6 MWT) was performed in accordance with standardized guidelines of the American
Thoracic Society (ATS) [21] along a 30-m corridor after
a minimum of 10 min of rest. Prior to and following the
test, blood pressure and heart rate were measured, dyspnea and fatigue were assessed using the 10-point Borg
Scale. Blood oxygen saturation was measured with a
pulse oximeter (OxyWatch C29) before the test, and in
the second, fourth, and sixth minute of the test. The test
and the post-exercise recovery phase were supervised by
a physician. All measurements were obtained in the
same conditions (primary outcome).
Hand grip strength (HGS) was measured in accordance with the recommendations of the American Society
of Exercise Physiologists (ASEP) [22] using the Jamar
hand dynamometer (Saehan DHD-1 Digital Hand Dynamometer). The patient was sitting upright in a chair
without armrests, feet resting flat on the floor, arms
adducted to the trunk, elbow joints at 90 degrees of
flexion, forearms in neutral position, wrists at between 0
and 30 degrees of extension. Isometric contraction lasted
five seconds, with a transitional period of one second at
the beginning of the contraction. Three attempts were
made for each side alternately, with a minimum of a
one-minute break between repetitions. The best result
was recorded.
The strength and function of respiratory muscles were
measured using the MicroRPM Respiratory Pressure
Meter (Micromedical Ltd., Rochester, Kent, UK) which
measures maximum inspiratory pressure (PImax), and
maximum expiratory pressure (PEmax) generated during
forced inspiration and expiration. Measurements were
performed in accordance with guidelines of the American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society
(ATS/ERS) [23, 24]. Patients were instructed to insert a
mouthpiece into the mouth, ensuring the flange was positioned over the gums and inside the lips. During the
measurement of maximum inspiratory pressure, the patient exhaled to residual volume, emptying the lungs,
and then performed the Mueller maneuver, a forced inhalation against the MicroRPM with as much effort as
possible for as long as possible (minimum two seconds).
The result was maximum average inspiratory pressure
sustained over the first second of the test in centimeters
of water (cmH2O). In order to measure maximum expiratory pressure, the patient inhaled to total lung capacity and performed the Valsalva maneuver, a forced
exhalation against the MicroRPM with as much effort as
possible for as long as possible (minimum 2 s). The result was maximum average expiratory pressure sustained
over the first second of the test in cmH2O. The best
result out of three repeated attempts was recorded.
Body composition analysis (bioelectrical impedance
analysis – BIA) was performed using the In-Body (720)
body composition analyzer (Biospace Co. Ltd., Seoul,
Korea) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The palms of the patient’s hands and the soles of
their feet were moistened prior to contact with the platform of the analyzer. Participants were instructed to
stand straight, hold the handles of the analyzer and keep
still, enabling constant contact with electrodes during
the analysis.
The reference group consisted of 25 healthy individuals without cardiovascular diseases or other significant
chronic diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic sclerosis, chronic kidney and hepatic diseases, cancer and
other medical conditions that would influence the results of the clinical examination. Participants had a full
medical history taken, and clinical examination performed. Anthropometric measures, measurements of
respiratory muscle and handgrip strength, and body
composition analysis using BIA were also performed.
Quality of life was assessed with the SF-36 and the FSS
questionnaires. The group was needed mainly as a reference for measuring body composition, handgrip and respiratory muscle strength since there are no clearly
established norms for these parameters in the Polish
population.
Intervention stage
Exercise training
A home training and respiratory rehabilitation program
was developed and adapted according to the clinical status of study participants, who were provided with a
booklet containing detailed descriptions and photographs of the exercises and recommendations regarding
the training. In order to ensure safety during exercise,
the intensity of physical effort was set at the level of 4–5
(fairly hard – hard) points on the 10-point Borg Scale
and the training heart rate was at the level of 60–70% of
heart rate reserve based on baseline parameters from
CPET (heart rate reserve = maximum exercise heart rate
– resting heart rate, training heart rate = resting heart
rate + 60–70% of heart rate reserve). Training was performed once a day, at least 5 times per week, for 6
months (24 weeks). The optimal target training duration
of 45–60 min (no less than 30 min) was reached within
the first two weeks of starting the program. Training
progression was expressed in parameters such as an increased number of repetitions of particular exercises, increased resistance during respiratory muscle training,
duration of a training session, marching pace and distance covered. Patients were advised to be assisted
during training sessions by a family member or a
caregiver.
Each training session started with a warm-up (5–10
min) in order to prepare the cardiovascular and the
locomotor systems. It consisted of 15 exercises of all
body parts including resistance training of inspiratory
muscles with the use of the Pulmogain, RespiTrain
(Moretti, Italy) exercise apparatus. The device provided
three-stage progression in training intensity. The patient,
by inhaling deeply, tried to lift all the balls constituting
resistance. Inspiration had to be maintained for as long
as possible. The main part of the training effort was
interval march training (lasting a minimum of 30 min),
interrupted every two minutes by one of five respiratory
exercises performed in the recommended order. Interval
aerobic march training together with respiratory exercises in the proposed combination were implemented in
order to decrease dyspnea and fatigue, improve exercise
tolerance, decrease work of breathing, correct the
breathing pattern, increase chest and diaphragm mobility, strengthen respiratory muscles and increase lung
capacity. The training session ended with a cool-down
(5–15 min) in order to prevent a sudden drop in blood
pressure and heart rate.
Prior to starting the training program, each patient
was shown how to perform the exercises properly, was
familiarized with recommendations regarding physical
activity, specific contraindications to training, and instructions on how to manage adverse effects during or
after exercise. The significance of regular, monitored
physical activity in cardiac rehabilitation in relation to
the pathophysiology of the disease was emphasized. Each
patient in the intervention group was provided with the
Pulmogain, RespiTrain exercise apparatus and instructed
in its usage. Patient instruction took place in the Department of Rehabilitation, University Hospital, Medical
University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.
Self-monitoring
Members of the intervention group were provided with
pedometers (Pearly 3D, Spokey) to measure their daily
physical activity. They were advised to wear the device
in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions in the
pelvic area from morning to night (removing it before a
shower or bath). Every patient received a self-control
diary in which data relating to each day of the intervention period were collected. Participants were asked to report the following before and after each training session:
heart rate and blood pressure, dyspnea and fatigue on
the 10-point Borg Scale, duration of the training session,
the number of steps taken during the training session indicated by the pedometer, and the total number of steps
taken per day (on training and non-training days) to
allow for assessment of general activity levels of the participants. Patients were instructed to record all changes
in symptoms, or situations which may have impacted
the quality of performed exercises as well as adverse
reactions not associated with training.
Patients from the intervention group had appointments in the Department of Rehabilitation one month
and three months after starting the training program in
order for the research team to check if the exercises
were performed properly, to monitor diary completion,
and to make potential modifications to the training program. The participants were supervised and supported
via telephone (at least once a week). In addition, attending physicians had an opportunity to analyze patients’
self-control diaries during scheduled appointments in
the Cardiology Outpatient Clinic. The control group was
not subjected to any of the above-mentioned interventions.
Adherence
Regularity of exercise in cardiac rehabilitation plays an
important role in the final outcome of a training program undertaken by the patient. Therefore, in the
present study, repeated weekly telephone calls were
made to verify adherence to the minimum recommended five training sessions per week. Moreover, the
participants reported on their compliance during scheduled appointments in the Cardiology Outpatient Clinic,
scheduled hospitalizations and follow-up appointments
in the Rehabilitation Department. Adherence was defined as a percentage of training sessions performed per
week over the period of six months of intervention
(minimum 120 sessions in a 24-week period).
Observation stage
Re-evaluation of patients from the intervention group
was conducted immediately after cessation of the 6-
month intervention, and six months later. During the
observational phase, patients decided independently
about continuation or discontinuation of the recommended training program and intensity of exercises.
Those who decided to continue the training program
were offered the support of the research team. Followup investigations included a medical history, physical
examination, anthropometric measurements, assessment
of WHO-FC, 6MWT, measurements of respiratory muscle
and handgrip strength, body composition analysis
(BIA), and completed SF-36 and FSS questionnaires.
Statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed with use of statistical environment R 3.6.2 and additional packages dedicated to
particular types of analysis and data visualization. For
comparisons of multiple independent means (intergroup
comparisons), Welch’s ANOVA was performed based
on type 2 sum of squares. The Kruskall-Wallis test was
used as the non-parametric equivalent of Welch’s
ANOVA. For comparisons of multiple dependent means
(comparisons of the effects of intervention in the study
group), a one-way analysis of variance for repeated measures was used. If the assumption of sphericity was violated, tested with the Mauchly test, the GreenhouseGeisser correction was applied. The Friedmann test was
used as the nonparametric equivalent of this analysis.
Strength of effect for analyzes of variance was measured
using the eta squared. The Bonferroni correction was
used for post-hoc analysis. For comparisons of two independent groups, Welch’s t tests not assuming homogeneity of variance were used. As the nonparametric
equivalent of this test, the Mann-Whitney test was applied. The t-test for paired data and the non-parametric
Wilcoxon test were used to compare two paired groups.
Measurement of the effect size for t-tests was Cohen’s d,
and for non-parametric tests, Pearson’s r. When comparisons of two groups were performed as post-hoc analyses, p-values were corrected using the Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons. P-values < 0.05
were considered statistically significant.
Results
Prior to the commencement of the rehabilitation program, there were statistically significant differences between the intervention group and the healthy reference
group in parameters such as PImax (49.62 ± 20.89 and
81.96 ± 27.9 cmH2O, respectively, p < 0.001) and PEmax
(76 ± 32.77 and 113.16 ± 36.55 cmH2O, respectively, p <
0.001), measurement of respiratory muscle strength, and
scores of SF-36 (PCS: 40.11 ± 11.35 and 51.5 ± 7, respectively, p = 0.008) and FSS questionnaires (4.08 ± 1.6 and
1.87 ± 1.07, respectively, p < 0.001). There were no statistically significant differences in handgrip strength and
body mass composition between PAH patients and
healthy individuals.
Patients with PAH who completed the exercise training program formed the intervention group (16 individuals, age 48.9 ± 18.6 years, 7 female (44%), 9 male (56%))
and the control group (23 individuals, age 53.7 ± 12.8
years, 13 female (57%), 10 male (43%)). Baseline demographic and anthropometric data, functional parameters
including the 6-min walk distance (6MWD), measurements of respiratory muscles and handgrip strength, body
composition analysis, and assessment of quality of life
after random allocation of patients to the intervention and
control groups are summarized in Table 1. Presented data
also includes the etiology of PAH, WHO-FC of PAH, comorbidities, specific PAH therapy, the RHC, TTE, CPET
parameters and laboratory test results prior to intervention. Statistically significant differences were found only
for the tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion
(TAPSE), and NT-proBNP parameters. In the control
group, the mean values of both parameters were significantly higher than in the intervention group (Table 1).
Data illustrating the effects of the intervention, divided
according to intervals at which the measurements were
taken are presented in Table 2. Physical training produced a statistically significant improvement in respiratory muscle strength, measured by PImax (Table 2,
Fig. 2A) and PEmax (Table 2, Fig. 2B) after the 6-month
intervention period (PImax: 16.38 ± 17.85 cmH2O, p =
0.002 and PEmax: 25.81 ± 24.58 cmH2O, p = 0.001), and
after the observation period, within one year of patient
inclusion in the study (PImax: 24.62 ± 19.09 cmH2O, p <
0.001 and PEmax: 31.19 ± 26.28 cmH2O, p < 0.001, Table
2). In post hoc analysis, a significant effect of intervals at
which the measurements were taken was noted (p <
0.001). Statistically significant improvements in arm
muscle circumference (0.43 ± 0.53, p = 0.005) and handgrip strength for both extremities (dominant: 5.67 ± 8.12
kg, p = 0.017 and non-dominant: 4.47 ± 6.22 kg, p =
0.015) after the intervention period were noted (Table
2). These parameters returned to baseline levels after
training discontinuation during the observation period
(Table 2). In post hoc analysis, a significant effect of
intervals at which the measurements were taken noted
(p < 0.05). A statistically significant improvement of
71.38 ± 83.4 m in the 6MWT distance was obtained(p =
0.004) which was maintained at the level of 57.12 ±
103.31 m (p = 0.043) after the observation period in comparison to the baseline value (Table 2, Fig. 2C). In post
hoc analysis, a significant effect of intervals at which the
measurements were taken was noted (p = 0.005). The
level of oxygen saturation (SaO2) before 6MWT was statistically significantly higher after the intervention period
(p = 0.029), and returned to initial values after the observation period (Table 2). Following the intervention phase
and the observation period, study participants reported
decreased dyspnea before 6MWT (p = 0.011 and p =
0.006, respectively, Table 2). The statistically significant
improvement in quality of life achieved after the completion of the exercise training program measured using
the SF-36 questionnaire (Physical Functioning, p < 0.001;
Role Physical, p = 0.015; Vitality, p = 0.022; Role
Emotional, p = 0.029; Physical Component Summary,
p = 0.005) did not persist beyond completion of the
study. Results of the one-way analysis of variance for repeated measurements of the evaluated parameters are
presented in Table 2. No statistically significant changes
in WHO-FC were observed.
A limited number of adverse events were reported, including excessive fatigue (n = 1), and a single incident of
a sudden increase in HR during training, which aroused
anxiety in the patient (n = 1) as the recommended
maximum training heart rate was exceeded. Some
patients (n = 3) reported the common cold, influenza,
and chest injury, which were not related to the
training program. There were no cases of death in either
PAH group.
Adherence to the recommended exercise protocol,
which included a minimum of 120 sessions in 24 weeks,
was on average 91.88 ± 14.1%. Three participants (18.8%)
exercised only 3–4 times per week while nine patients
rehabilitation program on patients’ functional status and
quality of life. The effectiveness of the program is comparable or greater than that reported in previously published interventions based mainly on closely supervised
rehabilitation in medical facilities. The impact of physical training on functional parameters has been revealed
in meta-analyses [12, 25, 26] which demonstrated, inter
alia, improvements in 6MWT (6MWD) by 53–72 m,
peak VO2/kg in the range of 1.5–2.2 ml/min/kg, and
workload by 14.9 W [9]. Our study, compared with these
analyses, showed an improvement in 6MWD by 71.4 m
after the intervention period, revealing equally high effectiveness. In other studies [27–29] evaluating the effectiveness of home-based rehabilitation programs, a
significantly less marked effect was achieved (39–48.5
m). Mathai et al. [30] estimated a minimal clinically important difference (MCID) for the 6MWD as the primary outcome measure for patients with PAH proposing
the value of approximately 33 m. In our study, twelve patients (75%) surpassed the MCID after the intervention
period. The 6-month observation period, which followed
the intervention phase, during which the majority of participants did not undertake training, allowed us to observe stabilization of improvement in 6MWD at the
level of 57 m. This result is highly satisfactory since it indicates a statistically significant long-term improvement
in patients’ health and exceeds the MCID for the population of patients with PAH [30].
Regular exercise training over a long period of intervention led to a statistically significant increase in the
resting level of SaO2.. Regrettably, the effect did not persist in the subsequent six months of observation.
In our study, values of handgrip strength in the PAH
group did not differ significantly from those in the control group at the time of inclusion in the study. The
training program developed for the purpose of this study
did not include exercises with significant resistance [31]
due to insufficient evidence regarding the safety of this
form of exercise, and a lack of direct medical supervision
during home training. Despite the exclusion of typical resistance training from the rehabilitation program, a statistically significant improvement in skeletal muscle strength
was achieved, although the effect was not permanent.
The rehabilitation program developed for the purpose
of the present study led to an improvement in PImax
and PEmax after the intervention period, and an increase
in PImax and PEmax after the observation period compared to baseline values. The undertaken respiratory
training led to both an improvement in inspiratory
muscle strength, as confirmed by previous reports [9,
31–35]), and expiratory muscle strength despite a lack of
specific resistance exercises for this group of muscles in
the program. This result confirms high effectiveness of
exercise training which, in our opinion, should include
respiratory muscle resistance training together with exercises mobilizing the chest and diaphragm, and restoring proper function of the respiratory system.
To date, no reports examining the effect of physical
training on body composition in patients with PAH have
been published in the available literature. In our study,
we assessed respiratory muscle and handgrip strength,
body composition, and changes in these parameters after
a period of cardiac rehabilitation. Body composition analysis using BIA at the recruitment stage of the study
showed that there were no statistically significant differences between patients with PAH and healthy controls.
Following the 6-month intervention period, there were
no statistically significant changes in the investigated parameters, except for an increase in arm muscle circumference. It was found that despite the passage of time
and a tendency towards increasing body weight and
body mass index (BMI), patients maintained the percentage of body fat (PBF) at a constant level. Additionally, an increase in skeletal muscle mass (SMM), and a
statistically significant increase in arm muscle circumference were observed. The beneficial effect of the rehabilitation program was observed not only on muscle
function, but also muscle mass despite the fact that typical resistance exercises were not included in the program. These parameters appear to indicate a significant
impact of the proposed exercise training program on the
increase in skeletal muscle mass, and thus the respiratory muscles. Patient adherence to the rehabilitation
program was enhanced by the coordinated efforts of the
therapeutic team who, in addition to face-to-face education of patients and their families during follow-up
meetings, were in constant telephone contact with patients. Doctors examining study participants during
scheduled appointments in the Cardiac Outpatient
Clinic were also instructed to monitor both the patients’
condition, and the completion of the self-control diary.
Exercising patients were also required to monitor their
physical activity based on accelerometry. The support
model proved to be highly effective, and the compliance
rate of 92% indicated the selection of measures was
appropriate. Comparable results have been obtained with
other physical training programs in a shorter, 12-week
home-based model [28, 29].
During the six-month observation phase, which
followed the compulsory intervention period, patients almost completely stopped following the recommended
training protocol. Only some of them continued to use
the respiratory muscle trainer, and tried to monitor daily
physical activity with the use of an accelerometer. Therefore, the lower compliance rate in studies by Babu et al.
[27] may be related not only to the etiology of pulmonary hypertension, and the WHO functional class to
which the patient belongs at the time of recruitment,
but also to a lack of additional tools monitoring patients’
physical activity. On the other hand, decreased frequency of exercise training [27] (3 sessions a week compared to 5–6 sessions in other studies [28, 29]), may give
patients increased freedom to forego training sessions.
These differences lessen the possibility of comparing the
results of our study with those reported in the aforementioned paper. There may be some possible limitations in
this study. The first is the small sample size caused by
the low incidence of PAH in the general population (estimated prevalence and annual incidence of PAH in
Poland – 30.8/mln and 5.2/mln, respectively [36]) and
exclusion of patients unable to follow the recommended
training program. A review of the available literature indicates that a small sample size has been listed as a limitation in the vast majority of published studies, which
explains a small number of randomized clinical trials in
PAH. In multiple studies evaluating the effectiveness of
rehabilitation in patients with pulmonary hypertension,
the number of patients in the intervention group ranged
from 12 to 30. The second limitation concerns the
model of monitoring adherence to therapeutic recommendations which was based on self-reports of patients
supported and supervised by a carer/family member, and
weekly telephone verification by the research team. Despite the fact that this type of method is commonly used
in long-term cardiac rehabilitation, the use of telemonitoring will be a standard way of healthcare delivery in
the future. The third limitation is connected with the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic which made evaluation of
the control group one year after patient inclusion in the
study impossible. Inability to compare the functional status of patients in the PAH intervention group with those
who did not undertake training after 12 months of study
enrollment limits the ability to determine the scale of
disease-related physical impairment over time. Due to
the dynamically developing pandemic, and the introduction of a national lockdown at the time, patients from
the control group, who did not benefit from joining the
study as they did not experience the positive effects of
rehabilitation, showed very limited motivation to participate in the final evaluation. Due to the fact that PAH as
a concomitant disease may have affected the severity of
a potential COVID-19 infection, patients declined to attend scheduled outpatient appointments since they associated healthcare settings with an increased risk of
contracting the disease. Therefore, taking into consideration the benefit-risk ratio, re-evaluation the control
group was not insisted upon. By contrast, despite the
risks associated with the current pandemic, participants
from the intervention group expressed the need to
undergo a set of tests designed to demonstrate the positive impact of the rehabilitation program on their functional status and physical fitness.
In summary, the present study provides key data on
the feasibility of the developed home-based exercise
training program and offers hope for physiotherapeutic
care for patients with PAH who do not have access to
other forms of rehabilitation. The results of our study
prove that the home-based exercise program developed
by us is safe, effective and acceptable to patients with
PAH, which encourages its implementation in centers
which do not provide inpatient or outpatient
rehabilitation.
Conclusions
Home-based rehabilitation program is an entirely safe
form of rehabilitation for stable patients with PAH who
can be supervised by a family member/caregiver.
Home-based rehabilitation significantly improves functional parameters, quality of life and physical fitness.
Respiratory muscle strength and 6MWD remain increased even six months after training cessation.
A lower level of resting dyspnea persists six months
after training cessation.
The effects of increased hand grip strength, increased
resting saturation, and improved quality of life are not
sustained after training cessation.