Background
A persistent research finding in Finland and elsewhere
has been variation in medical practices both between and
within countries. In a relatively recent systematic review,
Corallo et al. [1] found a large number of studies with
regional variation within OECD countries covering hospital
admissions due to several chronic conditions and
elective surgical procedures. Some of the variation seems
to be unwarranted, as these differences do not vanish
when regional differences in need are taken into account,
thus potentially reflecting inequity or inefficiency in the
system [2]. Variation seems to exist especially if medical
decision making involves discretion and the best treatment
cannot be identified unambiguously [3]. This is true
for hysterectomy when performed for benign causes.
While the rate of hysterectomy has decreased especially
in OECD countries, it is still one of the most common
gynaecological procedures [4–14]. In Finland hysterectomy
rates were high compared to many other countries
in the 1990s, but a substantial decrease has been reported
since the beginning of the 2000s [15] and the rates are
now comparable to other Nordic countries.
While most studies investigating differences in use of
hysterectomy have been longitudinal, studies on temporal
variations within one country are rare. Additionally,
many of the studies examining regional variation do so
with total hysterectomy rates [5, 7, 11, 12] and only a few
separate between rates for benign and malign conditions
[8, 13].
In Finland, earlier studies concerning regional variation
in hysterectomy are rare. An earlier study reported large
regional variation in overall hysterectomy rates in the
late 1980s, and decrease in it [16]. It has not been examined
how variation has evolved since. In terms of medical
practice variation it is important to examine regional variation
in hysterectomy rates for malign and benign conditions
separately, as there are non-invasive care options in
many of the benign indications and thus more discretion
on whether to operate or not.
The Finnish health-care system provides a good case
for examining variations in hysterectomy as the system
is universal in coverage and therefore, in general, supports
equity in access to health-care according to need
[17]. The system is mainly financed by tax revenues and
user-fees are generally low. The system supports evidence
based care as there are accepted guidelines for the treatment
of altogether 106 conditions including guidelines
for treatment of several benign causes related to hysterectomy
in the National Current Care guidelines system
[18].
The aim of this study was to investigate change in use
of hysterectomy in Finland from 2001 to 2018. We concentrate
mainly on hysterectomies performed for benign
indications. We further evaluate whether the potential
decrease in differences suggested by earlier studies has
occurred in Finland as well, and whether it occurred in
all indications or just some of them.
Methods
We used Finnish Care Register for Health Care (HILMO)
data from 1 January 2001 to 31 December 2018 to assess
changes in the use of hysterectomy. The register covers
all hospital discharges in all public and private hospitals
in Finland. The study population consisted of all female
residents in Finland aged 25 or older between 2001 and
2018. Population at risk was defined as female mean population
in each age group and hospital district. Hospital
districts were based on municipalities according to residence.
Persons whose permanent residence was outside
Finland and those in long-term care were excluded from
the analyses.
We defined hysterectomies using Nomesco operational
codes (LCC00, LCC01, LCC10, LCC11, LCC20, LCC96,
LCC97, LCD00, LCD01, LCD04, LCD10, LCD11,
LCD30, LCD31, LCD40, LCD96, LCD97, LEF13, LEF14).
We categorized indications for hysterectomy according
to diagnostic codes from the Finnish version of ICD-
10 and classified hysterectomies into seven categories:
leiomyoma of uterus (D25), gynecological malignancy,
malignant neoplasm and in situ neoplasms of female genital
organs (C51-C58, D06, D07, D39), abnormal uterine
bleeding (AUB; N91-N93, N95), endometriosis (N80),
genital prolapse (N81), and “other”, including the remaining
gynaecological diagnoses. Any record of primary
malignant neoplasm and in situ neoplasm of female genital
organs was assigned as a primary diagnosis independent
of its position in the list of diagnoses. If no diagnosis
of cancer or in situ neoplasm was recorded, the diagnosis
listed first was designated as the indication for hysterectomy.
Peripartum hysterectomies (MCA30, MCA33,
MCW00) were not included in the study. However, they
are rare in Finland and should therefore, not have a significant
effect on the results of the current study.
To analyse regional and temporal variations, ageadjusted
rates per 100,000 person years (py) were estimated
using a direct method of standardisation with
the standard population being female residents aged 25
or over in Finland in 2018. Age-standardised hysterectomy
rates were calculated separately for each indication.
Age was classified into four age groups: 25–49 years,
50–59 years, 60–69 years and 70 or over.
Regional and temporal variations in hysterectomy rates
were analysed in 20 hospital districts. They are owned by
federations of municipalities and responsible for organisation
of public specialised care for the residents of their
area.
To estimate regional heterogeneity in practices we calculated
systemic component of variation (SCV) between
health care regions as a descriptive measure of annual
variation in procedure rates. It is a relative measure that
indicates whether the variation found is larger than could
be expected by chance.
To examine consistency in regional variation in use of
hysterectomy from 2001 to 2018, the autocorrelations
per region and per indication were computed according
to the method described by Westert et al. [2]. The
annual hysterectomy rates by different indications within
each region during the 18-year study period cannot be
assumed to be independent measurements as rates can
be systematically higher or lower in some regions e.g. due
to physician preferences. The small autonomous region
of the Åland Islands was excluded from the analyses.
The trend analysis was performed for biennial agestandardised
hysterectomy rates with fixed effects for
intercept and a polynomial function of time and random
effects for intercept and slope varying across regions.
Next, z scores were calculated for annual hysterectomy
rates. This was done to capture the general national trend
in hysterectomy rate over years and allow for comparison
of regional rates over different indications in comparable
scale. We used biennial rates to acquire more consistency
into analysis. In the first analytical step all diagnostic or
procedural categories were simultaneously used in operational
models similar to above-mentioned model. In
these models, the time trend of spatial variation is given
by the correlation of the intercept and the slope in time
at level 2. We interpreted a statistically significant negative
correlation as decrease of regional variation with
higher than average random intercepts linked with larger
than average decrease in random slopes and vice versa. In
the second analytical step a similar two-level model was
run for each hysterectomy indication separately. Statistical
analyses were performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute
Inc, Cary, NC, US).
Results
A total of 131,695 hysterectomies performed in Finland
2001–2018 were included in the analyses. Descriptive
statistics of hysterectomies in 2001–2002 and 2017–2018
are summarized in Table 1. In 2001–2002 the total number
of hysterectomies performed was 21,305 and 11,812
in 2017–2018, which corresponds to a decline in agestandardised
hysterectomy rates from 553/100,000 py in
2001–2002 to 289 in 2017–2018 (− 49%).
Over the study period the hysterectomy rates decreased
in all age groups. The decrease was largest among
younger women (− 54%), and lesser among those aged
70 or over (− 22%). Of all hysterectomies, 24 per cent in
2001–2002 and 40% in 2017–2018 were performed for
women aged 60 or older.
From 2001 to 2018 age-adjusted hysterectomy rate
decreased in all indications (Fig. 1). In the beginning of
the study period, leiomyoma was the most common indication
followed by uterine prolapse and malignancy. Hysterectomies
performed due to leiomyoma decreased by
71 per cent during the study period, leaving uterine prolapse
as the most common cause in 2017–2018. The rate
of hysterectomies performed for leiomyoma decreased
from 212/100,000 py in 2001–2002 to 61/100,000 py in
2017–2018, accounting for the largest part of decline in
the total rate. Compared to other indication groups, the
decrease in rates was less pronounced in hysterectomies
due to uterine prolapse (change − 27%) and malignancy
(change − 14%). Genital prolapses and malignancies are
markedly more common in postmenopausal women
than in women of fertile age, which explains that there is
less reduction in hysterectomy in the age group of older
women. Respectively, conservative and hysteroscopic
treatment methods are increasingly being used for AUB,
leiomyoma and endometriosis.
To examine regional differences from 2001–2002 to
2017–2018 we investigated variations in hysterectomy
rates in the 20 hospital districts. Differences across
regions were observed in total hysterectomy rates and all
hysterectomy indications as suggested by Fig. 2, in which
each dot represents one hospital district. In 2001–2002
total rates of hysterectomies ranged from 405/100,000 py
to 861/100,000 py, while in 2017–2018 the respective figures
were 163/100,000 py, and 408/100,000 py.
During the whole study period, SCVs for indications
fluctuated from year to year (data not shown). When
comparing figures for indications in the beginning and
the end of the study period, the SCV for AUB and endometriosis
increased substantially, probably due to outliers
caused by declining rates and differing age structure. For
other causes, the changes were relatively small (Table 2).
Regional autocorrelations mainly suggest consistency
in regional patterns by indication between 2001–2002
and 2017–2018 (data not shown). The autocorrelation
averaged over the indications ranged from 0.18 to 0.67
between hospital districts, with an average of 0.50. This
suggests that most regions that have been above (or
below) the national average on some time-point have
stayed high (or low) in consequent years. However, substantial
differences in autocorrelations for individual
indications among regions were observed. The average
autocorrelation varied from 0.31 (malign causes and
endometriosis) to 0.50 (uterine leiomyoma). These results
indicate that consistency in medical patterns depended
on indication.
Table 2 further presents results of analysis for association
between regional variation and time. The estimated
trend for indications was negative and statistically highly
significant (p < 0.001) in all cases. For all hysterectomies
the correlation coefficient was − 0.84 and the correlation
was smallest in genital prolapse (− 0.71). These results
indicate increased regional convergence in all hysterectomy
indications.
Discussion
In this study we found a change in hysterectomy rates for
all indications in Finland from 2001 to 2018 along with
a substantial decrease in total hysterectomy rates. During
the study period regional variation in hysterectomy
practices decreased as we found a statistically significant
convergence of hysterectomy rates for all indications.
Despite this development, variation across hospital districts
still existed in 2017–2018. Historically, hysterectomy
rates have been high in Finland but the decline in
2000s was rapid and more substantial when compared to
findings reported from other countries [15]. The rate is
suggested to currently be similar to Sweden, but higher
than e.g. in Denmark [19]. However, direct comparisons
with rates from other countries are not possible due to
relatively large differences in study periods, selection
of indications, surgical procedures and age groups that
are included across studies as well as in international
databases.
The overall decrease in rates could be attributed mainly
to the decrease in hysterectomies performed for leiomyoma
as it was the leading indication at the beginning of
the study period. The decrease in proportion of operations
for leiomyoma and increased proportion for prolapse
since the 1990s is consistent with observations from
Sweden [20] and Denmark [4]. Compared to our results,
in Denmark abnormal uterine bleeding has accounted
for larger part of hysterectomies and the share has even
increased in the 2000s [4]. Also in the US, the proportion
of operations due to leiomyoma has decreased but that
of abnormal uterine bleeding increased [5]. However, dissimilarity
in indications between countries may reflect
differences in diagnostic practices more than those in
morbidity and possible differences in coding practices
may have influenced the differences between countries.
We found variation across regions both in overall hysterectomy
rates and indications for these. Regional variation
in indication specific rates has earlier been reported
from Germany [21], Australia [22] and the Netherlands
[23]. Although variation in medical practices is widely
known, changes in regional variation within one country
have been a focus less frequently. In a Dutch study,
Hanstede et al. [23] reported decreases in temporal and
regional differences in hysterectomy indications from
1995 to 2005, in Germany, Stang et al. [21] reported
regional variation in 2005–2006 and the Australian Hysterectomy
Clinical Reference Group reported similar
findings from 2008 to 2016–2017 [22]. Westert et al. [2]
investigated practice patterns in several common medical
conditions and found increased regional convergence
over time. These results are consistent with our findings
indicating decreasing trend in regional variation.
The changes in hysterectomy practices and convergence
found in hysterectomy rates are probably a result
of several factors. Firstly, in 2005 the Finnish guidelines
for operative treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding,
leiomyoma, endometriosis and prolapse were introduced
and this may have unified clinical practices [24].
Secondly, in the beginning of the 2000s results from
the Finnish RCT study comparing hysterectomies with
levonorgesterol releasing intrauterine devices for treating
menorrhagia were published [25]. The study results
also influenced the national clinical guidelines for the
treatment of excess menstrual bleeding underlining pharmaceutical
treatment of menorrhagia [26]. Nonetheless,
it is unclear whether use of more conservative treatments
enables women to avoid hysterectomy in the long
term or merely delays it [27, 28]. In general, variations in
medical practices may result from patient related, physician
related or practice environment related factors [3].
Although differences in disease burden across the population
may contribute to the variation found between
regions, it is unlikely that hysterectomy related risk factors
or morbidity would differ sufficiently across hospital
districts to account substantially for the differences
observed in this study. It has been shown that socioeconomic
position may have influence on hysterectomy rate
[29, 30]. However, this is unlikely to be the reason for the
regional variation found.
A major strength of our study was that we used individual-
level data on hospital use among all female residents
of Finland over a period of 18 years derived from
the Hospital Discharge Register, the quality and coverage
of which has been reported to be, in general, good.
A systematic review reported that more than 95% of discharges
could be identified from the register and that the
positive predictive value, i.e. the proportion of registerdetected
cases that are confirmed to be true-positives
according to external data varied between 75 and 99% for
common diagnoses [31]. However, we cannot exclude the
possibility that indication was miscoded in a small number
of cases or potential differences in coding practices.
Further, since AUB and leiomyoma occur in the same
patients and there is likely to be variation in which one is
recorded as the first diagnosis, they could also be considered
together.
The statistical models used enabled us to summarize
various aspects of the data efficiently. In Finland patients
are assigned to hospital districts based on their place of
residence and the use of health services across regional
boundaries is relatively rare. Since hysterectomies are not
performed in outpatient settings, the hospital discharge
data can be considered to accurately reflect the operation
rates in this country. Hysterectomies for benign diseases
are often associated with more than one diagnosis, and
the decision to operate may depend on the combination
and severity of indications presented. A limitation of our
study is that, we did not take secondary diagnoses into
consideration.
A potential limitation is that the analysis takes into
account the age structure of the different patient populations
but lacks data on other patient characteristics
likely to affect clinical decision-making, e.g. patients’
reproductive history, prior surgical procedures and
other health related factors. Also, age structures in
operations differ by indication with younger patients in
AUB and endometriosis and we were not able to examine
patients aged 25–39 years and 40–49 years separately
as the numbers of cases did not enable it while
we acknowledge that the reasons for hysterectomy can
differ before perimenopausal period. Notwithstanding,
we preferred using uniform standard population for
comparability reasons. Further, we did not have data on
medication or intrauterine device use. Further research
is needed in the development of incidence and treatment
of female malignant conditions. As we did not
have data on the incidence of ovarian cancer, cervical
cancer, and uterine cancer we could not analyse them
in more detail. Neither did we have data on patients’
preferences, which is important for operation decisions
in discretionary surgery. Thus, our data did not allow
us to differentiate variation occurring because of differences
in patient needs i.e. warranted variation from
unwarranted variation. However, it is plausible that the
decrease of variation in hysterectomy rates seen in this
study has focused on unwarranted variation. Based on
this assumption at least part of the earlier variation in
use of hysterectomy has been unjustified by patient
needs.
Conclusions
The findings of this study show major changes in hysterectomy
related medical practices in Finland from 2001 to
2018 and the concurrent increase in regional convergence
across health care regions. These results demonstrate
that changes in medical practices and more uniform use
of hysterectomy across regions are possible to achieve.
Despite the positive trend, regional variation in rates,
indications and surgical approaches still exists, which
may suggest inequity in availability of healthcare and
non-optimal use of health care resources. More in-depth
studies are needed by indication taking into account the
seriousness of the disease, availability of other treatment
options, patient preferences as well as comorbidity.