Background
Competitive dinghy sailing is practiced at varying levels,
from amateur competitions to the Olympics. Dinghies
range in size and complexity from single-handed 2.4 m
Optimist, intended for use by children, to 49er, the Olympic
two-handed skiff-type high-performance sailing dinghy
with a total sail area of 59.2 m2
and capable of speeds
easily exceeding 20 knots. According to the recent review
by Nathason, sailors at risk of acute injuries, overuse injuries,
environmental injuries, and sailing-related illnesses
[1]. Injury rates at an international 2014 Olympic-class
regatta and among elite dinghy racers in New Zealand
have been reported as 0.59 per 1000 h and 0.2 injuries per
year, respectively; while in dinghies mixed population,
injuries were 4.6 per 1000 days of practice [2–4]. In dinghies,
most acute injuries are contusions (9–55%) commonly
caused by falls and collision with the boat during
mismanaged maneuvers [1]. Head trauma is among the
most severe reported injuries and is often caused by the
boom’s impact. Hand injuries are also common (6–31%)
and mainly include lacerations, cuts and fractures from
handling lines or the center-board. Capsizing and collisions
with other boats or objects are other frequent
mechanisms of injury. Overuse injuries especially are
mainly represented by low back pain (29–45%) and knee
pain (13–22%) and are common especially among Olympic-
class sailors. High winds, turning maneuvers (i.e.
tacks, jibes), operator inattention and inexperience have
been identified as leading contributing factors for injuries
[1].
Over the last decade, hydrofoil technology has had an
enormous impact on sailing, providing high speed and
spectacle that attract media attention and increase sailing
popularity. While foil sailing was introduced with the
Nacra 17 class in the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Summer Olympic
Games, hydrofoil technology is also used in various
amateur sailing classes. In particular, the 36th edition
of America’s Cup, which took place from 6th to 21st of
March 2021, in Auckland, New Zealand, included the
AC75 catamarans [5]. Despite the advantages offered by
hydrofoils, the technology exposes crews to high speeds
and accelerations (over 40 knots, 46 mph, 74 km/h) that
increases the risk of high-energy trauma, especially in
the case of collisions between boats or boat capsizing
[6]. In hydrofoil technology, the shape of the appendices’
lamina diverts the water flow downwards, thus exerting
an upward force on the lamina. This upward force lifts
the boat’s keel, decreasing water drag and allowing for
an increase in speed. The speed, in turn, increases the
apparent wind, contributing to the possibility of exceeding
the actual wind speed and achieve significantly
higher final velocities than traditional boats. High speed
can expose participants to a risk of high-energy trauma,
as some events reported by the media seem to confirm.
For example, in 2013, Artemis Racing’s AC72 jumped
(somersaulted) and broke apart while training for the
34th America’s Cup. The accident resulted in a crewmember’s
death who suffered blunt trauma, severe head
injuries and cuts and drowned after being trapped underwater
[7]. In 2017, during a practice race for the Nacra
17 World Championships in France, the US crew pitchpoled
and capsized at a speed of 17 knots resulting in the
helmsman partially losing three fingers of the right hand
[8]. However, the media often highlight outdoor sports
risks after a severe accident or fatality [9]. However, it is
possible that most injuries are minor and that while the
speed and maneuverability increase the risk of injuries,
they are not necessarily serious.
Sailing on foiling boats requires fine coordination
between the crewmembers to maintain precarious flight.
Furthermore, wind shifts and water movements also
affect the flying boat’s speed and balance, continually
challenging the flight. A recent study by Terrien et al. [10]
showed that the natural environmental condition influences
the interaction between the crewmembers and the
Nacra-17 class boat. Moreover, extra-personal and interpersonal
coordination processes are also distinct cognitive
and interactive process influences to maintain or
restore flight stability, and reflective interpersonal coordination
processes to anticipate environmental events
or understand past events [10]. Since hydrofoil has only
recently been introduced into the sport of sailing, to
date, no scientific studies are investigating the risk of
acute injuries, overuse injuries, environmental injuries,
and sailing-related illnesses associated with this technology.
Therefore, this study aimed to provide preliminary
information about the most common injuries related to
hydrofoil sailing. The primary outcome was to classify
the lesions and identify which anatomical parts may be
affected. The secondary outcome was to determine the
traumatic dynamics most often involved and the main
risk factors to guide specific recommendations.
Methods
Study design
This descriptive epidemiology study was conducted following
the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational
Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) [11] during three
different regattas: 2018 and 2019 Foiling Week editions
held in Malcesine (Italy) and the Moth World Championship
held in Perth (Australia) in December 2019. The
recruitment of participants was extensive in Foiling Week
2018. We preliminarily sent an informative e-mail to all
pre-registered sailors; furthermore, upon completion of
regatta registration, participation in the study was proposed
in person by one of the researchers; finally, during
the regatta briefing, the organizers explained the aims
of the research and encouraged participation. As for the
other two regattas, the participants were allowed to participate,
but the information campaign was in charge of
the organizing committee only and took place in a sparse
and non-systematic way. Before entering the study, the
participants were fully informed about its aims and procedures.
Furthermore, each participant released written
informed consent before the inclusion in the study. The
study protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee
of Politecnico di Milano (Prot. 2/2018), with current
National and International laws and regulations governing
the use of human subjects (Declaration of Helsinki
II).
Data collection
The study protocol required completing the same questionnaire
pre and post the sailing event to distinguish
between injuries sustained during the regatta from those
before the regatta. The questionnaire was written in
English and designed specifically for the study (supplementary
material 1). As well as demographic and sailing
class information, the two-part questionnaire adopted a
symptom-focused approach, validated by Clarsen et al.
[12] for gathering data on injuries and illnesses. This
approach has proven effective for capturing data about
injuries in other outdoor sports, such as kitesurfing [13,
14]. Initially, participants were asked to respond to the
four following questions: “Have you had difficulty sailing
due to health problems (injuries/illnesses)?” (Question
1); “To what extent have you reduced your sailing volume
due to health problems over the past week?” (Question
2); “To what extent have health problems affected your
performance over the past week?” (Question 3); “To what
extent have you suffered from sports-related symptoms
in the past week?” (Question 4). An affirmative answer to
one of the four questions triggered further questions aiming
to identify sailing-related injuries and classify them
regarding the anatomical site and type of lesion according
to ICD-10 [15]. For this purpose, we asked participants
to respond to a predetermined list of possibilities
addressing both quantitative and qualitative elements.
We encouraged a complete and detailed description of
the type and severity of the injury. Another part of the
questionnaire concerned the event’s dynamics: participants
were asked to give a detailed account of the incident’s
dynamics and causes. The causes of the incidents
were analyzed using the Haddon matrix, a model broad
in scope that proved to be adaptable to extreme sports
contexts [16, 17]. Participants involved in more than one
incident were asked to respond to the questionnaire for
each event. A physician was available in person or by
phone to help participants complete the survey. In addition,
the physician conducted in-depth anamnesis to
ensure that the data collected was detailed, accurate and
classified appropriately. Inclusion criteria for the sailors
were the participation in one of the regattas mentioned
above, having provided written informed consent to participate
in the study and answering at least the first part
of the second questionnaire (questions 1, 2, 3, 4). Exclusion
criteria were the participation in foiling watersports
on hydrofoil vehicles other than sailing boats. In the
data analysis, we excluded medical conditions that had
a declared different origin than the practice of hydrofoil
sailing. Questionnaires were available in both paper and
electronic form, published on the website of the association
Extremesportmed (https:// extre mespo rtmed. org/
survey/ perfo rmance- test- for- the- foili ng- week/) using the
software Gravity Form 2.3.22.6.
Data analysis
The data relative to the second administration of the
questionnaire were extracted and analyzed, specifically:
sex, date of submission and all the data required to localize
and characterize each reported clinical condition
anatomically. The responses to the four initial questions
were scored according to Clarsen et al. [18] to calculate
a severity score from 0 to 100 for each reported problem.
Specifically, questions 1 and 4 were scored 0-8-17-25, and
questions 2 and 3 were scored 0-6-13-19-25. For each
participant reporting a problem, the pre-regatta questionnaire
was also checked to define whether the disorder
was already present. Still, the calculation of the incidence
excluded these data due to the lack of an appropriate
denominator. We obtained data about nationality and
boat class by matching the questionnaire data with those
provided by the regatta organizers. The regatta organizers
then offered data relating to the number of heats run and
the average duration of the races. Data was transferred
from the website onto Excel datasheets and analyzed
using Wizard Pro 1.3.27 and JASP 0.14.1 software. The
epidemiological analysis was based on the International
Olympic Committee consensus statement [19]. Incidence
was calculated based on the injuries reported in the second
questionnaire not registered in the first one, which
reasonably occurred during the regatta. Active sailing
time was determined by assessing the average duration of
each race based on the number of the disputed heats and
considering a mean time for each heat of 20 min (data
provided by the organizers). This data was subsequently
used as the denominator. Data analysis examined possible
relationships between the occurrence and type of
injuries and the type of boat using the X2 test. Descriptive
statistics were used to explore the data relative to the
dynamics of the sustained injuries. Confidence intervals
related to injury rates were assessed using the Wilson
score interval method.
Results
Limitedly to the Foiling Week 2018 regatta, a participation
rate of 44.8% was calculated. In total, 78 sailors
(91% males) from 13 nationalities took part in the study;
60 participants were from the 2018 Foiling Week, three
from the 2019 foiling week regatta and 15 from the Moth
World Championship. According to the exclusion criteria,
one of the participants was excluded because of practicing
foiling kitesurfing, and our analysis included the
data relative to 77 participants. Two participants sent the
second questionnaire multiple times without any difference
in the contents, and we excluded repetitions, including
the last invoice only. One injury was excluded as it
was sustained from a different sport (skiing). A majority
of the participants, 75.5% (n = 58), sailed single-handed
boats (namely the Moth class, A class, Waszp and S9cat).
In comparison, 19.5% (n = 15) sailed crew dinghies, both
double-handed (Nacra 17, Flying Phantom, and prototypes)
and 2.5% (n = 2) on three-person boats (Etf26); the
data relative to the boat was missing in two cases. The
days from the last regatta’s day and questionnaire completion
were missing data in seven of the cases collected
in 2019. Based on the available data, the mean interval
was 2.21 days.
Overall, 26 (33.7% of the participants) reported 28
medical conditions, 14 overuse injuries, nine acute
injuries and five illnesses, with two sailors reporting two
distinct medical conditions each.
Eleven of the reported conditions were already present
in the week before the regatta. When considering all
medical conditions, the prevalence in the regatta week
was 36.4%, with an incidence of 36/1,000 sailor-hours.
The prevalence of illnesses and overuse injuries during
the regatta week were 6.5% and 18.2%, respectively, while
the incidence of acute injuries was 16/1.000 sailor-hours.
The breakdown of injuries sustained in each of the
studied competitions is reported in Table 1. The 17 conditions
during the studied regattas, included seven acute
injuries, seven overuse injuries, and three illnesses. Musculoskeletal
injuries were mainly distributed to the upper
limbs (34.6%; n = 9), followed by lower limbs (26.9; n = 7)
and lumbar spine (15.4; n = 4) (See Fig. 1).
Most of the reported illnesses (80%) were upper respiratory
tract infections with an incidence of 0.51/1000
sailor-hours and a prevalence in the week of the regatta
of 5.2%.
Acute injuries and their dynamics and causes classified
according to the Haddon matrix are reported in Table 2.
Environmental-related factors during the crash phase
were the leading contributing factors (See Fig. 2).
Overuse injuries and illnesses and their causes are
reported in Table 3.
Discussion
This study aimed to classify the most common injuries
related to hydrofoil navigation, which anatomical
parts could be affected and the most common traumatic
dynamics to guide specific recommendations.
Analyzing the demographics of our series, we found a
disproportionately higher percentage of males; however,
this data is expected in sailing; apart from the Olympics,
where the female participation rate is 50%, among
the most significant events in the sailing calendar, the
percentages span between zero and 24%. Traumatic
injuries were calculated at a rate of 0.035 (SE: 0.024) per
hour of active practice [20]. An injury rate of between
0.29 and 5.7 per 1.000 h was reported for dinghy sailing
in a relatively recent review. However, that study also
included data from the Nacra 17 class in its first configuration.
Despite not being a genuinely foiling boat, it was
equipped with curved fins that may be considered forerunners
of foiling technology, capable of providing vertical
lift under certain sailing conditions. In a review of
sailing accidents more broadly, Nathanson [4] reported
an injury rate of 4.60/1.000 practice hours. In our series,
the injury rate was significantly high and seemed to confirm
that foiling increases injury risk. All but one of the
reported acute injuries resulted from the collision with
fixed and mobile parts of the boat: shroud, wing bars,
vang strut, cleats, and the boom. One case of whiplash
was caused by deceleration caused by the boat nosediving
in the presence of winds generated by motorboat
traffic in the regatta field. These dynamics suggest that
speed and acceleration play a vital role in injury generation
on foiling boats.
However, in our study, none of the acute injuries
reached the maximal score of severity as determined by
the four grading questions (max. score recorded: 25),
while the higher reached score value was 63/100. This
indicates that while foiling technology might increase the
frequency of injuries, the injuries sustained are not necessarily
severe injuries. Most reported acute injuries are
unspecific trauma generated by collision with the boat
and the equipment; collision with boat parts is a common
cause of injuries also in traditional sailing. However,
the increased acceleration forces that may result
in a higher rate of foiling boats’ injuries suggest some
specific preventive measures. While in traditional dinghy
sailing, strong wind is reported as a cause of injuries in
novices, Nathanson et al. [4] found that strong wind was
a cause in two-thirds of accidents resulting in injuries.
Findings from this study suggest some interventions. The
results linking high winds to accident and injuries suggest
that careful consideration of the practice of foiling
in extreme wind conditions is essential. Moreover, waves
may increase the risk of a crash, and therefore the use of
motorboats’ near the race site should be limited. Sailors
should prepare themselves for hydrofoil sailing’s specific
technical and dexterity requirements to cope with
the increased boat speed and maneuvers’ high velocity.
Equally, a high level of concentration is required to effectively
steer these boats that require appropriate physical
and psychological training to reduce fatigue. Specific
medical and ergonomic guidelines should be prepared
to encourage the adoption of rounded forms rather than
sharp edges, especially for the deck and drift, while cleats,
winches, and bailers should be positioned in places with
reduced likelihood of accidental contact. Since drowning
has been reported as the cause of 73.1% of recreational
boating deaths among recreational sailors, life jackets
should be worn at all times while sailing on any types of
boats. The life jacket should provide head support to protect
against drowning in case of head injury followed by a
fall in the water [21].
Some overuse injuries were reported in this study,
including hand lacerations, cervicalgia and sciatica, and
tendinopathy. All these conditions have already been
reported as common overuse conditions in traditional
sailing [1, 4, 6, 22–26] However, one participant reported
a specific traumatic mechanism resulting from an incorrect
jibing technique, with the leg placed on the trampoline
in a flat position with the bent knee resulting in knee
pain due to lateral overload on the joint. Ensuring effective
technique, optimizing posture, and strength training
[24] could prevent knee injuries. Specific training should
also be undertaken depending on the particular foiling
class. Equally, a chilled body is more susceptible to injury
of joints, tendons and muscles. Waterproof garments are
especially useful in reducing heat dispersion, particularly
in inclement weather and proved to be effective at
preventing muscle tears and bursitis in the joints of the
lower limbs [26]. The adoption of hardwearing, performance
sailing gloves may prevent hand injuries. Their use
is crucial in cold climate conditions and when handling
ropes under high tension. Shrouds and ropes should be
of the highest caliber and should be changed regularly
to maintain their smooth and soft texture to avoid abrasions
and lacerations to the hands. In our series, most
reported illnesses were upper respiratory tract infections
(URTI), with a weekly prevalence of 5.2%. URTI are
common among sailors and have already been registered
during America’s Cup, where illnesses accounted for 35%
of all health problems suffered, the majority consisting
of upper respiratory tract infections (40%) [24, 27]. Specifically,
the data reported by Neville et al. [24] (a total of
129 wks of infection in 38 sailors, over 50wks) means a
weekly prevalence during America’s Cup of 6.7% attributed
to the immune system weakening resulting from
physical exercise, psychological stress and cold and damp
conditions. An adequate, balanced diet that maintains a
positive energy balance and an adequate intake of carbohydrates,
proteins and micronutrients may help prevent
these infections [25, 27]. Stress levels should also be monitored
by assessing markers of tiredness and overtraining
[28]. Neville et al. [29] also proposed regular monitoring
of resting s-IgA together with a simple fatigue questionnaire
to determine the risk of upper respiratory tract
infections in sailors.
This study has some limitations. The relatively small
sample size and consequent law statistical power did
not allow firm conclusions on the identification of typical
injuries, anatomical distribution and main risk factors
during hydrofoil sailing. Data collection during major
international competitions was essential to collect relevant,
consistent data under controlled circumstances.
At the same time, however, it may have influenced decisions
to participate in the study as crews were focused
on the competition. The data collection method we used
has already been shown to collect more sports-related
medical conditions than traditional methods. Comparing
the quantitative results of this study with the previous
studies’ data must consider the possibility of differences
related to the different method of data collection. This
was a relatively short-duration study. Although longitudinal
studies are needed, this study enabled collecting
information about hydrofoil sailing that could be functional
for further, more extensive studies. Finally, not all
the participants were native English speakers, and this
may have introduced bias due to a wrong interpretation
of the questionnaire. However, we speculate that this
may have limited effect on the present study because all
sailors participated in international regattas, with sailing
instructions and regulations in English. Good knowledge
of the language is therefore assumed.
In conclusion, most of the reported musculoskeletal
injuries were to the upper limbs (34.6%), among which
one third were represented by hand contusions and lacerations,
followed by shoulder strains and contusions.
This study provides potentially helpful information
for regatta organizers, boat builders, athletes, and their
coaches and doctors. The results also provide the basis
for new studies. In hydrofoil sailing, much more than in
traditional sailing, there should be a focus above all on
the ergonomics of boats and specific physical exercises
adapted for the crew training and rehabilitation of crews.