Introduction
Cervical cancer is a major cause of morbidity and mortality,
and remains one of the four most common malignant
tumors in women. Globally, more than 560,000
new cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed each year, of
which 80% occur in developing countries [1, 2].
Treatments of stage IB2/IIA2 cervical cancer revolves
around chemoradiotherapy (CCRT), radical Surgery
(RS), radical surgery following chemoradiotherapy
(CCRT+RS), neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by
radical surgery (NACT+RS), adjuvant radiotherapy
followed by Radical surgery (RT + RS), radiotherapy
alone (RT). Previous studies have suggested that CCRT
is the most appropriate treatment strategy [3–6]. However,
other investigators have reported that NACT + RS
improves the long-term DFS and OS of patients with locally
advanced disease [7–9]. Other treatment regimens,
such as CCRT+RS [10, 11], RT + RS [11, 12], RT [13, 14]
and RS [14, 15], remain controversial. We therefore
sough to perform a network meta-analysis of currently
available findings in order to determine the most effective
treatment for patients with stage IB2/IIA2 cervical
cancer.
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses are widely considered
to represent the pinnacle of the medical evidence
pyramid [16]. However, traditional meta-analysis typically
compare only two intervention types. In contrast,
network meta-analyses can process all possible comparison
indicators in the same model multiple times or in
combination, and collect direct and indirect evidence at
the same time [17, 18]. Moreover, network metaanalyses
are thought to produce more accurate and reliable
models compared to traditional meta-analysis,
representing the premier guideline evidence for clinical
practice [19, 20]. A network meta-analysis compares
multiple treatment options for the same disease, which
may be useful for developing clinical practice guidelines
[21].
Here, we present a Bayesian network meta-analysis to
address the currently conflicting data surrounding optimal
treatment strategies for FIGO IB2/IIA2 cervical cancer
patients. We aim to summarize and analyze the
existing evidence to explore the clinical outcome of patients
treatment with various regimens, using overall
survival (OS) and disease recurrence as primary endpoints,
in order to identify the optimal approach for
management of locally advanced disease.
Material and methods
Search strategy and study selection
Two authors performed independent searches using
PubMed, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled
Trials and Embase to identify Randomized Controlled
Trials (RCTs) for the treatment of cervical cancer from
1971 to 2020, according to the Cochrane System Intervention
Review Manual [22]. A comprehensive search
was carried out through Boolean logic operators with
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) combined with entry
words, using “Uterine Cervical Neoplasms”, “Chemoradiotherapy”,
“General Surgery”, “Surgical Procedures,
Operative”, “Gynecologic Surgical Procedures”, “Hysterectomy”,
“Chemotherapy, Adjuvant”, “Drug Therapy”,
“Radiotherapy” and “Randomized controlled trials”. This
study was conducted based on the Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA) for systematic reviews and meta-analysis [23]
(Material S2). The specific search strategy is detailed in
Material S1.
As specified in the predetermined inclusion criteria, all
searched articles were individually evaluated by the two
authors. We first screened the initial inclusion of studies
based on the title and abstract, and deleted duplicate
studies. Remaining articles were subject to full text
screening by the two authors to evaluate study relevance.
All citations were managed in Endnote X9. In order to
ensure that further analysis can proceed smoothly, it is
necessary to check the veracity and completeness of the
data. Discrepancies between the two authors were resolved
by a third empirical observer through discussion.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria, data extraction
The two authors independently extracted relevant data
for each included trial. Discrepancies were addressed via
discussion and consensus, with external arbitration
where required.
Detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria are shown in
Table S1. In our inclusion and exclusion criteria, treatment
is defined as a preference. Treatments were defined
as an intervention following discussion of the
physician and patient, including surgery, radiotherapy,
chemotherapy, or a combination of these regimens. All
included randomized controlled trials were coded according
to treatment type and are divided into 6 treatment
groups. Differences in coding between the two
authors were resolved by discussion and consensus, with
external arbitration where required.
Quality appraisal, evaluation of endpoints
We used Cochrane tools to assess the risk of bias (ROB)
of the included studies [22]. The two authors separately
assessed seven areas of ROB. ROB evaluation is conducted
in Review Manager (version 5.1).
The primary endpoints were overall survival and disease
relapse; comparisons of all interventions were performed.
All surviving patients contribute to OS,
regardless of their disease status. Where exact case numbers
of deceased and surviving patients were not available,
these were estimated from Kaplan-Meir survival
curves; corresponding authors of included studied were
contacted where necessary. Both local recurrence and
distant metastasis were included as disease relapse.
Statistical analysis
Compared with traditional meta-analysis, Bayesian network
meta-analysis has greater analytical power, in that
it summarizes all possible intervention comparisons simultaneously
[20]. Using the minimum information prior
distribution based on the random effect Bayesian statistical
model, a connection network is formed combining
direct and indirect evidence. Six intervention therapies
were compared simultaneously; first, we performed
regular pairwise meta-analysis. The I2 index was used to
determine heterogeneity; indices of 25, 50, and 75% represent
mild heterogeneity, moderate heterogeneity, and
high heterogeneity, respectively [24]. A funnel chart was
produced to detect publication bias. In order to reveal
all available treatment evidence, a simple summary description
network diagram was generated. The above analysis was performed in STATA, version 14.2. Endpoint
analysis effect sizes were summarized as odds ratios
(OR) with corresponding confidence intervals (CrI).
Bayesian stratified random effects were used to directly
and indirectly compare multiple interventions. The
Bayesian method is used to calculate endpoint results;
first, three parallel Markov chains with randomly selected
states are established to simulate accurate estimation
of statistical models [25]. Each chain generates
50,000 iterations, and because of the aging cycle, the first
20,000 iterations will be abandoned to ensure
minimization of deviation of the initial value [26]. Convergence
of the model was judged through the diagnostic
curve [27]. The surface under the Cumulative
Ranking Curve (SUCRA) is regarded as the ranking
probability map for each intervention. The higher the
SUCRA value, the more likely it is that an intervention
is at the highest level or very effective, while a value of 0
means that the treatment is least effective [28].
Consistency between the two comparisons was evaluated
by comparing the DIC values between the consistency
and inconsistency models (a difference greater than 5 is
considered as inconsistency between models) [29]. Node
splitting was used to further assess for local inconsistencies
in our network [30]. These analyses were performed
using R (X64 version 3.5.3) with the “Gemtc” package
(0.8–4 version), “JAGS” (version 4.3.0) and OpenBUGS
(version 3.2.3).
Cluster analysis of the treatments
After Bayesian network analysis, by sorting out the
SUCRA data of OS and relapse, a systematic cluster analysis
of various treatment options was performed. Two
to five cluster types were chosen and a vertical icicle diagram
was used to visualize different clustering forms.
After the systematic clustering analysis, the results were
further analyzed through Online Analytical Processing
(OLAP). The above analysis uses IBM SPSS version 26.0
for analysis.
Results
Study characteristics and ROB quality assessment
Among the 7486 citations, 4500 records were retained
after deletion of duplicates. Four thousand two hundred
thirty-two citations were removed after evaluation of
title and abstract. Two hundred fifty-five records were
excluded during full-text screening: 75 studies did not
include stage IB2 and IIA2 cervical cancer, 65 studies
were not randomized controlled trials, 12 studies had no
relevant results, 15 studies did not determine the control
group, 15 studies were supplements and 73 were excluded
for other reasons such as foreign language, abstract
etc.13 articles were included in the final study
(Fig. 1).
These studies included 2733 participants undergoing 6
different interventions and provided sufficient data published
from 1987 to 2020. Table 1 summarizes the main
characteristics of the participants and interventions in
the 13 included studies. Overall, 1399 patients were randomly
assigned to the intervention group, while the
remaining 1334 patients were assigned to the control
group. In different studies, age is reported as the mean
or median, ranging from 18 to 70 years. Across the 13
randomized controlled trials, most (more than half) of
the participants were from Asia, followed by North
America and Europe.
The 13 included studies included 6 interventions. The
number of events and the The quality of individual and
overall research levels are plotted in Figure S1 and Figure
S2, respectively. In all 13 trials, all sequences were
randomly generated, nine randomized controlled trials
described their allocation concealment method, one trial
design was not double-blind, and four randomized controlled
trials had incomplete data on outcome indicators.
There is 1 randomized controlled trial with higher risk,
which originated from allocation concealment and
double-blind design.
I2 analysis indicated no statistically significant heterogeneity
in our preliminary meta-analysis (I2 = 0 for OS,
P > 0.05, I2 = 8% for relapse, P > 0.05). The funnel chart
indicated no obvious publication bias for OS (Figure S3)
or relapse (Figure S4).
Visual network geometry was performed to show
each arm. Each intervention has its own unique
nodes, whose size depends on their number in the
entire network. The two interventions are connected
by straight lines, and the thickness of each straight
line represents the number of comparisons (Fig. 2a,
Fig. 3a).
Among the 2733 patients, the final number of OS
and relapses were 1692 in 2342 and 470 in 1950,
respectively (Table 2). A SUCRA line was drawn to
rank the hierarchy of each interventions (shown in
Fig. 2b and Fig. S5 for OS), which indicated that
CCRT+RS got the highest probability (SUCRA =
0.7986) in IB2/IIA2 patients compared with the other
5 active interventions, Following by NACT+RS (SUCR
A = 0.5214), RT (SUCRA = 0.5070), CCRT (SUCRA =
0.4832), RT + RS (SUCRA = 0.4462), RS (SUCRA =
0.2436) got an inferior ranking. Another SUCRA line
was drawn to rank the hierarchy of each interventions
(shown in Fig. 3b and Figure S6 for relapse), which
indicated that CCRT got the highest probability
(SUCRA = 0.8389) in IB2/IIA2 patients compared with
the other 5 active interventions, Following by RT + RS
(SUCRA = 0.6504), NACT+RS (SUCRA = 0.6295), RT
(SUCRA = 0.4897), CCRT+RS (SUCRA = 0.2427), RS
(SUCRA = 0.1488) got an inferior ranking.
Inconsistency detection
The posterior values of the random effects inconsistency
and consistency model were estimated; for OS and relapse,
the difference in DIC values between the
consistency and inconsistency model was 2.6 and 2.0, respectively.
These indicated no substantial inconsistency
between models.
Overall ranking of SUCRA for each endpoint and cluster
analysis
Intervention ranking were distinct for the two endpoints
measures (OS and relapse). Clinically, high OS is highly
desirable; however, high recurrence rate also represent a
substantial burden on patients. In order to make an
overall assessment of the best treatment plan, the
SUCRA value of each endpoint of all 13 interventions
was added to obtain a cumulative SUCRA score. This
analysis determined CCRT as the optimal treatment
strategy (Fig. 4). Subsequently, based on the sum of
SUCRA of OS and relapse, systematic cluster analysis divides
the CCRT into a cluster, further supporting this
strategy as the best option (Fig. 5).
Further OLAP cube analysis demonstrated that when
using a three-category approach, CCRT and RS were
divided into a single group, indicating CCRT to be the
optimal intervention and RS to be the worst (Table 3, Fig. 5).
Discussion
We performed an NMA study of treatments related to
locally advanced cervical cancer in women to assess the
relative effectiveness of various treatments in trials to
date. Among all interventions evaluated, CCRT demonstrated the highest comprehensive efficacy, as evidenced
by the sum of SUCRA value. After Bayesian analysis,
a systematic cluster analysis was performed to
determine the treatment interventions that can be evenly
grouped according to the sum of SUCRA values of the
two endpoints obtained by NMA, setting the cluster
numbers to 2–5 categories to facilitate observation. At 3
clusters, CCRT and RS are classified into different
groups. From the SUCRA value, it is apparent that the
top-ranked treatments vary depending on the endpoint
of the assessment. The sum of the SUCRA value of each
of the two endpoints implies that CCRT is the optimal
intervention for FIGO stage IB2/IIA2 cervical tumor.
Hierarchical cluster analysis further verified that the CCRT separated into an independent group. Therefore,
in FIGO stage IB2/IIA2 cervical cancer, CCRT appears
the optimal management strategy for cases.
Cervical cancer is a serious women’s health issue
worldwide; most cervical tumors are caused by highrisk
human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infection [41].
An appreciable proportion of cervical cancer is
diagnosed at FIGO stage IB2/IIA2. Previous reports
have compared these cases against stage IB1 disease,
reporting an increased risk of death from FIGO stage
IB2 cervical cancer disease representing a close-todoubling
of risk (HR 1.98, 95% CI 1.62–2.41, P <
0.001) [42]. Optimal management of these cases is
therefore crucial.
The efficacy of CCRT in the treatment of locally advanced
cervical cancer has been compared in previous
randomized controlled trials or meta-analysis; these
studies have suggested the superiority of CCRT versus
other regimens [43–45]. Gupta et al. [31] suggested that
in locally advanced cervical cancer, cisplatin-based concurrent
radiotherapy and chemotherapy can achieve
better disease-free survival compared with radical surgery
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Other studies suggest that - although only significant
for patients with stage IB2-IIB - NACT plus RS seems to
confer survival benefit compared to RT [34]. Compared
with RS alone, especially compared with CCRT, NACT
+ RS may improve the long-term disease-free survival
rate and overall survival rate of patients with locally advanced
cervical cancer stage IB2-IIB [7]. Moreover, total
hysterectomy after NACT may be an option for patients
with stage Ib2-IIb cervical adenocarcinoma [46]. However,
this study found that NACT did not improve overall
survival, but reduced the number of patients
receiving postoperative radiotherapy [47]. Lee et al. [48]
described no therapeutic advantage of NACT + RS compared
to CCRT. Some scholars believe that preoperative
brachytherapy in the vaginal cavity can be used as an effective
treatment method for comprehensive treatment
of stage Ib2 and IIa cervical cancer, with a satisfactory
local control rate for stage Ib2 and IIa cervical cancer
[32]. The findings of Landoni et al. [13] indicate that, in terms of survival, there is no alternative treatment for
early cervical cancer. Long-term follow-up confirmed
that the best treatment for individual patients should
take into account clinical factors, such as menopausal
status, comorbidities, histological type, and tumor diameter.
In light of our findings in the context of this controversy,
CCRT appears to be the most appropriate
therapeutic option.
NMA comes with conceptual and technical considerations
[49], including the need to meet transitivity and
consistency assumptions. The transitivity hypothesis
means that the diverse treatments in all studies are comparable
in terms of the characteristics that may affect
the results. In order to ensure transmissibility, except for
treatment interventions, other aspects of the included
study should be relatively similar [49, 50]. In order to
meet this transitivity assumption, we limited the study
to locally advanced cervical cancer.
Consistency described the statistical consistency between
the direct comparison and the indirect comparison
of each paired comparison in NMA. Differences
indicate inconsistency [19, 29, 49]. We use the
confidence interval in the network Meta-analysis to test
the heterogeneity and consistency of the two endpoints
and use the node splitting method to detect local inconsistencies
[30]. No major heterogeneity or consistency issues
were identified in the OS or relapse analysis.
The advantage of this study is that our NMA compares
each intervention for locally advanced cervical
cancer. At present, the treatment of stage IB2/IIA2
cervical cancer is still controversial; our findings are
therefore of clear clinical interest.
We acknowledge several limitations of our study. We
acknowledge the subjectivity of the risk bias assessment.
Some of the include studies lacked blinding of participating
subjects, personnel or external reviewers. Moreover,
some studies had incomplete outcome data. One
randomized control trial demonstrated higher risk,
which originated from allocation concealment and
double-blind design. The quality of several studies may
have affected our analysis. In addition, due to incomplete
data, very few data were available, so the endpoint of
complication rate and type of different treatments were
lacking. Another limitation of the study is that all 13
studies included cervical cancer stage IB2/IIA2, but a
few studies not only included cervical cancer stage IB2
/IIA2. This may have some impact on our research.
Conclusions
We report an analysis of all RCTs using different interventions
in FIGO IB2/IIA2 cervical cancer; NMA identified
that, in terms of effectiveness and safety, overall
survival and relapse, CCRT may be the optimal treatment
strategy in locally advanced cervical cancer. RS
alone may be the least effective strategy. However, since
these interventions have not yet been directly compared
face-to-face, additional verification is necessary for the
Phase 3 multicenter randomized controlled trial.



