Introduction
Due to a decrease in the estrogen level of blood, menopause
causes several symptoms and complications in
women, including termination of reproductive capacity
resulting in the complete cessation of ovarian function [1,
2], vasomotor instability, decreased psychological function,
forgetfulness, and vaginal and urinary tract infections
[3]. Regarding cultural and ethnic differences, the
severity and frequency of these symptoms vary in different
countries [1, 4]. Factors such as genetics, dietary habits,
level of activity, and daily exercises cause differences
in the natural age of menopausal in various communities.
Low self-efficacy, extensive cultural conflicts, and socioeconomic
inequalities, belief and gender inequalities,
knowledge of the menopausal process, and stressors are
the most significant factors influencing the menopausal
Quality of life (QOL) [5]. As a result, vasomotor symptoms
show a higher prevalence in African American and
Western women than Asian women [6].
The World Health Organization (WHO) has defined
the QOL as people’s insights into their life status within
the value and cultural systems where they live and concerning
their expectations, goals, concerns, and standards
[7]. The multidimensional QOL has been accepted
nowadays [6]. Changes in life expectancy have led to an
increase in post-menopausal life expectancy in women.
Each woman spends at least one-third of her life during
the menopausal period [8]. Statistics show an increasing
number of postmenopausal women worldwide. In
1998, more than 477 million women were living in the
postmenopausal period, and this rate will reach 1.1 billion
people by 2025 [9]. According to some newer statistics
in the US, 6000 people reach menopausal age every
day, and about 50 million will be menopausal over the
next decade. Iran is also expected to have about 5 million
women with menopausal by 2021, leading to demographic
changes and population aging [10].
The mean age of menopausal in Iran is lower than that
in other countries due to several factors. Based on the
results of various studies in Iran, the QOL of menopausal
females has been reported at a moderate level [11,
12]. Women make up half of Iran’s population. Therefore,
gaining information and knowledge of their conditions
in various dimensions and planning to reform
their conditions to affect society and family health seems
necessary [13]. Also, given the role of women as the key
members of family health and transmitting the model of
education and promoting a healthy lifestyle to the next
generation, acquiring knowledge of this period’s symptoms
and enhancing their QOL is of great necessity [5,
14]. Therefore, the current work was conducted to assess
the Factors related to MENQOL among postmenopausal
women in the health center of Hamadan City, Iran.
Materials and methods
Study type
The current descriptive-analytical cross-sectional work
was performed on 270 women aged 45–60 years covered
by Hamadan health centers in 2018.
Participants
Using the data of previous studies [15] and the formula
for determining the sample size [16], the minimum sample
size was determined at 250 people. Considering 5%
error and 80% power and considering the effect of cluster
sampling design, the sample size was determined to be
270 postmenopausal women. In the present research,
the participants were selected using the stratified sampling
method. Accordingly, after listing health centers
in Hamadan, some of these centers were selected using
a cluster sampling method. Then, after gaining permits
from the centers’ authorities, the samples were selected
from the population covered by each center. Finally, some
women aged 45–60 years covered by the centers were
selected, and the data were collected. The inclusion criteria
were being 45–60 years, having normal menopausal,
living in Hamadan, lack of alternative hormone therapy
in the past six months, no history of hysterectomy, and
lack of known systemic illness. The exclusion criteria also
included non-responding to all items of the questionnaire
and having any physical and mental illness based on
their self-report.
Statement
All methods were performed in accordance with relevant
guidelines and regulations. The word informed consent
was obtained from all women; they were informed about
the confidentiality of the information and the project’s
purpose, and only if they would like, they were enrolled
in the study. The Ethics Committee approved this study
with all consent process at Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences.
Survey questionnaire
The data collection tool used in this study consists of two
parts completed by the women through the self-reporting
method. The first part includes demographic information
such as age, education level, economic status, marital
status, smoking, job, physical activity, and supplemental
Omega-3 s intake. Also, the second section includes
the Menopausal Quality of Life Questionnaire (MENQOL).
MENQOL designed by Hilditch et al. [17, 18] that
assesses the QOL in 4 dimensions: (1) physical dimension
with 16 questions (questions 11–26); (2) the psychosocial
dimension with 7 questions (questions 4–10); (3)
the sexual dimension with 4 questions (questions 27–29);
and (4) vasomotor dimension with 3 questions (questions
1–3), respectively. This scale, which also was used in this
study, is adopted to the Persian language and is appropriate
for Iranian culture [17, 19]. The validity and reliability
of the questionnaire have been confirmed in several similar
studies. For example, the reliability of the MENQOL
questionnaire was assessed using the test–retest based on
intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs). The coefficients
were 0.79, 0.68, 0.92, and 0.77 for the psychological,
physical, sexual, and vasomotor domains, respectively
[6]. This questionnaire was on a seven-point Likert scale
ranging from 0 to 7. A “zero” is identical that the woman
has not experienced this specific symptom in the previous
month; Score “one” demonstrates that the woman
experienced the symptom, but it did not bother her;
Scores “two” through “seven” demonstrate an increasing
level of the bothering symptom, so that these scores
indicate increasing levels of bother experienced from the
symptom and correspond to the ‘‘1’’ through ‘‘6’’ checkboxes
on the MENQOL [6, 20]. It is essential to be mention,
with increasing MENQOL scores, levels of bother
experienced from the symptom are increased as well.
According to the definition of WHO, menopausal
health was considered menstruation cessation without
medication for at least 12 months [4]. Before the study,
necessary explanations were provided for the subjects
regarding the study’s objectives, and their informed
consent was obtained. The subjects were selected and
included in the study in terms of exclusion and inclusion
criteria. The demographic characteristics questionnaire
and QOL questionnaire of postmenopausal females were
completed through a face-to-face interview.
The duration of the interview was around 25–30 min.
Analysis of statistical data
SPSS V.23 was used to analyze the collected data. The
Mann–Whiney test and the Kruskal–Wallis test were
used to compare different dimensions of QOL according
to individual characteristics. The significance level of statistical
tests was regarded as less than 0.05. The Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test showed that data were not normally
distributed, the Mann–Whiney U test and the Kruskal–
Wallis test were used to compare MENQOL item scores.
Results
Demographic characteristics
The mean age of the women was 52.19 ± 3.98 years with
a range of 45–60 years old. About 25.2% had an elementary
education and 5.6% have university education; 77.8%
were married and 14.8 were widow; about 11% had Clerk
and 88.9% were housewives; 7.4% were smoking, and
59.6% had medium economic status; 47.8% usually exercise
3–5 times a week; 38.9% were taking supplemental
Omega-3 s; 50.4% had been postmenopausal for less than
5 years and 40.6% for more than 5 years. Other demographic
and characteristics of participants are presented
in Table 1.
The menopausal quality of life, and associated factors
According to the association between Quality of Life
and demographic variables, there was a significant association
between the total QoL score and job, economy
status, smoking, exercise, supplemental Omega-3 s
intake, and postmenopausal stage (p < 0.01). As smokers,
women had increasing levels of bother experienced from
the symptom than non-smokers (mean = 3.67 ± 0.85
vs. 2.36 ± 0.99; p < 0.001). While the MENQOL scores
for menopausal females who exercised more often
(mean = 1.56 ± 0.7) had lower than those who exercised
less than 3 times per week (mean = 3.27 ± 0.9;
p < 0.001). However the lowest score was menopausal
females who had taking supplemental Omega-3 s
than those who hadn’t taken it (mean = 2.15 ± 1.06 vs.
2.65 ± 0.97; p < 0.001). Though women who had postmenopausal
stage less than 5 years stage (mean = 2.28 ± 0.87)
had significantly lower MENQOL scores from those
who had postmenopausal stage 5 or more years
(mean = 2.63 ± 1.16; p < 0.001).
Besides, there was a significant association between the
vasomotor dimension of MENQOL and economy status,
smoking, exercise, supplemental Omega-3 s intake
(p < 0.01).
Moreover, high-socioeconomic status (SES) women
had significantly lower vasomotor scores than those who
had postmenopausal low-socioeconomic status (SES)
(mean = 2.29 ± 1.81 vs. 3.34 ± 1.97; p < 0.001). Smokers
(mean = 4.42 ± 1.94) increasing levels of bother
experienced from the vasomotor symptom than nonsmokers
(mean = 2.68 ± 1.89; p < 0.001). While menopausal
females who exercised more often had vasomotor
scores (mean = 1.94 ± 1.66) lower than those who exercised
less than 3 times per week (mean = 3.63 ± 1.91;
p < 0.001). However menopausal females who had taking
supplemental Omega-3 s more often had mean
vasomotor scores lower than those who hadn’t taken it
(mean = 2.38 ± 1.87 vs. 3.08 ± 1.94; p < 0.001).
Although, there was a significant association between
the psychosocial dimension of MENQOL and education,
job, economic status, smoking, exercise, supplemental
Omega-3 s intake, postmenopausal stage (p < 0.01),
and marital status (p < 0.05). Through, educated women
(mean = 1.35 ± 1.07) had significantly lower psychosocial
scores than illiterate women (mean = 2.53 ± 1.18;
p < 0.001). Clerk women (mean = 1.67 ± 1.24) had significantly
lower psychosocial scores from housewife women
(mean = 2.68 ± 1.07; p < 0.05). High-socioeconomic status
(SES) women had significantly lower psychosocial scores
than those who had postmenopausal low-socioeconomic
status (SES) (mean = 1.32 ± 0.93 vs. 2.94 ± 1.25 p < 0.001).
Smokers (mean = 4.31 ± 0.68) increasing levels of bother
experienced from the psychosocial symptom than nonsmokers
(mean = 2.1 ± 1.17; p < 0.001). While menopausal
females who exercised more often had psychosocial
scores (mean = 3.68 ± 0.95) lower than those who exercised
less than 3 times per week (mean = 0.85 ± 0.55);
p < 0.001). However menopausal females who had taking
supplemental Omega-3 s more often had mean psychosocial
scores lower than those who hadn’t taken
it (mean = 1.99 ± 1.29 vs. 2.43 ± 1.24; p < 0.001). Also,
married women (mean = 2.14 ± 1.26) had significantly
lower psychosocial scores than divorce women
(mean = 2.94 ± 1.15; p < 0.05).
While there was a significant association between
the physical dimension of MENQOL and economy status,
smoking, exercise, supplemental Omega-3 s intake,
postmenopausal stage (p < 0.01), and job (p < 0.05). By
way of, Clerk women (mean = 2.22 ± 0.87) had significantly
lower physical scores than housewife women
(mean = 2.68 ± 1.07; p < 0.05). High-socioeconomic status
(SES) women had significantly lower physical scores
than those who had postmenopausal low-socioeconomic
status (SES) (mean = 1.88 ± 0.83 vs. 3.02 ± 1.08 p < 0.001).
Smokers (mean = 3.46 ± 0.66) increasing levels of bother
experienced from the physical symptom than non-smokers
(mean = 2.57 ± 1.06; p < 0.001). While menopausal
females who exercised more often had physical scores
(mean = 1.79 ± 0.9) lower than those who exercised less
3 times per week (mean = 2.37 ± 0.92); p < 0.001). However
menopausal females who had taking supplemental
Omega-3 s more often had mean physical scores lower
than those who hadn’t taken it (mean = 2.38 ± 1.87 vs.
2.79 ± 0.98; p < 0.001).
However, there was a significant association between
the sexual dimension of MENQOL and, job, marital
status (p < 0.01), education, and exercise (p < 0.05).
By way of, Clerk women (mean = 1.17 ± 1.49) had significantly
lower sexual scores than housewife women
(mean = 2.23 ± 1.79; p < 0.001). Also, married woman
(mean = 2.67 ± 1.60) had significantly higher sexual
scores from widow women (mean = 0.28 ± 0.94;
p < 0.001). Educated women (mean = 1.40 ± 1.69) had significantly
lower sexual scores than women with low levels
of education (mean = 2.44 ± 1.50; p < 0.001). While menopausal
females who exercised more often had sexual
scores (mean = 1.65 ± 1.54) lower than those who exercised
less 3 times per week (mean = 2.43 ± 2.05); p < 0.05)
(Table 2).
Frequency distribution and scores of menopausal items
Generally, the most dominant symptom, reported by
91.1% of the sample, was aching in muscles and joints
ache. Besides, vasomotor symptoms with 2.80 ± 1.94 had
the highest score, and sexual symptoms, with 2.12 ± 1.79
had the lowest score among the other dimensions. The
mean Score of MENQOL in menopausal women was
2.45 ± 1.04. In the other words, we found that vasomotor
symptoms had the highest mean scores and sexual symptoms
had the lowest scores in all domains (Table 3).
Discussion
The present work was performed to determine the prevalence
of menopausal symptoms among postmenopausal
females and factors associated with the Quality of these
women’s lives in Hamadan city. Based on the obtained
results, the lowest symptoms belonged to the sexual
dimension, which is in line with the outcomes of the
study conducted by Chedraui et al. and Parsa et al. [21,
22]. So, it can be stated that enhancing information and
knowledge alongside high education level, increasing
support and counseling [10], and improving adaptation
and adaptive behaviors in postmenopausal periods may
improve the MENQOL in the sexual dimension among
this group of menopausal women.
The findings indicated a significant association between
the total QoL score and job, economy status, smoking,
exercise, and supplemental Omega-3 s intake. Consistent
with the results of the researches reported that the MENQOL
was associated with the job [6, 23, 24]. In general,
employed women may have better access to health care
services and adapt to postmenopausal symptoms. On
the other hand, based on the results of Fallahzadeh et al.,
being employed, and high social interaction with other
people can reduce the physical symptoms of menopausal
[6]. Overall, it seems that menopausal women are more
likely to have menopausal complications because of the
stresses of working at home. So, it may be necessary to
design and implement effective educational and promotional
interventions to improve the sense of usefulness in
menopausal women.
The poor economic status may cause the severity of
menopausal symptoms. In this sense, Li et al. have previously
reported low economic status as the main factors
contributing to the incremented severity of menopausal
symptoms or a longer duration of the menopausal symptoms
[25]. His finding is also similar to that reported by
Fallahzadeh et al. [6]. However, being employed and having
high-income levels may be increased access to healthcare
or the level of coping mechanisms for menopausal
symptoms.
Nicotine dependence and smoking may reason the
severity of menopausal Symptoms amongst postmenopausal
women Smokers. These results are consistent with
the funding of Copeland et al. [26]. However, cigarette
smoking and hookah smoking have antiestrogenic properties,
which may health risks associated with menopause
symptoms.
A high physical activity level may reduce the menopausal
symptom. This funding is similar to the results of
other studies [27, 28]. Concerning, exercise has long been
proven to be as effective as relaxation and meditation, as
well as aerobic exercise, induces weight loss and increases
in their hot flashes’ severity and reductions in the risk
of memory problems. It should be noted that exercise
and physical activity in this group of women leads to
increased social interactions, and group aerobic exercise
leads to improved mental health and Quality of life in this
group of people. So, having exercise play improvement of
women’s Quality of life in menopausal women.
There was an association between menopausal symptoms
and supplemental Omega-3 s intake in postmenopausal
women. Saimin et al. reported increasing
the quantity and frequency of fish consumption will
reduce the severity of menopausal symptoms [29]. Studies
showed that supplemental omega-3 s could improve
overall health conditions [30, 31]. So, design and planning
intervention programs for a healthy lifestyle [32], for
the improvement of women’s Quality of life in menopausal
women seems to be essential.
Additionally, in the psychosocial, physical domains,
women who were in the postmenopausal stage less
than 5 years ago had lower scores than those who were
in the postmenopausal stage more than 5 years ago.
Also similar to that reported by Fallahzadeh et al. and
Karmakar et al. [6, 33]. Nevertheless, some women
experience symptoms earlier during the time since
menopause while some experience them at a later time.
Concerning, older women might have learned to handle
menopause-related symptoms over time.
In the present study, the highest MENQOL in menopausal
women belonged to the vasomotor dimension,
and the lowest belonged to the sexual dimension. In
line with this result, several studies by Barati et al., Fallahzadeh,
Chedraui, et al., Blumelet al., Whelan et al.,
Nisar et al. reported higher vasomotor symptoms [6,
15, 34–37]. Moreover, Reproductive hormones seem
to play a significant role in this regard. In this period,
dramatic changes occur in hormone levels, including
reduced severe estrogen, which results in Vasomotor
symptoms (VMS) such as hot flushes and night
sweats. Some studies have reported an increase in the
frequency of vasomotor symptoms, which is consistent
with the current work results [38].
Following the outcome, physical symptoms were the
most experienced and complained factors, among other
dimensions in the postmenopausal period. In agreement
with the findings in the current work, Ceylan
et al. indicated that the most frequently experienced
symptoms during this period were aching muscles and
joints [39]. It seems that factors such as reproductive
hormones play a major role in this regard. As a result,
dramatic changes in hormones, including a severe
reduction in estrogen, occur, leading to physical symptoms
during this period. This result is in accord with
paying attention to menopausal in health care services
programs to enhance women’s life expectancy seems to
be useful in this field.
The major limitation of the present study is its selfreporting
and descriptive cross-sectional nature. Therefore,
it is recommended to investigate the subject of the
present study as a longitudinal or trial study. Given the
complexity of MENQOL dimensions, a qualitative study
of menopausal phenomena and understanding other
related factors can also be helpful.
Conclusion
In general, the results of the present work revealed that
vasomotor symptoms were the most dominant symptom.
Therefore, increased life expectancy among these women
will be possible by designing and implementing effective
educational interventions. It is necessary to improve
physical activity levels, particularly in developing countries,
focusing on job status to decrease unproductive
feelings, encourage social interaction skills, and enhance
economic status. Simultaneously, recommend taking an
omega 3 s supplement and planning education and promotion
intervention for cessation or prevention smoking
among postmenopausal women to increase the MENQOL
is essential.