Background
Breast cancer is one of the most frequently occurring
types of cancer in the world; female breast cancer has
surpassed lung cancer as the most commonly diagnosed
cancer in 2020, with an estimated 2.3 million new
cases worldwide [1]. Early detection is extremely important
towards improving the survival rate of patients.
Additionally, nearly 23% of breast cancer cases are preventable
[2]. More than 90% of women diagnosed with
breast cancer at the earliest stages (stages 0 and I) survive
their disease for at least five years compared to around
15% for women diagnosed with the most advanced,
metastatic stage of disease (stage IV) [3]. It is of fundamental
importance patients and family caregivers understand
the role of chemotherapy, radiotherapy and other
conventional treatments for curing the disease [4]. For
this reason, it is essential to develop efficient health communication
strategies aimed at the lay public. October is
Breast Cancer Awareness Month, an international health
campaign which aims to increase awareness of the disease,
including the importance of prevention, self-examination,
screening and to raise funds for ongoing research
[5].
In recent times, social networking sites (SNSs), which
are web-based services that allow users to create a profile
and connect with other individuals within the system,
have emerged as powerful health communication
platforms [6]. An increasing number of individuals rely
on social networking as a source of information. In a
worldwide survey conducted in 2020, more than 65% of
respondents from populous countries such as Mexico,
Argentina, Kenya, South Africa, Philippines and Brazil,
declared they rely on social media as a source of news [7].
Moreover, 53% of EU citizens aged 16–74 reported they
sought online health information related to injury, disease,
nutrition, improving health or similar; in which the
highest shares were recorded in Finland (76%) and in the
Netherlands (74%) [8].
Despite its immense power to reach a wide audience,
SNSs present some drawbacks. Users can share content
without any verification by editors, reviewers, or factcheckers.
Often, such content reaches a number of users
similar or even greater than traditional media [9]. This
overabundance of information, both accurate and inaccurate,
makes it more difficult for the lay audience to filter
and learn essential information regarding a given subject.
A widely discussed topic in studies related to communication
in the SNSs is the “fake news” phenomenon
[10]. The Harvard Kennedy School’s Shorenstein Center
defines fake news as “misinformation that has the trappings
of traditional news media, with the presumed associated
editorial processes” [11]. In numerous studies,
nevertheless, this term has been replaced by others, since
it is considered inadequate to capture the complexity of
the information disorder phenomenon [12–14]. Terminologies
used extensively in literature include misinformation,
which is, false, inaccurate or misleading (out
of context) information, regardless of whether there is
intent to mislead [12, 15]; and disinformation, which
entails the distribution, assertion, or dissemination of
false, mistaken, or misleading information in an intentional,
deliberate, or purposeful effort to mislead, deceive,
or confuse [13, 16]. For the purpose of this study, the
term ‘misinformation’ is used as an umbrella expression
encompassing all characteristics of information which
lack scientific evidence, since we are not able to know, in
most cases, if the author had the deliberate intention of
spreading false, misleading or confuse information.
In relation to health, social networks serve as fertile
ground for the proliferation of misinformation. One can
use as an example, Facebook, the SNS with the largest
number of active users as of January 2021 [17]. A study
analysed the credibility of the ten most popular health
news stories featured on this social network [18] and
found only three articles achieved a high credibility rating,
and four articles received a medium credibility rating
(in this case, the information is not entirely false,
however, it contains misleading data). In April 2019, an
article entitled "Cancer industry not looking for a cure;
they’re too busy making money," had nearly three million
engagements on Facebook until it was banned on this
SNSs for using misleading and inaccurate information
[19].
Since wrong and malicious information can be quickly
propagated on SNSs, efforts must be redoubled to better
communicate medical advances accurately with both the
lay public and among patients to ensure genuine knowledge
can be separated from false material [20]. In two
studies [21, 22], researchers investigated the relationship
between the use of complementary and alternative
medicine, adherence to conventional treatment, and
overall survival among patients with cancer. Together,
the studies revealed that patients who use alternative or
complementary medicine are more than twice as likely
to die when compared with those treated using conventional
methods. Moreover, those patients are more likely
to refuse surgery. This can be a consequence of a decline
in public trust in physicians, generated by the increase of
health and cancer misinformation spread over the internet
[20].
The aim of this study is to analyse news stories about
breast cancer shared on social networks from varied
perspectives. We seek to understand the characteristics
regarding the narratives in our sample, including
the credibility of the content with more public engagement.
Health professionals and communicators need to
know the attributes of breast cancer-related content currently
circulating among SNSs, in order to disseminate
relevant and accurate content in an appealing way, ultimately
counteracting misinformation. To our knowledge,
despite the large number of studies regarding online
health-related and cancer misinformation, this is the first
investigation dedicated exclusively towards effectively
analysing breast cancer content across the most used
SNSs worldwide. Our research questions are:
RQ1. What is the credibility of the most shared content?
RQ2. What are the characteristics of the breast cancer
news stories on social networks that generates
more engagement (in the form of total shares)?
RQ3. Do these stories address prevention or early
detection in breast cancer?
RQ4. Are there any differences between the content
shared in October (Breast Cancer Awareness Month)
and other months of the year?
Methods
Study design and data collection
This is an exploratory quali-quantitative study, without
prior hypotheses. We analysed news stories in the English
language regarding breast cancer. Data collection was
conducted between 17 June 2019 and 17 June 2020.
To collect our sample, we used an online tool called
Buzzsumo [23], which monitors the web and social
media feeds to show the most popular content in any
niche. We searched for the keyword "breast cancer", in
quotation marks, so that we only have results displaying
this exact term, and not the words separately. The search
was made within the "Web Content" tab, which finds and
analyses the most engaging articles and blogs among the
following social media sites: Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest
and Reddit. These social networks are among the most
popular in the world. In 2020, Facebook has more than
2.7 billion monthly active users [24]; Twitter has 321 million
[25]; Pinterest has 442 million [26], and Reddit, 430
million [27].
Our search was limited to pages in English, with
no country restrictions. We performed statistical and
content analysis of the stories which had at least 1,000
total shares. The sample size was determined based on
the following: first, since most shared news stories were
exactly those which had greater visibility throughout the
studied social networks, and therefore these stories are
more relevant to our investigation; secondly, we need to
establish a cut for this sample, which makes content analysis
possible; lastly, we believe this cut is enough to have a
comprehensive overview of the conversations and narratives
regarding breast cancer in the chosen period.
The news stories filtered by Buzzsumo were exported
to an Excel table containing the following information:
total shares (sum of shares across all analysed social networks);
total Facebook shares; Twitter shares; Pinterest
shares; total Reddit engagements; and published date.
Content analysis
The content analysis follows the methodology developed
by Bardin [28] (with some adjustments), an inductive
process comprising of the following steps:
1. Pre-analysis: the researchers collect the corpus to be
examined and implement a wide and careful reading
of all relevant material.
2. Coding: coding is the step in transforming raw data
from corpus, making use of records to be grouped in
the future [29]. In this step, we developed the coding
schedule for this research, which is, the form onto
which all the data relative to the news stories being
coded will be entered (as found in Table 1).
3. Categorization: each news story was considered by
us as a unit of our corpus. In this way, we used different
dimensions to categorize each column of the
coding schedule (Table 1). Two researchers dedicated
themselves to the analysis of the material and its classification.
The coding schedule and its dimensions
were previously established by both. Subsequently,
the analysis of a sample of one hundred news stories
was carried out separately by each of the researchers.
Percent agreement was used to calculate inter-rater
reliability, and the result is 83%. After analysing this
initial sample, one of the researchers completed the
categorization of the entire corpus.
4. Interpretation: after categorizing the entire corpus,
we evaluated the results and made inferences.
Credibility analysis and types of rumours
We initiated our content analysis by classifying news
stories according to its credibility. For this, we first separated
them into the following categories: "Verified"
(scientifically accurate) and "Rumours" (scientifically
inaccurate or false) [10]. To determine accuracy, the
researchers checked whether the content of the news
stories could be found in peer-reviewed journals indexed
in the main health-related databases, which include
the following: PubMed, PsycINFO, Embase, Cochrane
Library, CINAHL and Web of Science [30]. It is important
to mention not all stories were classified in “credibility”
dimension; only those that address some kind of
scientific innovation, traditional treatment, alternative
treatments or mention health tips for patients, as well as
address prevention and early detection in breast cancer.
For the “types of rumours” column, we were inspired in
the nomenclature developed by Wardle [14] on the different
types of misinformation, with some adaptations. The
following categories were established: (1) Misleading
content: describes stories which are not entirely false yet
lead the reader to misinterpret the data; (2) False connection/
context: this encompasses Wardle’s categories
of manipulated content, false connection, and false context.
We classified a rumour in this category when the
headline does not support the content of the news story,
or when genuine images, videos, photos, and audios were
used outside their original context, or were manipulated.
(3) Fabricated content: News stories without any trace
of genuine information (both in the textual and non-textual
parts) were classified in this category.
Source of news stories
We classified the origin of news stories into three categories:
(1) Traditional media: also known as ‘legacy media’
[31] or ‘old media’ [32], refers to the types of media that
existed before the popularization of the internet, even
though they now have their digital versions. As an example,
we can mention radio or television networks, newspaper
publishers, book publishers and movie studios. (2)
Digital media: news sources launched online and exclusively
publish using this medium [10].
Content type analysis
The categories identified by the researchers for "content
type" are as follows: (1) “Real life story”: testimonials
from individuals who have/had cancer, or family
members of patients, or other life stories; (2) “Risk factors”:
stories whose main focus is on some risk factor
for breast cancer, such as smoking, unhealthy eating
habits, physical inactivity, among others; (3) “Treatment”:
stories focused on explaining or announcing
some type of treatment for breast cancer, whether they
are traditional or alternative methods; (4) “New technology”:
stories that focus on explaining new technologies
in the detection or prevention of breast cancer;
(5) “Solidarity”: stories that focus on solidarity actions,
such as donating money to help women perform diagnostic
tests, or when individuals become involved in
breast cancer awareness actions, for example. (6) “Educational”:
news stories that teach what kind of food
can help prevent cancer, or what are the symptoms of
breast cancer; (7) “Complaint”: reports of problems
that breast cancer patients experience, such as the lack
of medication or problems with health insurance providers;
(8) “Opinion”: the focus is on the authors’ opinions
regarding topics related to breast cancer, such as
awareness campaigns or new treatments.
Mentions prevention and early detection/screening
Finally, we have included in our content analysis
some questions whose answer is a simple ’yes’ or ’no’
(Table 1). The purpose of such questions is to evaluate
in greater depth the content of news stories, seeking to
understand how they approach breast cancer: whether
they mention prevention strategies, early detection and
screening exams.
Statistical analyses
Data were analysed using IBM SPSS Statistics (version
26.0) predictive analysis software, and Microsoft
Office Excel (version 16). Depending on the sample
size, Fisher’s Exact Test or Chi-square test was used
to determine the relationship between two categorical
variables. A Kolmogorov–Smirnov normality test was
used to determine whether sample data has been drawn
from a normally distributed population.
Results
Screening the media for breast cancer news stories
published between June 2019 and June 2020 resulted
in 9,811 hits. Of these, 1,594 news stories had at least
1,000 total shares.
Source of news stories
Most of the stories in our sample were published in
digital media (76.73%), whereas 23.27% originated
from traditional media. However, the most shared
news story (Table 2) was published in Fox News, a traditional
media outlet. Among the twenty stories with
the most shares, thirteen were published by traditional
media outlets: four times by Fox News and once by nine
other media entities, such as The Epoch Times, Metro,
CNN and NBC News. The most shared story in a digital
media is authored by the blog The Breast Cancer Site.
Credibility and type of rumours
Regarding RQ1, of all news stories selected for coding,
69.7% have not been classified according to credibility.
This is due to the fact these news items do not
address science, risk factors, prevention, treatment or
other aspects, which can be assessed for scientific accuracy.
Among the news classified according to credibility
(n = 483), 17.25% are ’verified’ and 13.05% are ’rumours’.
When we examine the most common types of rumours,
we see ‘false connection/context’ represent 62.7% of the
total, ‘misleading content’ are 34.9% of the total, and
totally false content, that is, ’fabricated content’ category,
represents 2.4% of the total.
In consideration of the number of shares in relation
to the credibility of the content (Fig. 1), we see the content
classified as "rumours" tends to be more shared than
those scientifically correct, both in traditional and digital
media. Although less frequent in our sample, “rumours”
totalled 5,755,192 shares, whereas “verified” stories were
tallied at 1,747,352 total shares (3.29 times less).
We can observe a very strong statistical connection
(Cramer’s value = 0.313) between categories “credibility”
and “content type”. News stories regarding “treatment”
are 37.9% “rumours” and 62.1% (1.6 times more)
“verified”. “Real life stories” are 58.3% (1.4 times more)
“rumours” and 41.7% “verified”. About “risk factors”,
56.3% are “rumours” and 43.8% are “verified”; in “new
technology”, 53.8% (nearly 1.5 times more) are “rumours”
and 46.3% are “verified”. Stories classified as “educational”
are 13.7% “rumours” and 86.3% (6.3 times more) “verified”.
Finally, the dimensions “solidarity” and “complaint”
are both 100% “verified” in our sample.
There is also a very strong association (Cramer’s
value = 0.431) between categories “type of rumour” and
“content type”. In the dimension “risk factors”, we observe
that 79.5% of the rumours were classified as “false connection/
context”, and 20.5% were deemed “misleading.”
In the “treatment” dimension, 29.3% of the rumours
are “misleading” and 70.7% (2.5 times more) have “false
connection/context.”
Content type
Regarding RQ2, when we examine the distribution of
content type categories in our sample (Fig. 2), we see
most stories are classified as ‘real-life story’ or ‘solidarity’
(67.69%). These stories have no scientific content, since
they are focused on narrating the life of an individual or
family members with cancer, publicizing actions to raise
money for cancer hospitals or requesting donations of
any kind for patients in need, to mention a few examples.
During the period studied, we also noticed a recurrence
of the same news among the stories with the most
total shares (Table 2). These stories multiply on different
web pages, often with the same title and text, or few
variations.
Among the most shared stories, we see how the trial
vaccination against breast cancer of a patient in Florida
was highlighted (the story was repeated four times in the
Top Twenty). The death from COVID-19 of a mom of 6
who survived breast cancer was also noteworthy, being
repeated four times.
We also noticed a highlight in news that addresses
celebrities with breast cancer, including the North-American
actress Shannen Doherty, the British-Australian
singer Olivia Newton-John, and the North-American television
broadcaster Robin Roberts.
Mentions prevention and early detection/screening
To answer RQ3, most analysed news stories do not
address ways of preventing or early detecting breast cancer
(Table 3). In our sample, 5.08% of the stories comment
on prevention and 19.7% mention early detection.
There is an extraordinarily strong statistical connection
(Cramer’s value = 0.435; Fisher’s exact test, p < 0.001)
between content type and prevention; and between content
type and early detection (Cramer’s value = 0.355;
Chi-square test: p < 0.001).
Stories whose theme are "opinion", "educational" and
"risk factors" have the highest proportion of references
in prevention. In relation to early detection, we see this
characteristic in stories regarding “new technology”,
“opinion” and “complaint”. We did not observe statistical
connection between prevention versus credibility and
between early detection versus credibility.
Breast cancer awareness month
Regarding RQ4, we compared the news published
in October (known as the “Breast Cancer Awareness
Month” or “Pink October” in several countries around
the world [5]) with the other months. There are several
variations in relation to the topics covered and in relation
to the credibility of the most shared content (Chi-square
test: p < 0.001; Cramer’s value = 0.300, extraordinarily
strong connection).
There is a significant increase in news stories classified
as "solidarity" in October (28.4% versus 9.3% in other
months). On the other hand, there was a decrease in content
that addresses “risk factors” (3.6% versus 13.1% in
other months), “real-life stories” (47.9% versus 54.5% in
other months) and “new technology” (1.0% versus 7.0% in
other months). We can observe a slight increase in educational
content (7.8% versus 5.3%).
When we compare the credibility of the news shared in
October with the other months of the year, we see there
is a statistically significant difference in the distribution
of the types of rumours (Fisher’s exact test: p = 0.030;
Cramer’s value = 0.172, strong connection). There is an
increase in rumours classified as "false connection/context"
(81.3% in October versus 59.3% in other months),
whereas it is possible to note a decrease in “misleading
content” (15.6% in October versus 38.4% in other
months). There is no noteworthy difference in relation
to "fabricated content" (3.1% in October versus 2.3% in
other months).
We found a moderate connection (Chi-square test:
p = 0.003; Cramer’s value = 0.138) between news stories’
credibility in October and in other months. Overall, in
October there is an increase in news stories classified
as “verified” (69.8% in October versus 53.3% in other
months).
Discussion
The aim of the present study was to analyse the most
shared news stories regarding breast cancer on social
networks, examining its content under different aspects.
The majority (69.7%) of our sample could not be classified
as to credibility, as they do not address topics related
to science, technology and treatments. However, it is
important to note that the news classified as "rumours"
(13.05%) had a total number of shares 3.29 times greater
than the "verified" ones (17.25%). This trend has previously
been observed. In a study that evaluated the accuracy
of the most popular articles on SNSs relating to
genitourinary malignancies [33], there was a significantly
higher average number of shares for inaccurate and misleading
articles, compared to accurate ones. The same
tendency was observed in a study dedicated to examine
the spread of information related to Zika virus on the
internet [10].
Most "rumours" in our sample did not display completely
fabricated information, but instead presented
“false connection/context” (62.7%) or “misleading content”
(34.9%). Understanding this nuance regarding
misinformation about breast cancer on social media is
important. Valid information taken out of context can
have even greater potential damage, as it may seem far
more convincing to the lay reader—hence the higher
number of total shares, which was also observed in other
studies [34, 35].
To cite an example, we mention the most shared news
story in our sample, entitled “Trial vaccine wipes out
breast cancer in Florida patient” (1,822,993 total shares).
It was classified as ‘false connection/context’ because
the title implies the vaccine is a reality, since a patient
has been cured of cancer. However, the text of the article
shows the story is more complex than it may seem at first:
the vaccine is still a trial, and this patient was the first one
to be tested. The text states, “The drug still has a long
way to go, but Knutson said it’s promising and is helping
show shades of a future that doctors have been working
toward.” We concur that the title is sensationalist, since it
leads readers to conclude something that is not yet realistic.
This same story, with the same or remarkably similar
titles, was reproduced thirty-two times in our sample.
As an example of “misleading content”, we can mention
the news story whose title is “Black women are over
6 times more likely to get breast cancer from hair dye
and relaxers- New study finds” (145,238 shares). However,
this study has a serious limitation, as pointed out
by an epidemiologist: “The Sisters Study is a good prospective
cohort study—but women were recruited to the
study because they had a sister with breast cancer, so the
conclusions wouldn’t necessarily hold true for women in
the wider population, hence the need for further confirmation.”
[36] This type of misinformation can cause the
spread of unnecessary fear among the lay audience [37].
The most shared “content types” in the sample of this
study were “real-life stories” and “solidarity” (67.69%).
This seems to indicate a public preference in relation to
these themes. Another study which examined Brazilian
Facebook pages about cancer shows similar findings;
on most pages, content related to “Solidarity”, “Anniversaries”
and “Testimonies or real-life stories” was among
those with the most engagement on this social media
[38]. To illustrate, the most shared articles classified
as “real-life story” in our sample include the following:
“Loyal boyfriend who stuck with girlfriend during breast
cancer proposes on her last day of chemo” (734,482 total
shares) and “Dad with breast cancer ’rejected from support
groups because he’s a man’” (640,106 total shares).
The most shared “solidarity” stories are “DeAngelo Williams
Pays for 500 Mammograms after Mom Dies of
Breast Cancer” (62,836 total shares) and “North Charleston
Police Department goes pink to help fight breast
cancer” (61,769 total shares). These stories focus on the
daily life, or personal narratives of cancer patients, their
family members, or friends. There is no educational or
awareness objective regarding risk factors and prevention
of breast cancer. One of the stories mentions mammography,
but the text does not provide more details about
who should undergo the exam, and when it should be
scheduled.
Only 5.08% of the articles in our sample address prevention,
and 19.7% mention early detection. Extensive
literature highlights the importance of adopting
habits that help prevent breast cancer, such as limiting
alcohol consumption, not smoking, maintaining a
healthy weight, and being physically active [39–41]. It
is also extremely important that the population is well
informed regarding the importance of early diagnosis,
including the symptoms of the disease, as screening is
the most efficient way to diagnose breast cancer at an
early stage and thus decrease mortality [2]. Moreover,
a study conducted in Hungary revealed most respondents
were unaware of the fact that breast cancer selfexamination
should be initiated two decades earlier
than mammography, when women turn twenty years
old [42]. The lack of knowledge and awareness on
breast cancer is also an identified concern in a number
of highly populated countries, such as Ethiopia
[43], Nigeria [44], and Brazil [45]. A systematic review
of breast cancer screening discourse on social media
[46] indicates there is a substantial presence of unscientific
statements shared by lay individuals about the
topic, such as “mammography causes breast cancer”, or
“breast cancer can be prevented by organic food”. This
type of misinformation is dangerous, as it can discourage
women from scheduling the screening exam.
It is interesting to note that, in our sample, there is
a decrease in news stories that address risk factors in
October, the Breast Cancer Awareness Month. On the
other hand, there is an increase in stories regarding
solidarity. Although the stories that narrate solidarity
attitudes are more popular (high number of shares
on social networks), we believe it is also necessary to
address issues related to prevention, risk factors and
early diagnosis more emphatically throughout this
month. A study that examined Google searches for the
terms "mammography" and "breast cancer" over a five
year period showed remarkable peaks every October
[47], which reveals a growing, although temporary,
interest of the population in the subject. Another study
that investigated Twitter messages during the awareness
month concluded most content on this SNS does
not address any type of prevention strategies, and it is
essentially used as a one-way communication tool [48].
Limitations
This study has some limitations that need to be considered.
The first aspect is the limited number of
investigated news stories, as we do not have enough
resources to analyse qualitatively thousands of articles
without compromising the excellence of the process.
Due to this, we have no way of knowing whether
the result of the content analysis of the entire corpus
will be the same as the analysis of the sample selected
for this study. A second limitation is the fact that our
sample is limited to stories in English. If we analysed
other languages, we might have discovered differences
in the topics covered and in the credibility of the news.
Therefore, we believe it is not possible to generalize
the results observed in this article to all languages and
cultural settings.
Conclusions
The study revealed that, although the volume of verified,
evidence-based content is moderately greater in our sample
than misinformation, unscientific articles are shared
3.29 times more, on average. In an environment in which
everyone can produce content without any type of filter
or quality control, public understanding of medical
research and advances has never been more paramount
[49]. We consider it is of great importance to combine
content of higher popularity, such as real-life stories, with
subjects that can make a difference in patients’ lives, such
as early detection, breast cancer symptoms and disease
prevention strategies. The same should be done during
Pink October, when there is an increase in internet
searches on the topic. Speaking about solidarity while
addressing the importance of screening exams can be a
good strategy. We believe our findings may be useful to
assist in the development of online health communication
strategies in breast cancer. Doctors, scientists and
health journalists can expand the dialogue with the lay
public about breast cancer, helping to counteract online
misinformation.