Background
Uterine leiomymomas are considered a chief health issue,
with around 235 million females affected throughout the
globe, and up to 70% of females could be diagnosed with
uterine myomas before menopause. On the other hand,
symptomatic leiomyomas requiring management exist in
only 25% of patients [1].
Myomectomy is the typical surgical management
option for various women who suffer from myomas and
require future childbearing or basically desire preservation
of their uterus. Various surgical approaches for
myomectomy are implemented in practice involving laparotomy,
laparoscopy, and hysteroscopy [2, 3].
Myomectomy is considered a risky bloody procedure,
and the most considerable morbidity correlated to it is
major blood loss [4]. Being a reconstructive surgery, the
goals of myomectomy operation include removal of the
tumor mass without excessive blood loss, closure of the
dead space without hematoma formation, ensuring a
good-quality uterine scar that can withstand subsequent
pregnancies without dehiscence, and minimizing postoperative
formation of adhesions.
It has usually been proposed that vertical uterine incision
was the most preferred as it causes less blood loss,
being attributed to the fact that arcuate arteries run
transversely from lateral to medial [4, 5]. However, radiological
studies proved that the presence of the myoma
disrupts the normal vascular design, so either transverse
or longitudinal incision would transect the arcuate arteries
[6].
We postulate that transverse uterine incisions might
achieve a better scar quality. It is well established that
classic longitudinal incisions are associated with weaker
scars and higher incidence of subsequent uterine rupture
compared to lower segment transverse incisions during
cesarean delivery [7, 8]. Despite the unique process
of uterine involution and remodeling after delivery [9],
which hinders extrapolating outcomes of wound healing
to myomectomy incisions; some correlations might
prove some relevance. Relative strength of low transverse
uterine scars was reported in preterm uteri with yet
under-developed lower segment, compared to the classic
longitudinal scars [10].
Thus, it might seem a rational option to perform a
transverse uterine incision [11] if proven to be hemostatically
equivalent to longitudinal incision. Unfortunately,
up to our knowledge, no previous studies addressed this
issue in open myomectomy.
The current research study aims to prove that transverse
uterine incision is not inferior regarding intra-operative
blood loss compared to longitudinal incision during
myomectomy.
Methods
Study design
A parallel randomized controlled pilot study conducted
at Ain Shams University Maternity Hospital in the
period between January 2017 and April 2018, in which
fifty-two cases were recruited from those attending the
outpatient gynecologic clinic, who were candidates for
myomectomy.
Sample size calculation
Sample size was calculated using the Power & Sample
Size Calculator®, setting the power (1−β) at 0.8 and the
type-1 error (α) at 0.05. The primary outcome of the current
study is the mean estimated intraoperative blood loss
(IBL). Reviewing the literature revealed no direct comparison
between vertical and transverse uterine incision for
abdominal myomectomy. A trial comparing the two types
of incision in laparoscopic myomectomy was, however,
found. This latter trial showed that the mean values for
estimated IBL in transverse versus vertical uterine incision
in laparoscopic myomectomy were 110.5 ± 81.7 ml and
136.4 ± 108.5 ml, respectively [12]. Therefore, transverse
uterine incision would be assumed to reduce the mean
estimated IBL by almost 18.9%. A previous study showed
that the average blood loss during conventional abdominal
myomectomy (which utilizes vertical uterine incision)
was 621 ± 121 ml [13]. The mean estimated IBL with transverse
uterine incision would, therefore, be assumed to be
503 ml. Calculation according to these values, produces a
minimal sample size of 17 women in each group. Considering
an attrition rate of 35% (to compensate for drop-outs
due to the limited surgical experience with the novel technique
in difficult myomectomies), a total of 52 women were
recruited.
Recruitment
Criteria for inclusion in the study were as follows; single
myoma measuring 5–10 cm in diameter, causing abnormal
uterine bleeding, uterine pressure-related symptoms,
infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss in women between
20 and 35 years of age, with BMI between 18.5–29.9 kg/
m2. Candidates were excluded from the study if they had
any of the following criteria; pregnancy, cases with bleeding
tendency, prior laparotomies, cases having coexisting
pelvic pathologies, as ovarian cysts. All candidates had a
complete preoperative evaluation via clinical history taking,
clinical examination and sonographic examination for
confirmation of the exact site, size and number of uterine
fibroids and to exclude any coexisting pelvic pathology, a
venous blood sample for blood picture, liver and kidney
functions as well as coagulation profile, as a part of anesthetic
workup.
Convenience sampling was utilized. The process of
recruitment and handling the study population during the
course of the study is shown in the CONSORT flow diagram.
Candidates were randomly assigned (with 1:1 allocation
ratio) to one of two groups according to a computer
generated sequence, distributed in sequentially numbered
sealed opaque envelopes, allocated by the seventh author.
Only the research candidates were blinded to the surgical
technique.
Intervention
All candidates received general anesthesia and the abdominal
cavity was accessed through a Pfannenstiel incision.
Research group A included 26 women who were planned
for transverse uterine incision in which a transverse elliptical
uterine incision is accustomed within the pseudocapsule
in a manner that its transverse diameter is almost
centralized over the myoma with a slight anterior shift. Its
length is 2 cm shorter than the maximum diameter of the
myoma and ends well away from the tubal ostia. Breadth of
the ellipse is fashioned so that its edges wouldn’t be under
tension or redundant after closure, usually the breadth
equals one third of its length (Fig. 1). Tissue planes are
bluntly and/or sharply dissected and the myoma is resected
with the overlying ellipse of myometrium and pseudocapsule
leaving a relatively smaller zone of dead space for
closure (Fig. 2). Myometrium is re-approximated in two
layers using absorbable suture (Fig. 3). The uterine serosa
is sutured in a running fashion, exposing minimal suture
material and raw area to minimize adhesion formation
(Fig. 4). Research group B included 26 women who were
planned for standard longitudinal uterine incision [4]. No
vasopressin or any other hemostatics were used to avoid
their confounding effect on blood loss. No peritoneal toilet
was done and intra-peritoneal suction drains were left in all
cases. IBL was estimated as follows: obtaining the volume
difference of blood in suction bottle containers (in ml),
obtaining weight difference of linen towels (in gm) [weight
of soaked linen towels—weight of dry linen towels] [14].
These differences were estimated from the beginning of
the uterine incision till its closure. IBL was also calculated
by obtaining the difference between preoperative and 24 h
postoperative hematocrit using the following formula:
EBV x (Hi‑Hf)/Hi
Where the Hi is the preoperative blood hematocrit, Hf
is the postoperative one and EBV is the estimated blood
volume. The estimated blood volume could be calculated
by multiplying weight times average blood volume which
is around 65 ml/kg in females [15].
After exclusion of three patients (as shown in the
CONSORT flow diagram), a total of 25 women in the
Transverse Uterine Incision group and 24 women in the
Longitudinal Uterine Incision group were eligible for statistical
analysis.
Postoperatively, all women were subjected to postoperative
follow-up of vital data and suction drains for 24 h,
and received NSAIDs for analgesia.
Research study outcomes
IBL as primary outcome, operative time and postoperative
fever, defined as temperature of 38.5 °C in the first 48
postoperative hours and persisting more than 24 h [16,
17], as secondary outcomes.
Statistical analysis
Conducted using SPSS for Windows version 20. Per
protocol analysis was adopted to avoid dilution of treatment
effect by excluded patients with surgically-difficult
myomectomies.
Data was represented as mean ± SD (95% CI) for continuous
parametric variables and median (IQR) for
non-parametric ones. Difference between two unrelated
groups was analyzed using the independent Student’s
t test as well as the mean difference [MD] and its 95%
confidence interval [95% CI] (for numeric parametric
variables); Mann–Whitney’s U test (for numeric nonparametric
variables); paired t test (for paired numerical
parametric variables); chi-squared test and Fischer exact
test (for categorical variables). Significance level was set
at 0.05.
Results
No statistically significant differences were found
between women of both groups regarding age, body mass
index or parity. Also there were no significant differences
between women of both groups regarding frequency distribution
of indications for myomectomy, myoma location
according to FIGO sub-classification [18], mean
myoma size, preoperative hemoglobin or hematocrit.
(Table 1).
Directly-estimated IBL (based on weight difference
of gauze and towels and suctioned blood volume) was
lower in the transverse uterine incision group compared
to the longitudinal uterine incision group (389.7 ± 98.56
vs 485.04 ± 230.6); though this difference failed to reach
statistical significance. (p value = 0.07). Only one case
needed postoperative blood transfusion, due to anemic
symptoms in the longitudinal incision group after an estimated
blood loss of 1000 ml, but that was not statistically
significant. (p value = 0.48) (Table 2).
Postoperative repeated analysis of hemoglobin concentration
revealed higher drop in hemoglobin concentration
in the longitudinal uterine incision group in
comparison to the transverse uterine incision group;
though lacking statistical significance. (p value = 0.68)
Similar findings were found on analysis of hematocrit
values in the two groups (p value = 0.72). Calculated IBL
(derived from difference between pre- and post-operative
hematocrit values) between the two groups was higher in
the longitudinal incision group, yet this difference did not
reach statistical significance (p value = 0.07). (Table 2).
No statistically significant difference was observed
between the transverse uterine incision group and the
longitudinal uterine incision group regarding the operative
time (p value = 0.18). (Table 3).
There was no statistically significant difference as
regards the amount of fluid lost in the suction drain or
incidence of postoperative pyrexia (p value = 0.27, 0.60
consecutively). (Table 3).
Discussion
Longitudinal midline uterine incisions have usually been
adopted during myomectomy [4, 5]. They were assumed
to be more hemostatic, because the anatomical studies of
the distribution of myometrial blood vessels showed that
arcuate arteries run transversely from lateral to medial,
to join at the median plane. They give off radial arteries
and spiral arterioles, which course centripetally towards
the endometrium in also a transverse plane [19–21]. This
transverse course would thus, at least theoretically, result
in transection of more blood vessels by a longitudinal
incision. In comparison, a transverse uterine incision will
parallel their course, leading to the transection of a fewer
number [22].
Moreover, suturing of a vertical incision places the
sutures parallel to the course of the transversely running
vessels, which hinders adequate ligation of all transected
arteries and veins, together with their branches and tributaries
respectively. On the contrary, suturing transverse
incisions places the sutures perpendicular to them, and
thus, provides an effective hemostatic seal that would
surround all transected vessels [22].
However, all these assumptions were based upon anatomical
studies of normal uteri. Few studies addressed
the distortion of myometrial vascular anatomy by the
growing myomas. Studies of the vascular pattern of
myomatous uteri by injection, micro-radiographic and
histologic techniques revealed that their vascular supply
depends upon localized expansion of the normal myometrial
vasculature, where displaced and distorted arcuate
and radial arteries give off a number of small arteries
that penetrate the myoma anywhere along its circumference
[23]. They also revealed that the venous drainage of
fibroids is sparse compared to the arterial supply, only
few moderate-sized distended arcuate veins are occasionally
seen. These distended venous channels contribute
substantially to the heavy bleeding during myomectomy
[23]. Angiographic study of the course of the arterial
blood vessels encircling uterine myomas revealed that
the neo-vessels, developing around them, do not follow
the normal anatomy of myometrial vasculature. Instead,
on the surface of myomas, blood vessels run mostly diagonally
with an angle of 0–60° in 70% of cases. In addition,
nearly 40% of the vessels crossed the myoma midline [6].
Based on these findings, it may be concluded that arterial
vessels on the surface of myomas can be injured
whatever the direction of uterine incision, yet a transverse
uterine incision would be less traumatic to the
transversely directed myometrial arteries, aretrioles and
venous channels, and to the diagonally directed fibroid
feeding vessels.
This theory was previously questioned by Morita and
his colleagues in the setting of laparoscopic myomectomy.
Transverse uterine incisions were associated with
significant decline in IBL compared to longitudinal incisions
(137.6 ± 88.1 vs. 235.8 ± 169.4 mL respectively).
This decline was more evident in large myomas (> 7 cm in
diameter); with an estimated blood loss 158.9 ± 87.1 mL
in transverse incisions, compared to 362.3 ± 147.3 mL
in longitudinal incisions. Whereas no statistically significant
differences were found between both incisions
in smaller myomas (< 7 cm) [12]. This seems logic, as the
traumatic effect becomes more evident with the extension
of the longitudinal incision causing more damage to
the traversing vessels; in contrast to the extension of the
transverse incision that runs almost parallel to the vessels.
However, validation by further studies is needed, as
the proposed effect of myoma size in the study of Morita
is confounded by the large difference in operative time
with myomas > 7 cm between longitudinal (165.4 min)
and transverse incision (129 min), owing to the easier
suturing technique of transverse incisions [12].
Despite the disparities between the laparoscopic
and open approaches for myomectomy, in addition to
preoperative treatment with gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone analogs and intra-myometrial vasopressin
injection in the study of Morita [12]; yet, the underlying
surgical theory of transection of more transversely running
vessels by longitudinal incisions might also be held
true in case of open myomectomies.
In consistence with the same theory, the results of our
study proved that transverse uterine incision resulted
in lower volumes of IBL and postoperative drop of
hemoglobin and hematocrit compared to longitudinal
incision, although this difference did not reach statistical
significance. It should be noted that only myomas
< 10 cm in diameter were included in our study,
with an average myoma size of approximately 8 cm.
We acknowledge the differences between open and
laparoscopic approaches for myomectomy [24, 25],
yet it is standard practice in our institute to perform
myomectomy through the open approach for cases
with our inclusion criteria.
The optimum myomectomy technique has always been
a matter of debate, especially concerning measures to
ensure optimum myometrial healing, considering the
difficulty in the assessment of the obstetric quality of the
resulting scar. The concept of pseudocapsule preservation
in the intracapsular myomectomy technique has
been introduced to preserve the neurovascular bundle
and promote better healing [26].
Although based on a sound biological background,
much of the assumptions of the impact of pseudocapsule
preservation are still theoretical and derived by
analogy to the effect of preservation of the neurovascular
bundle during prostatectomy [27]. Reports of the
reproductive outcomes of intracapsular myomectomy
seem favorable [26]. However, up to our knowledge,
no trials compared the obstetric quality of the scars of
intracapsular myomectomy with those of the conventional
surgical approach. Moreover, given the inevitable
injury of the pseudocapsule during the incision to reach
the myoma, no clear cut limits exist for the maximum
accepted damage to the pseudocapsule. It is not known
whether the whole pseudocapsule should be preserved
or even a smaller part would be sufficient to supply the
growth mediators postulated to stimulate myometrial
healing.
Elliptical uterine incisions are designed to remove
excess serosal and myometrial tissues overlying the
maximum fibroid bulge, to avoid leaving behind large
dead space after enucleation of the myoma. The idea of
removal excess serosal and myometrial tissues is reported
in the literature several times [28]. Especially in the setting
of minimally invasive myomectomy, many surgeons
advocate this incision to ensure obliteration of any dead
space [29].
We adopted an elliptical incision, removing only a
small part of devascularized serosa and pseudocapsule
overlying the myoma within the boundaries of the
ellipse, to minimize dead space and the amount of redundant
tissue to be sutured, while sparing the rest of the
pseudocapsule.
The mean blood loss in both research groups of our
study lies in the average range of blood loss volume
observed in previous studies, that indicated that mean
blood loss during open abdominal myomectomy would
be between 200–800 ml [13, 30–32].
The mean operative time ranged between 58–88.5 min
in different studies using the standard longitudinal
myomectomy incision [13, 33, 34], which matches our
observed mean operative time in both research groups.
The variation between different studies in calculated
blood loss and operative time was correlated to the size
and number of excised myomas.
In this study, only one case required blood transfusion
in the longitudinal incision group representing 4%
of cases, while none required in the transverse incision
group, making no significant difference between both
groups. Studies on average blood loss during myomectomy
stated that blood transfusion was widely variable
extending from 2 to 28% of cases [35].
Postoperative pyrexia following myomectomy has been
linked to the development of myoma-bed hematoma
[16], that may be followed by weakening of the developing
scar [36]. In this study, postoperative pyrexia developed
in one patient in the transverse incision group
and in two patients in the longitudinal incision group.
However, being a secondary outcome, our sample size
is underpowered to detect a significant difference in the
incidence of such uncommon complication.
By proving that blood loss is comparable in both
incisions, it might be convincing to routinely adopt a
transverse uterine incision during myomectomy as with
cesarean section. Future research is required to investigate
long term sequelae of transverse and longitudinal
incisions during myomectomy regarding reproductive
sequelae, incidence of uterine rupture in subsequent
pregnancies and its impact on formation of pelvic
adhesions.
Among the strengths of this study: (1) up to our
knowledge, this is the first study to explore the effect
of uterine incision direction in open myomectomy; (2)
homogeneity of patients within the two groups regarding
the number, size and site of myomas; (3) estimation
of IBL both directly and indirectly. Limitations include:
(1) although we tried to restrict the range of myoma
sizes, we failed to statistically adjust blood loss to varying
myoma size due to limited sample size; (2) different
surgeons were involved in the study, although all had
similar adequate experience.
Conclusion
Blood loss from transverse uterine incision is comparable
to longitudinal incision in open myomectomy.
