Background
An important role of the pelvic floor muscles (PFM) is to
maintain urine continence and support the pelvic organs.
Voluntary PFM contraction is evaluated by assessing
pelvic floor elevation, muscle strength, endurance, and
coordination [1]. In clinical practice, digital vaginal palpation
is the technique most often used to assess PFM
function [2]. In addition, the perineometer and ultrasound
imaging are used as the diagnostic tools.
However, the sensitivity of vaginal palpation for quantifying
sustained contractions [3] and discriminating variations
in force is less than that of other techniques, and
it has been shown to have limited reliability even when
performed by experienced examiners [4, 5]. Vaginal pressure
measurement is a commonly used quantitative evaluation
to measure PFM strength [3], and it is significantly
lower in women with stress incontinence than in healthy
women [6]. It is also used as a teaching tool and as motivation
for conducting training exercises [7]. Thus, vaginal
pressure measurement has high clinical importance. It is
necessary to perform an objective evaluation of the PFM
to be able to properly treat, give feedback, and document
changes in PFM function during rehabilitation [8]. Additionally,
PFM evaluation is recommended by the International
Continence Society and considered essential to
assess a post-therapeutic intervention effect [9].
The Peritron (Laborie, Mississauga, ON, Canada) perineometer
is commonly available for clinical practice and
research. However, in order to import the Peritron into
some countries, complicated purchasing procedures
are required because this device is considered medical
equipment. Therefore, there are some barriers to its use
for evaluation and research. The MizCure (OWOMED,
Seoul, Korea) is sold as a PFM training and biofeedback
device. It can be easily purchased online by private individuals.
The MizCure is generally used in some urology
and gynecology and urogynecology clinics for training.
The MizCure uses different units of measurement,
which complicates any comparison of measurements
obtained between the MizCure and Peritron perineometers.
Whether the measurements obtained using the two
perineometers, even with probes of similar diameters,
are correlated is not known. In a previous study using the
Peritron (Cardio-Design, Oakleigh, VIC Australia), it was
found to have good inter-rater reliability, intra-rater reliability,
and validity [3, 10–12].
However, the reliability and validity of the MizCure
have not been verified. The purpose of this study was to
clarify the reliability and validity of PFM strength assessment
using the MizCure perineometer in healthy women.
Methods
Subjects
A convenience sample of 20 healthy women was recruited
for this study. A sample size calculation showed that 17
subjects were needed for a correlation greater than 0.7,
alpha level of 5%, power of 90%, and effect size of 0.6 [13].
In this study, the sample size was set at 20, taking into
account 3 dropouts. This study of intra- and inter-rater
reliabilities and agreement was performed at our institute
from September 2018 to December 2019. The patients
included in this study were nulliparous, non-pregnant
women, aged 20–45 years, with body mass index < 25 kg/
m2 and no gynecological complaints or disease verified,
with the ability to correctly contract the PFM. Women
with pelvic organ prolapse or who had undergone pelvic
reconstructive surgery, those who had symptoms of vaginal
infection, intolerance to condoms, or allergy to the gel
used in the procedure, as well as those involved in PFM
training, were excluded. The present study was approved
by the Scientific Ethics Committee of our institute (#018-
0056), and all patients provided their informed consent.
Assessment tools and procedures
Assessment tools
Manometry 1 The Peritron 9300 perineometer (Laborie),
shown in Fig. 1, was used in this study. The Peritron
perineometer has a conical vaginal probe, 26 mm (pressurized:
33 mm) in diameter and 110 mm in length, with
a measurable length of 55 mm. The vaginal probe is connected
to the perineometer’s main body with an 80-cm
plastic tube. When the probe is compressed by vaginal
pressure, a pressure sensor measures the vaginal pressure.
The probe consisted of an air-filled silicone rubber sensor
and measured pressure in cmH2O.
The occlusive pressure
readings obtained by the perineometer provide surrogate
measures of PFM strength.
Manometry 2 The MizCure perineometer (OWOMED,
Korea) is a conical vaginal insert, 21 mm (pressurized:
27 mm) in diameter and 79 mm in length, with a measurable
length of 50 mm (Fig. 2).
The probe was connected to the perineometer’s main
body via a 75-cm silicone tube. When a silicone tube is
connected to the perineometer’s main body and the
power is turned on, air enters the probe and the probe
expands. When pressure is applied to the inside of the
vagina to the inflated probe sensor, the pressure sensor
measures the vaginal pressure. The inflation pressure
can be set to 140 or 150 mmHg. In the present study, the
inflation pressure was set to 140 mmHg. The unit measured
pressure in mmHg.
Procedure
Test 1 First, before starting the tests, a transperineal
technique using two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound confirmed
that each woman was able to contract the PFM
correctly based on 2D transperineal ultrasound measurements,
including the anteroposterior diameter of the
urogenital hiatus (measured at rest and during PFM contraction)
(Fig. 2). In our group, we demonstrated that 2D
transperineal ultrasound is useful to assess PFM function
in patients with pelvic organ prolapse [14]. Yang et al.
found a close correlation between reduced urogenital
hiatus diameter in the sagittal plane and the modified
Oxford grading scale [12]. The modified Oxford grading
scale is defined as follows: 0 = no contraction; 1 = flicker;
2 = weak; 3 = moderate; 4 = good; and 5 = strong [15].
Second, vaginal pressure was measured with the Peritron
and MizCure perineometers. The order of use of the two
vaginal manometers and the two test positions were each
performed randomly. Testing was conducted with the
women in two positions: the supine position, with flexed
and slightly abducted legs, and the standing position,
with straight and slightly abducted legs. Before data were
acquired by the perineometers, the participant inserted
the probe, which was covered with a condom and lubricated
with hypoallergenic gel, into her vaginal cavity. The
participants were instructed to place the probe inside the
vagina to a location where 0.5–1.0 cm of the probe was
visible from the outside of the introitus. PFM strength was
then evaluated by a maximum voluntary contraction, as
measured by squeeze pressure. The instruction used for
each contraction was ‘squeeze and lift the PFM as much
as you can’. Vaginal pressure testing was performed with
three repetitions of maximum voluntary contractions that
each lasted for 3 s, with a 3-s rest between contractions.
A 2-min rest break was then taken. Visible co-contraction
of the transversus abdominis muscle was permitted, as
long as there was no pelvic tilting [16, 17]. Examiner 1
was a physiotherapist with 11 years of clinical experience.
Examiner 2 was a physiotherapist with 5 years of clinical
experience and 4 years of educational experience in a university
institution.
Test 2 All women were evaluated twice. After the testing
protocol was completed in the first session (Test 1),
all subjects repeated the protocol 2–6 weeks later (Test 2).
In Test 2, vaginal pressure measurements were performed
using only the MizCure perineometer. The order of the
two test positions (supine, standing) and the two examiners
were each assigned randomly.
Statistical analysis
Within- and between-session intra-rater reliabilities in
vaginal pressure values (maximal voluntary contraction)
were analyzed using intraclass correlation coefficients
(ICC) (1, 1), and inter-rater reliability was analyzed using
ICC (2, 1). Validity was assessed by Pearson’s productmoment
correlation coefficient and Spearman’s rank
correlation analysis of the vaginal pressure values of the
Peritron and MizCure. Pearson’s product-moment correlation
coefficient was used when the data were normative,
and Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient was
used when the data were non-normative. Statistical
analyses were performed using the free statistical analysis
software R, version 2.12.0 (https ://perso nal.hs.hiros
aki-u.ac.jp/pteik i/resea rch/stat/S/), with the level of significance
set at 5%.
Results
The median age of the 20 healthy female participants
was 26.5 years (range 23–45 years), and their median
body mass index was 19.4 (range 17.5–23.4) kg/m2. None
of the subjects included in the analysis had done PFM
training before participating in the research project or
between the two evaluation points. Table 1 summarizes
within and between-session vaginal pressure values
obtained by examiners 1 and 2 (MizCure and Peritron
perineometers). All raw data are referred to as Additional
file 1.
Within‑session intra‑rater reliability
Table 1 shows the within-session intra-rater reliability
using three repetitions of each maximum voluntary contraction
by the MizCure and Peritron perineometers for
both Tests 1 and 2. For both examiners 1 and 2, all vaginal
pressures in Tests 1 and 2 had ICC (1, 1) values of
0.90–0.96.
Between‑session intra‑rater reliability
Between-session intra-rater reliability values for the Miz-
Cure perineometer for examiners 1 and 2 are shown in
Table 2. The between-session intra-rater reliability of
examiner 1 was ICC (1, 1) = 0.72 for the supine position
and 0.79 for the standing position. The between-session
intra-rater reliability of examiner 2 was ICC (1, 1) = 0.63
for the supine position and 0.80 for the standing position.
Within‑ and between‑session inter‑rater reliabilities
Table 3 shows the inter-rater reliability analysis for vaginal
pressure values for Tests 1 and 2. The inter-rater reliability
for Test 1 was ICC (2, 1) = 0.96 for both the supine
and standing positions for the Peritron. The ICC (2, 1) for
MizCure was 0.91 for the supine position and 0.87 for the
standing position. The inter-rater reliability of the Miz-
Cure in Test 2 was ICC (2, 1) = 0.69 for the supine position
and 0.95 for the standing position.
Validity
Significant correlations between the Peritron and Miz-
Cure perineometers in the measurements of vaginal
pressure were found in the supine position (Pearson’s
correlation coefficient of 0.68, P < 0.001) and in the standing
position (Spearman’s correlation coefficient of 0.82,
P < 0.001). More details about these results are presented
in Table 4.
Discussion
PFM training has been shown to improve stress urinary
incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse [18, 19] and is
recommended by the International Continence Society
as Grade A [20]. However, about 30% of women report
failure to contract the PFM correctly [21]. Incorrect PFM
contraction is not expected to have a training effect.
Therefore, it is recommended that proper PFM training
should always include an objective assessment of correct
contraction.
In the present study, the reliability and validity of
PFM strength assessment using the MizCure perineometer
were examined in healthy women. Using transvaginal
devices, it is known that the measurement of PFM
strength depends on the size and placement of the probe,
the subject’s cooperation, and the examiner’s experience
and skills [22, 23]. If a small perineometer probe is used,
the placement of the intravaginal probe causes reliability
problems, because the probe may be located not completely
adjacent to the pressure zone [24]. Thus, in the
current study, whether the MizCure can properly measure
PFM strength was verified using the widely reported
Peritron.
In the previous study on the intra-rater reliability
of the Peritron, the ICC (1, 1) was over 0.9 for the
supine and standing position measurements [3]. Therefore,
the results of the present study suggest that the
within-session intra-rater reliability of the MizCure is
as good as that of the Peritron. Rahmani et al. and Ferreira
et al. reported the inter-rater reliability of vaginal
pressure measurements using the Peritron. Rahmani
et al. reported that the between-session ICC (1, 1) was
0.88 [10]. Ferreira et al. reported that the mean vaginal
squeeze pressure had good inter-rater reliability, and the
difference between the examiners was not significant
[11]. In the current study, the between-session intra-rater
reliability of the MizCure was slightly lower than that
reported by Rahmani et al. [10]. This is primarily because
of the size and placement of the probes. In the current
study, the insertion and placement of the probe were
performed by the subject. The MizCure has a smaller
probe than the Peritron, and it is difficult to standardize
the position of the probe between subjects. The previous
study showed that probe placement can affect measurement
results [22]. The fact that intravaginal squeeze
pressure changes along the vagina [25] means that the
profile of vaginal pressure is not fully understood. This
suggests that probe placement may have affected reliability.
The MizCure probe used in the current study
was 79 mm in length. The vaginal high-pressure zone
at rest and during PFM contraction is 2–4 cm from the
vaginal introitus [26]. The vaginal high-pressure zone
was shown to be related to the PFM contraction [25].
Therefore, the MizCure probe is considered to cover the
high-pressure zone of the vagina. The other factor that
may have affected the results for the reliability of vaginal
pressure measurements may be the skill of the examiner.
With respect to this factor, the two examiners were
skilled physical therapists with urologic education. The
examiner checked the correct PFM contraction with 2D
ultrasound prior to measurement, and always checked to
prevent compensatory movement due to PFM contraction
(e.g., pelvic tilt or excessive abdominal muscle contractions).
Therefore, the effect of the two examiners on
the measured value was thought to be small.
ICC reliability criteria are defined as substantial for
0.61–0.80 and almost perfect for 0.81–1.0 [27]. From this
perspective, the present results indicate that the intrarater
reliability of the MizCure within and between days
was substantial to almost perfect. The inter-rater reliability
was similar. These results suggest that the use of
the MizCure perineometer to evaluate PFM strength can
minimize the effects of the examiner and provide good
intra-rater reliability.
The validity of the MizCure was evaluated using
Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient and
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. The correlation
between MizCure and Peritron measurements has not
been previously reported. The MizCure measurements
showed a significant correlation with the Peritron measurements:
r = 0.68 for the supine measurements and
rs
= 0.82 for the standing measurements. For the correlation
coefficient, 0.4–0.69 is considered moderate and
0.7–0.89 high [28]. Therefore, the correlation coefficients
for the MizCure were moderate to high. The results suggest
that the MizCure is a suitable tool for measuring
PFM strength. There have been reports in the past examining
the validity of the Peritron and other perineometers
[29]. Barbosa et al. reported the following differences
among the other devices: acquisition of higher or lower
measurement values depends not only on the diameter of
the probes used, but also on other variables, such as individual
vaginal diameter, probes of different materials, and
differences in the sensitivity of each piece of equipment
to vaginal pressure [29]. Therefore, a detailed examination
of the characteristics of the MizCure perineometer
and the individual’s vagina will be necessary in the future.
A recent paper in the statistical analysis of correlation
coefficients for reliability suggests different cut-off
values for ICC. Based on the 95% confidence interval of
the ICC estimate, values less than 0.5, values between 0.5
and 0.75, values between 0.75 and 0.9, and values greater
than 0.90 indicate poor, moderate, good, and excellent
reliability, respectively [30]. Applying the results of this
study, the 95% confidence intervals for inter-rater reliability
for supine position measurement were 0.43–0.88
for examiner 1 and 0.28–0.83 for examiner 2, as shown
in Table 2. In addition, as shown in Table 3, the 95% confidence
interval for inter-rater reliability in the supine
measurement was 0.38–0.86. This shows that the lower
limit of the 95% confidence interval is low, and the variability
is high. This is the lower bound of the 95% confidence
interval is low. Due to the small number of subjects
in this study, this indicates a large variation in the confidence
interval. In the future, it is necessary to examine
the results with a larger population.
The advantage of the MizCure perineometer is that it
is easy to purchase, portable, and simple to use. These
results suggest that the MizCure is a tool that can quantitatively
reflect PFM function, since the reliability and
validity of the measured vaginal pressure values are good.
This may help select the measurement position for evaluation
and treatment purposes and help the treatment
plan. From the current study, the MizCure might be a
device that can be used by physical therapists, nurses,
and physicians involved in pelvic floor rehabilitation to
assess PFM function.
However, as a limitation of this study, the results of the
present study are limited to healthy nulliparous women
with normal BMI without PFM dysfunction, such as
stress urinary incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse. And
all subjects were not asked about their sexual activity
prior to vaginal pressure measurement. This may affect
the results of vaginal pressure measurements. An additional
limitation is the small number of subjects. A small
sample size reduces the power of the study and increase
the margin of error. Future study must be needed to
ensure our study.
Conclusion
The present findings suggest that MizCure perineometer
is a validated tool to measure PFM strength in both
supine and standing positions in healthy nulliparous
women.