Introduction
Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA) are used to
facilitate tracheal intubation and improve surgical conditions [1–3]. Residual neuromuscular blockade is commonly seen postoperatively and patients with residual
paralysis have an increased risk of postoperative respiratory complications such as hypoxemia and upper
airway obstruction [4–6]. Te risk of residual paralysis
and respiratory complications is markedly increased
among elderly patients [7, 8]. Te presence of small
degrees of muscle weakness after tracheal extubation
may signifcantly afect outcome in this patient population, as the elderly have limited physiologic reserve [9].
In particular, pharyngeal function and muscle strength
may be impaired in patients older than 65  years, and
the residual efects of NMBA’s may further worsen this
impairment [8, 10]. Approximatively 50% of elderly
patients will require anesthesia for surgical interventions
and increasing age may be associated with greater morbidity and mortality after anesthesia [11, 12]. According
to Eurostat’s 2019 edition of Ageing Europe report, the
oldest old (i.e. patients≥80  years) are within the group
of elderly the fastest growing segment of the population
at large. Unfortunately, pharmacodynamic data of NMBA
in patients≥80 years old are sparse.
Te aim of this prospective, controlled observational study was to compare the time course of neuromuscular blockade after rocuronium 0.6  mg/kg in
patients≥80 years old with patients between 20-50 years.
We hypothesized that patients≥80 years old have slower
onset and increased duration and recovery of neuromuscular blockade.
Methods
Te research protocol was approved by the institutional
review committee (Comité de Protection des Personnes
EST III, 10 September 2018, referral number 200, chairperson Pr Y. Martinet) and registered at Clinicaltrials.gov
(NCT03551652 on 29/05/2018) before enrollment of the
frst patient. All patients gave written informed consent,
and all clinical data were obtained in our department.
35 patients scheduled for a surgical procedure under
general anesthesia were included between 15 May 2020
and 16 March 2021. Exclusion criteria were hypersensitivity to rocuronium or any other of the drugs used during this study, contraindication to rocuronium, planned
rapid sequence induction (RSI), refusal to participate,
and the absence of written informed consent. Tis study
is reported according to the STROBE statement.
Patients were included in one of two groups based on
age: an elderly cohort in group 80+ (≥80 years old) and a
younger cohort in group 20–50 (age 20–50 years).
Anesthesia technique
Monitoring established on arrival in the operating room
included electrocardiography, non-invasive arterial pressure, pulse oximetry, and capnography. After preoxygenation, total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) was induced in
all patients with 1.5–2.5 mg/kg propofol and 10 μg sufentanil and maintained with 4–10  mg/kg/h propofol and
bolus doses of sufentanil (5–10  μg). Nitrous oxide and
halogenated agents were avoided. Neuromuscular block
was established with a single dose of rocuronium 0.6 mg/
kg without any further injection. Te bolus of rocuronium was given over 5  s. By using a warming blanket,
the central temperature was maintained over 35  °C and
the peripheral body temperature measured at the thenar eminence of the palm was maintained at least at 32°
C. End tidal pressure of carbon dioxide was maintained
between 32–36 mm Hg.
Neuromuscular monitoring
Neuromuscular blockade was quantifed with TOFscan
(IMED, Marseille, France) according to Good Clinical
Research Practice (GCRP) in pharmacodynamic studies
of neuromuscular blocking agents [13]. Tis device has
an adapter with a built-in three-dimensional acceleration
transducer applying a constant preload. Te TOFScan
hand adapter was fxed on the dominant hand and surface electrodes were placed on the cleaned skin over the
corresponding ulnar nerve as described previously [14].
Te negative electrode was placed near the wrist and
the positive electrode 3  cm proximally and the arm
and fngers were secured with velcro straps to prevent
movement artifacts during stimulation. Neuromuscular
monitoring was started after induction of anesthesia but
before administration of rocuronium. Te current intensity was fxed at 50 mA. To obtain raw TOF ratio’s the T4/
T2 algorithm of the device was inactivated. After some
initial TOF stimulation, a 5 s, 50 Hz tetanic stimulation
was applied followed by TOF stimulations for 10–15 min
until a stable response was achieved—defned as less than
5% variation in the TOF-ratio for at least 2 min. Tereafter the device was set to deliver TOF stimulations at a
15 s interval and the following time intervals were measured as defned: onset time, defned as the time from
start of injection of rocuronium to no response to TOF
stimulation (TOF count=0); clinical duration defned
as the time from start of injection of rocuronium to the
return of the 4th response of the TOF (TOF count=4)
and recovery to the TOF-ratio of 0.9 and 1.0, defned as
the time from start of injection of rocuronium to a TOF
ratio above 0.9 and 1.0, respectively. For each time interval, the frst of three consecutive corresponding values
were considered. In addition, the deepest level of neuromuscular block during onset was also quantifed.
Endpoints
Recovery to a TOF ratio≥0.9 was the primary endpoint
of this study. Secondary outcomes were onset time, maximum depth of neuromuscular block, clinical duration
and recovery to a TOF ratio≥1.0.
Statistical analysis
A sample size estimation was done to detect a diference of at least 30% in the recovery to a TOF ratio≥90%.
Under intravenous anesthesia mean time to a TOF ratio
recovery≥0.9 for adult patients is 60 min with a standard
deviation of 11 min [15]. With an alpha risk of 5% and a
power of 90%, 14 patients needed to be included in each
group. In order to compensate for possible dropouts, 35
patients were included in total.
When continuous variables were compared between
2 groups, the assumptions in the t-test, i.e. homogeneity of variances and normality of residuals were tested
by the Bartlett’s test of homogeneity of variances and
the Shapiro-Wilks test for the normality of the residuals. If the underlying assumptions were met, a t-test was
performed, and data are presented as mean±standard
deviation; if not, a nonparametric Wilcoxon rank test was
used and data are presented as median and interquartile
range. Discrete variables were compared using a Pearson
Chi-square test. When paired diferences were tested for
continuous variables, a t-test for paired data was used
on variables for which a normal distribution is observed
for the diference between the two variables and data are
presented as mean±standard deviation. Otherwise, a
Wilcoxon test for paired data was used and median and
inter-quartile range are presented.
Results
Tirty fve patients were enrolled between May 2020 and
March 2021. Data from 3 patients had to be excluded
from analysis because of study protocol violation: in 2
patients anesthesia was maintained with sevofurane
instead of propofol and 1 patient received an initial bolus
of rocuronium 0.9  mg/kg. Data from 32 patients were
complete and could be analyzed.
Of the 32 patients included 16 were≥80  years and
16 were between 20–50 years old. Patients in the group
80+ were 85 years old [82–88] and patients in the group
20–50 were 39 years old [28–42]. Te female/male ratio
was 4/12 in the group 80+ and 6/10 in the group 20–50.
Te weight of patients in group 80+ was 70.5±14.0  kg
and the BMI was 25.3±3.9. Te corresponding values in
the group 20–50 were 69.6±10 kg and 24.2±3.9, respectively. Elderly patients had more comorbidities and a
higher ASA score than the younger patients (Table 1).
In the group 80+ onset time was 190±46  s and the
corresponding value in the group 20–50 was 123±40 s;
P<0.001. Te deepest level of neuromuscular block
detected was PTC 3.5 and PTC 9, respectively; P=0.07.
Te clinical duration was 52 [48–69.5] min in the group
80+. Te corresponding values in the group 20–50 was 36
[34–41] min, respectively; P<0.001.
Recovery to a TOF-ratio ≥ 0.9 occurred after 77.5
[71–88.5] min and a TOF-ratio ≥ 1.0 was reached after
91.2 [82.2–98] min in the group 80+. Te corresponding values in the group 20–50 were 53.5 [49.5–55.5]
min and 59.5 [56.5–70.25] min, respectively; P < 0.001.
Discussion
Te most important fndings of the present study were:
frstly, both clinical duration and duration until 90%
and 100% recovery are signifcantly prolonged in the
group 80+. Secondly, compared to younger adults the
onset of neuromuscular block is signifcantly slower in
the group 80+. Moreover, a tendency toward deeper
maximum levels of neuromuscular block could be
observed in group 80+ (Table  2). Tus, a shift from
rocuronium as a rapid onset, intermediate acting compound to a slower onset and long-acting compound can
be observed in patients ≥ 80 years old.
Te signifcance of an acceleromyographic TOF ratio
of 0.9 as a criterion for sufcient neuromuscular recovery has been questioned by Capron et  al., proposing
recovery of the TOF ratio to 1.0 as benchmark when
acceleromyography is used [16]. Recent observations by
Blobner et al. confrmed this limitation of an acceleromyographic TOF ratio of 0.9 for clinical decision-making [17]. Hence, in the present study both parameters
were assessed: a TOF ratio recovery to 0.9 facilitating comparison with data in the literature, and a TOF
recovery to 1.0 indicating acceptable neuromuscular
recovery when using acceleromyography. In the present
study time course neuromuscular block was assessed
with the TOFscan monitor. Tis AMG device has
recently been approved for research purpose [14]. Tis
monitor does not need to be calibrated, as it operates
with an alternative option to ensure a constant maximum stimulus, it measures the impedance of the skin
directly (resistance) and as long as the resistance of the
skin is within the measurement window, the stimulation of the nerve is assured with the user-selected electrical current [18]. Moreover, according to the available 
evidence normalization of TOF values is not mandatory
with this device [14]. Tus, recovery parameters indicated in this study are raw TOF-ratios.
Murphy et  al. reported a twice as high incidence of
postoperative residual neuromuscular block in geriatric patients compared to younger patients, despite
similar neuromuscular management [8]. Tis increased
incidence of residual paralysis in the elderly was associated with a higher incidence of hypoxic events, airway
obstruction, and postoperative pulmonary complications.
Moreover, even PACU and hospital length of stay was
increased in the elderly. Hårdemark Cedborg et al. could
report a profound negative impact of residual paralysis
on airway integrity in elderly individuals, increasing the
incidence of pharyngeal dysfunction from 37 to 71%,
with impaired ability to protect the airway [10]. Hence,
elderly patients are prone to adverse pharyngeal efects
of residual neuromuscular blockade and these efects
may further increase the risk of postoperative pulmonary
complications in this population segment. Te present
study gives new insights in neuromuscular block characteristics in the oldest old. Clinical duration and time
needed to recover to a TOF-ratio of 90% and 100% of
baseline are increased about approximatively 60% compared to the group 20–50. Tus, rocuronium shifts from
an intermediate-acting compound to a long-acting compound in patients≥80 years. Terefore, strategies to prevent residual paralysis in this patient population needs to
be revised and the poor tolerance of even small degrees
of residual paralysis in the elderly should be considered
in the context.
Neuromuscular monitoring and pharmacological reversal are key elements in any strategy to prevent postoperative residual paralysis [4]. Tilen et  al.
recently tested a protocol for the prevention of rocuronium-induced residual neuromuscular block based on
qualitative monitoring and an optimized protocol for
neostigmine-induced reversal [19]. Timing and dosing of
neostigmine were founded on best available evidence in
their protocol [20–22]. Basically, a TOF count of 4 at the
adductor pollicis was required before starting reversal
with neostigmine, 40 μg/kg neostigmine were given at a
TOF count of 4 with fade, and a delay of at least 10 min
between neostigmine administration and extubation was
respected [20–22]. Compared to the pre-protocol practice, the incidence of residual paralysis could be reduced
from initially 58% to 35% of patients and severe residual
paralysis corresponding to a TOF-ratio<0.7 could be
avoided with this protocol. However, small but clinically
relevant degrees of residual paralysis corresponding to
a TOF-ratio of 0.7—0.9 remained unchanged with this
best practice protocol, suggesting that the association of
qualitative monitoring and neostigmine-based reversal
has limitations [19]. Findings from Martinez-Ubieto et al.
further confrmed this limitation of neostigmine [23].
A lesser relative potency of neostigmine in the elderly
further confrmed this assumption and emphasizes the
need for age-appropriate reversal strategies for elderly
patients [24]. Of interest in this context, McDonagh
et  al. observed a rapid and complete reversal of rocuronium neuromuscular block in the elderly when sugammadex was given at a TOF count of 2. Sugammadex
doses were similar to nonelderly adults although reversal was slightly slower in the elderly cohort: 2.2  min in
patients<65  years, 2.6  min in patients 65–74  years old
and 3.6 min in patients≥75 years [25].
Succinylcholine may be contraindicated in many
elderly patients because of comorbidities such as renal
insufciency with increased serum potassium levels or
hemiplegia to name only a few. Tat’s why rocuronium
may be an interesting alternative for rapid sequence
induction (RSI) in the elderly. In the present study, a tendency to deeper maximum level of neuromuscular block
could be observed in the elderly (Table 2). However, the
study was not primarily designed to detect diferences in
the depth of neuromuscular block. Moreover, the fndings of the present study confrmed previous results
reporting a slower onset of rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg in the
elderly [25]. In the light of these fndings one may question whether rocuronium is still a useful compound for
RSI in the elderly. In a cohort of elderly patients between
65–92 years Takagi et al. observed an onset time of 187 s
after rocuronium 0.6  mg/kg and increasing the dose of
rocuronium to 1 mg/kg decreased the onset time to 104 s
[26]. Unfortunately, their study design did not allow to
draw conclusions on intubating conditions for RSI after
rocuronium 1.0 mg/kg. Te slower onset on rocuronium
neuromuscular block observed in the study by Takagi
et  al. may be explained by fndings from Shiraishi et  al.
reporting an inverse relationship between cardiac output
and rocuronium onset time in the elderly [27]. However,
whether doses of rocuronium higher than 1  mg/kg will
further decrease its onset time in the elderly is currently
unknown, as is the question what level of neuromuscular
block is really required in elderly patients to achieve good
to excellent intubating conditions after 45–60 s [28].
Limits and further research
Te new insights in neuromuscular block characteristics in patients ≥ 80 given in this study should incite
future research addressing the question of safe management of RSI with rocuronium in the elderly. Especially
the optimal rocuronium dose and the required level of
neuromuscular block to achieve adequate intubating
conditions within 45 to 60  s need to be determined.
Moreover, as the present study was designed to assess
the impact of increasing age on the pharmacodynamic
properties of rocuronium, it does not allow detailed
insights in the underlaying mechanisms. Tis has to be
addressed in future studies. To this end patients ≥ 80
with hepatic and/or renal insufciency should be
compared with patients in the same age group but
without these organ dysfunctions. In addition, diferent dosing strategies based on real body weight, ideal
body weight, or lean body weight should be evaluated
in patients ≥ 80  years, also. Finally, the fndings of the
present study are limited to an intravenous anesthesia
background. Both parameters, duration and recovery of
rocuronium may be signifcantly delayed during volatile anesthesia compared to TIVA, as volatile anesthesia
may potentiate the efect of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents.
In conclusion, the present study observed a shift from
rocuronium as a rapid onset and intermediate acting
compound in the group of younger adults to a slower
onset and long-acting compound patients≥80 years old.
Age-appropriate strategies for the management of neuromuscular blockade are required for the oldest old.