Background
The incidence of accidental hypothermia (AH), which is
defined by a body core temperature of < 35 °C [1], is low,
however, severe hypothermia is associated with a high
mortality rate [2, 3]. In severe hypothermia, intrinsic
heat production by means of active movement and shivering, disappeared, leading to further progression in the
decrease in body temperature. In Japan, which has a
large elderly population, the mortality rate of all patients
with AH is as high as 24.4–35% [4, 5], so effective prevention and intervention strategies are required.
Frailty is characterized by a decline in functioning
across multiple physiological systems, accompanied by
an increased vulnerability to stressors [6]. More recently,
data have suggested that the presence of frailty places a
person at increased risk of adverse outcomes, including
hospitalization, and mortality [7]. Recently, frailty has
also been noted in critically ill patients [8, 9]. However,
to our knowledge, limited data exist regarding the relationship between AH and frailty. Clarification of the relationship between AH and frailty may provide useful
insight for improving the prognosis of patients with
hypothermia.
We hypothesized that frailty would be associated with
a poor prognosis and mortality in patients with AH. For
the purpose of verifying this hypothesis, we analyzed the
Japan’s nationwide registry data on hypothermia.
Material and methods
Study design and setting
We performed a prospective, observational, multi-center
registries of hypothermia: the Hypothermia STUDY
2018&2019. This study was conducted from December
2018 to February 2019 and December 2019 to February
2020, among a consortium of 120 academic and community medical centers from different geographic regions across Japan. The study has been approved by the
Ethics Review Board of Teikyo University Hospital in
Japan (Approval No: 17–090). The requirement for informed consent was waived due to the observational nature of the study by the Ethics Review Board of Teikyo
University Hospital in Japan. In addition, the institutional review board of each hospital listed in the acknowledgements approved the study.
Patient selection and data collection
The present study included consecutive patients whose
body temperature, as measured by emergency medical
services (EMS) or at the emergency department (ED),
was < 35 °C. Patients of < 18 years of age were excluded.
The following data were collected: age, sex, any preexisting conditions, activities of daily living (ADL), lifestyle, location of hypothermia incidence, mechanism
underlying hypothermia (acute medical illness [stroke,
ischemic cardiac disease, infectious disease, malnutrition,
arrhythmia, diabetes mellitus, renal disease,
hypoglycemia, cardiac failure, endocrine disease and
gastrointestinal disease], trauma [submersion, distress],
alcohol intoxication, other [including drugs]), Charlson
comorbidity index (CCI) [10], Glasgow coma scale
(GCS) [11], Sequential Organ Failure Assessment
(SOFA) score [12], laboratory data, temperature, blood
pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, cardiac arrest during pre-hospital, intubation, hospital length of stay, mortality, and Cerebral Performance Category (CPC) [13]
score at 30 days after admission, and complications. The
temperature was recorded as the core temperature from
the rectum, urinary bladder, or esophagus if available;
otherwise, the peripheral temperature from the axilla or
ear was noted. The severity of hypothermia was classified according to the temperature as mild (35–32 °C),
moderate (32–28 °C), or severe (< 28 °C) with reference
to previous studies [1] [3].
The laboratory data included the pH value, potassium
level, lactate level, platelet count, CPK level, BUN level,
and creatinine level measured at the ED. The pH value
in principle was evaluated by an arterial blood gas analysis, and the pH value measured using the venous blood
gas was adjusted as described in a previous study [14].
In the present study, the patients who did not stay in a
hospital, or in whom the length of hospital stay or body
temperature was unknown or > 35 °C were excluded
from the present analysis.
Complications during hospitalization were recorded
and classified as arrhythmia, pneumonia, pancreatitis,
electrolyte abnormality, or other. Pneumonia was defined as an obvious shadow on chest radiography or
computed tomography (CT). Pancreatitis was defined as
cases meeting at least two of the following conditions: 1)
abdominal pain, 2) elevation of pancreatic enzyme levels
in the blood, and 3) edema of the pancreas or peripancreatic effusion on ultrasound/CT.
The rewarming duration to target temperature was defined as the time interval between arrival at the ED and
the moment at which the target temperature was
reached. The rewarming rate (°C per hour) was defined
as follows: (target temperature-temperature at ED) / the
rewarming duration to target temperature.
Rewarming methods were divided into active external
rewarming (warmed blanket, forced warm air, heating
pad, and warmed bath) and active internal rewarming
(warmed fluid infusion, lavage, hemodialysis, intravascular catheter, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
[ECMO]).
Definition of frailty
The clinical frailty scale (CFS) score was used to determine the presence and degree of frailty, as described
previously [15]. The CFS score was determined using
the activities of daily living and pre-existing conditions,
as shown in our previous study [16]: CFS 1, very fit, defined as ADL 1 (independent) and CCI 0; CFS 2, well,
defined as ADL 1 and CCI ≥1, or ADL 2 (sometimes out
of the door) and CCI 0; CFS 3, well with treated comorbid disease, defined as ADL 2 and CCI 1–2; CFS 4, apparently vulnerable, defined as ADL 2 and CCI ≥3, or
ADL 3 (indoors); CFS 5, mildly frail, defined as ADL 4
(almost needing assistance) and CCI ≤2; CFS 6, moderately frail, defined as ADL 4 and CCI ≥3; and CFS 7, severely frail, defined ADL 5 (needing total assistance).
Patients were defined as frail if they had a CFS score of
≥5 before hospital admission.
Outcome measures
Patient demographics and outcomes were compared between frail and non-frail patients. The primary outcome
was the comparison of mortality between the frail and
non-frail patient groups. The secondary outcomes were
the comparisons of the length of intensive care unit
(ICU) stay, hospital stay, CPC at 30 days after admission,
and complications between the frail and non-frail patient
groups. A favorable outcome was defined as a CPC of 1
or 2, whereas an unfavorable outcome was defined as a
CPC 3–5.
Data analyses
Data are expressed as the number (%), median (interquartile range) or the mean ± standard deviation, as appropriate. Intergroup comparisons were made using the
Fisher’s exact test for categorical data and MannWhitney U test or Student’s t-test for continuous data.
Ninety-day survival was calculated using a Kaplan-Meier
curve and the difference in survival between frail and
non-frail patients was determined using a log-rank test.
Hazard ratios (HRs) and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the association between frailty
and 90-day survival were derived using Cox proportional
hazard survival models. The following covariates were
included in the multivariable model based on the relevant literature [2, 3], or the consideration of clinically
significant variables: age, sex, potassium level, lactate
level, pH value, CPK level, heart rate, platelet count, location of hypothermia incidence, and rate of tracheal intubation. Missing data were managed with multiple
imputation by chained equations [17, 18]. The variables
included in the imputation model were those from the
multivariable model. Twenty-five datasets were imputed
with 10 iterations each. A Cox proportional hazards analysis was applied to the 25 imputed datasets, and final
estimates were obtained by averaging the 25 estimates
according to Rubin’s rules. Furthermore, a complete data
set was used for the sensitivity analysis. We also
performed a subgroup analysis with the exclusion of
cases in which a warmed blanket or ECMO were applied. All tests were two-sided, and P values of < 0.05
were considered statistically significant. All statistical
analyses were performed with EZR (Saitama Medical
Center, Jichi Medical University, Saitama, Japan), a
graphical user interface for the R software program.
Multiple imputation was performed using the mice
package in R (version, 4.0.3 R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria).
Results
Of the 1363 patients with hypothermia who were included in the Hypothermia STUDY 2018&2019, 443
were excluded from the present study because of unknown temperature or temperature > 35 °C (N = 147),
unknown outcome (N = 127), unknown length of hospital stay (N = 150), or unknown ADL (N = 19). The
remaining 920 patients were eligible for inclusion in the
present analysis. A patient flow diagram is shown in
Fig. 1. According to the CFS score, the 920 patients were
divided into the frail patient group (N = 221) and the
non-frail patient group (N = 699).
Baseline characteristics of the study population
Supplemental Fig. 1 shows the age distribution of the patients included in the present study. The present population included only a few relatively young patients, with
81% of the total patients being ≥65 years old, and the
median patient age being 79 years old. Table 1 shows the
baseline characteristics of the study population and a
comparison of the clinical characteristics of frail and
non-frail patients. The non-frail patient group had a larger percentage of male in comparison to the frail patient
group. The frail patient group was older, had higher CCI
values, and included a higher percentage of AH cases
that occurred indoors in comparison to the non-frail patient group. Regarding the mechanism of hypothermia,
the rate of acute medical illness in the frail patient group
was higher than that in the non-frail patient group.
Clinical and laboratory data
Among the 920 patients, the core body temperature was
measured in 585 (63.6%). The clinical and laboratory
data are presented in Table 2. There were no significant
differences in the severity grade of temperature, blood
pressure, respiratory rate, potassium level, creatinine
level, or cardiac arrest during the pre-hospital period between frail and non-frail patients. Frail patients had a
lower GCS, heart rate, lactate level, platelet count, CPK
level, and rate of tracheal intubation in comparison to
non-frail patients. The pH values of frail patients were
significantly higher in comparison to non-frail patients.
Primary outcome
As shown in Table 3, the overall 30-day mortality rate
was 23.5% (N = 216). After 30 days of hospitalization,
32.6% of frail patients and 20.6% of non-frail patients
had died (p < 0.001). A survival time analysis revealed
that there was significant difference between frail and
non-frail patients (log-rank test p < 0.001) (Fig. 2). The
results of the Cox proportional hazards analysis are summarized in Table 4. In the unadjusted analysis, frail patients had a significantly higher risk of 90-day mortality
(Hazard ratio [HR], 1.64; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.25–2.17; p < 0.001). Based on the Cox proportional
hazards analysis using multiple imputation, after adjustment for age, potassium level, lactate level, pH value,
sex, CPK level, heart rate, platelet count, location of
hypothermia incidence, and rate of tracheal intubation,
frail patients still had a significantly higher risk of 90-day
mortality (Hazard ratio [HR], 1.69; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.25–2.29; p < 0.001). A sensitivity analysis performed using the complete dataset of cases excluding
cases with missing values (N = 679) confirmed the robustness of the results.
Secondary outcomes
Among the 920 total patients, the median length of ICU
stay was 3 days, and the median length of hospital stay
was 13 days. There was no significant difference in the
length of stay at the ICU or hospital between frail and
non-frail patients (Table 3). However, in the neurological
assessment, frail patients showed a higher rate of patients with a worsened neurological score (CPC 3–5) at
30 days after admission in comparison to non-frail patients, while non-frail patients showed a significantly
higher rate of patients with a favorable neurological outcome (CPC 1–2) in comparison to frail patients. There
was no significant difference in the incidence of complications between the frail and non-frail patient groups.
Rewarming method and rewarming rate
The rewarming method and rewarming rate are presented in Table 5. The rates of warmed blanket (P <
0.001) and ECMO (P = 0.039) use in the frail patient
group were lower in comparison to the non-frail patient
group. However, the other rewarming methods did not
differ between the two groups to a statistically significant
extent. The rewarming rate in frail patients was significantly slower than that in non-frail patients (p < 0.001).
Subgroup analyses
In the subgroup analysis with the exclusion of cases in
which a warmed blanket or ECMO were applied, the
rewarming rate in frail patients was still lower than that
in non-frail patients (Supplemental Table 1).
Discussion
The present nationwide study showed that frail patients
with AH had a significantly higher risk of mortality in
comparison to non-frail patients with AH, even after adjustment for important confounders. Additionally, the
frail patient group included a higher rate of patients with
a worsened neurological outcome in comparison to the
non-frail patient group. The rewarming rate in frail patients was delayed in comparison to non-frail patients.
Recently, frailty has been shown to be associated with
mortality and adverse outcomes in patients with various
conditions [7], including patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [19], patients with inflammatory
bowel disease [20], patients with AIDS [21], patients
awaiting liver transplantation [22], hip fracture patients
[23] and patients undergoing elective vascular surgery
[24], independent of chronological age. However,
whether or not frailty is associated with mortality in patients with AH has not previously been investigated. The
present nationwide study showed, for the first time, that
frailty is an important prognostic factor in patients with
AH.
Previous studies showed that prognostic factors in AH
include the potassium level, pH value, lactate level, and
age [2, 3, 25–27]. Although these factors may be useful
for predicting the prognosis and selecting an appropriate
rewarming intervention, these factors cannot be controlled and do not help improve the prognosis of patients with AH. However, in contrast to the other
factors, frailty is a factor that can be avoided with preventive intervention [28] [29]. The reduction of frailty
might consequently lead to a decrease in the number of
deaths caused by AH.
The rewarming rate in frail patients was slower
than that in non-frail patients. Although the rates at
which ECMO or a warmed blanket were used in the
frail patient group were lower in comparison to the
non-frail patient group, the results were also similar
in the subgroup analysis that excluded cases in which
ECMO or a warmed blanket were used. The reasons
for the difference in the rewarming rate may be as
follows. It is hypothesized that intrinsic heat production by the patient, such as shivering thermogenesis,
does not occur sufficiently in frail patients with AH,
resulting in delayed rewarming. In the present study,
the finding that the CPK level was lower in the frail
patient group may support this mechanism. A previous study showed that a decreased rewarming rate in
patients with AH is associated with a high risk of
underlying infection [30] and mortality [31]. In recent
years, many studies have shown that the prognosis of
septic patients with hypothermia is poor [32–34]. For
this reason, it has been pointed out that homeostatic
dysfunction, such as immune dysfunction, is related
to the poor prognosis of these patients [35, 36]. Although there was no significant difference in the occurrence of infectious complications between the frail
and non-frail patient groups in the present study, a
similar mechanism may be responsible for the relationship between frailty and a poor prognosis in patients with AH. On the other hand, the results of this
study could not clarify whether or not the rapid
rewarming using invasive internal rewarming methods
will reduce mortality and improve the prognosis of
frail patients with AH. Thus, further studies are
needed to address this problem.
In our previous study, we found that frail patients with
AH showed prolonged hospitalization [16]. However, in
this study, there was no significant difference in the
length of hospital stay between the frail and non-frail patient groups. The reasons are as follows: the previous
study excluded patients who died within 30 days,
whereas the present study included these patients. The
rate of early mortality within 30 days was higher in the
frail group than in the non-frail group. As a result, the
length of hospital stay in the frail group was shorter than
that in the non-frail group, although the difference was
not statistically significant.
A previous study showed that, among ICU patients
requiring mechanical ventilation, the presence of
frailty increased the likelihood of short-term mortality, and that these findings might play a role in informed shared decision-making with patients and
families prior to the provision of mechanical ventilation [37]. In this study, the rate of tracheal intubation
was lower among frail patients than among non-frail
patients. This may be because these patients and their
families did not wish to receive invasive treatment
with intubation and ventilation.
Regarding complications, previous studies have reported
that the incidence of complications is higher in frail patients [7]. However, in this study, the incidence of complications in the frail and non-frail patient groups did not
differ to a statistically significant extent. The complications defined in this study (arrhythmia, pneumonia, pancreatitis, electrolyte abnormality and coagulopathy)
occurred infrequently, which may have contributed to the
lack of a significant difference.
The present study was associated with some limitations.
First, we used the CFS score, which was calculated based on
ADL and the CCI to determine frailty, while the standard
tools for the diagnosis of frailty are the frailty index [38] or
frailty phenotype [39]. Therefore, it remains to be verified
whether the diagnosis of frailty in this study was accurate. In
this regard, a comparative study regarding the accuracy of
the CFS score is currently in progress [40]. Second, there
were numerous missing data in relation to the rewarming
rate. However, the volume of data including in this nationwide study was sufficient; thus, the results are considered robust. Third, we could not to determine the rewarming rate
according to individual rewarming methods, because several
rewarming methods were used in combination. Finally, this
study was based on the findings of registry data on
hypothermia, and it did not include any data that was related to frail research, such as ADL after a long-term followup. Therefore, further studies will be needed to investigate
the long-term ADL of frail patients with AH.
Conclusions
This study found that, after adjustment for multiple factors, mortality in frail patients with AH was higher than
that in non-frail patients with AH. According to the
neurological outcome after 30 days, the percentage of
patients with a poor prognosis in the frail patient group
was higher than that in the non-frail patient group. It is
important to recognize that frail patients with AH are at
risk for more severe hypothermia.