Background
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of mortality and disability around the world [1]. Despite recent
clinical advances in percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) and medical therapy [2], coronary artery disease
(CAD) remains a major issue worldwide [1]. Assessment
of risk stratifcation for mortality and cardiovascular
events in patients with CAD is therefore crucial when
making medical decisions [3, 4].
Malnutrition is common among hospitalized patients
and has been reported to be associated with worsened
prognosis among patients with chronic diseases such as
cancer [5] and renal failure [6]. Various tools are available
for the evaluation of nutritional status, and the geriatric
nutritional risk index (GNRI) is widely used as a simple
method for screening nutritional status using body mass
index (BMI) and serum albumin [7]. Te GNRI was a tool
created to study and predict nutrition-related complications in elderly patients and was initially proposed for
sub-acute care setting [7]. Recent studies have demonstrated that GNRI is associated with worsened prognosis
in heart failure patients [8], and with mortality in patients
with chronic life-threatening ischemia [9]. GNRI could
thus be important for risk stratifcation even in patients
with cardiovascular disease.
Stable CAD patients with myocardial damage display
poor prognosis compared to those without myocardial
damage [10]. However, the impact of malnutrition on
the prognosis of CAD patients with myocardial damage
remains unclear. Te present study aimed to evaluate the
prognostic value of nutritional status using GNRI in stable CAD patients with myocardial damage.
Methods
Study population
We evaluated a retrospective cohort in a single center,
investigating 241 consecutive patients with stable CAD
and myocardial damage admitted to Kagoshima University Hospital between January 2015 and August 2018 for
PCI. All patients underwent coronary angiography and
successful revascularization for the culprit lesion by PCI
using a standard technique with second-generation drugeluting stents and intravascular ultrasound. All patients
were administered dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin and
thienopyridine: prasugrel or clopidogrel) before the procedure. Patients were followed up at our hospital or by
their physician. In this study, patients with acute coronary syndrome were excluded. Patients who could not be
tracked after discharge were also excluded. Acute coronary syndrome was defned as either acute myocardial
infarction (ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
or non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction) or
unstable angina pectoris.
Measurements and assessments of GNRI
Laboratory values were obtained at the time of admission before PCI. Levels of serum albumin, cholinesterase, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP),
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), lowdensity lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), total cholesterol (T-CHO), triglycerides, creatinine, uric acid, and
fasting plasma glucose were measured, and estimated
glomerular fltration rate (eGFR) was calculated using
the Modifcation of Diet in Renal Disease equation with
coefcients modifed for Japanese patients as follows:
eGFR (ml/min/1.73  m2
)=194×serum creatinine (mg/
dL)−1.094×age (years)−0.287 (×0.739 for female subjects)
[11]. Blood samples were drawn after 12 h of fasting and
serum levels of albumin were measured by modifed bromocresol purple method (KAINOS, Tokyo, Japan).
Tis study assessed nutritional status using
the GNRI, calculated using the following equation: GNRI=14.89×serum albumin level in g/
dL+41.7×(body weight in kilograms/ideal body weight)
[7]. Body weight/ideal body weight was set to 1 when the
bodyweight of the patient exceeded the ideal bodyweight.
Ideal bodyweight was calculated using a BMI of 22  kg/
m2
. BMI was calculated as bodyweight in kilograms
divided by height in meters squared. Japan Society for the
Study of Obesity suggests that ideal BMI is 22 kg/m2
 and
obesity is a BMI greater than or equal to 25 [12]. Terefore, we used 22 kg/m2
 as ideal BMI.
Defnitions
In all patients, echocardiography was performed on
admission before PCI, and left ventricular asynergy due
to myocardial ischemia or infarction was defned as myocardial damage in this study. Conventional transthoracic echocardiographic examinations were performed
using a commercially available ultrasound transducer
and equipment. Echocardiography measurements were
performed according to the guidelines of the American Society of Echocardiography [13]. We estimated left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) using the biplane
Simpson method. Myocardial ischemia was evaluated by fractional fow reserve or myocardial perfusion 
single-photon emission computed tomography. Patients
with GNRI<92 at baseline were defned as the malnourished group based on previously published thresholds
[7]. Hypertension was defned based on the following
criteria: systolic blood pressure≥140  mmHg, diastolic
blood pressure≥90  mmHg, or the use of antihypertensive medication. Diabetes mellitus was defned based on
the following criteria: use of antihyperglycemic medication, fasting plasma glucose concentration>126  mg/
dL, or glycosylated hemoglobin concentration≥6.5% (in
accordance with the National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program) [14]. Dyslipidemia was defned as
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol≥140  mg/dL, triglycerides≥150 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol<40  mg/dL, or use of antidyslipidemic medication.
Current smokers were defned as those who were actively
smoking at the time of admission.
Clinical outcomes
Clinical outcomes were retrospectively collected during
follow-up. All-cause death was defned as any death after
PCI. Major cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events
(MACCE) constituted a composite endpoint including all-cause death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, and
ischemic stroke.
Patients were divided into a malnourished group
(GNRI<92) and a non-malnourished group, then
MACCE after PCI was compared between groups.
Statistical analysis
Quantitative data are presented as mean±standard
deviation or median and interquartile range (IQR).
Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the incidences
of categorical variables, expressed as frequency and percentage. Continuous variables were compared between
malnourished and non-malnourished groups using Student’s t-test (for values showing a normal distribution) or
the Wilcoxon rank-sum test (for values showing a nonnormal distribution). Cumulative survival rate and rate
of MACCE were estimated using a Kaplan–Meier curve
evaluated by log-rank testing. Cox proportional hazards
regression analysis was used to analyze factors associated with MACCE, reporting hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confdence intervals (CIs). Variables showing values
of p<0.05 on univariate analysis were entered into multivariate analysis. Furthermore, Cox proportional hazards regression model was performed to assess HRs for
MACCE, and results were expressed by forest plots. In
addition, we conducted a test for interaction of malnutrition and hemodialysis. Values of p<0.05 were considered
to indicate statistical signifcance. Statistical analyses
were performed using SAS software (JMP version 14.0).
Results
Baseline characteristics
Te baseline clinical characteristics of patients are shown
in Table 1. Mean age was 70±11 years, and 163 patients
(68%) were male. Mean GNRI was 100±13, and participants comprised 55 malnourished patients (23%;
GNRI<92) and 186 non-malnourished patients (77%).
Malnourished patients were older (77±9  years) than
those without malnutrition (67±11 years, p<0.001), and
sex (male) had a signifcant diference between malnourished and non-malnourished patients (p=0.009). Te
malnourished group showed a lower frequency of dyslipidemia and a higher frequency of hemodialysis compared with the non-malnourished group (p<0.001 and
p=0.009, respectively). Median concentration of hs-CRP
was higher in the malnourished group (3.1 mg/dL; IQR,
0.36–8.26  mg/dL) than in the non-malnourished group
(0.19 mg/dL; IQR, 0.08–0.58 mg/dL; p<0.001). Levels of
T-CHO and triglycerides were lower in the malnourished
group than in the non-malnourished group (p=0.002
and p<0.001, respectively) (Table 1).
Clinical outcomes
Mean duration of follow-up was 546±310  days, with a
maximum follow-up of 1092  days. Tirty-four patients
(14%) died after PCI, and the frequency of all-cause death
was signifcantly higher in the malnourished group (31%)
than in the non-malnourished group (9%; p<0.001).
MACCE occurred more frequently in the malnourished
group (38%) than in the non-malnourished group (11%;
p<0.001) (Table  2). Kaplan–Meier analysis showed a
signifcantly lower survival rate after PCI in the malnourished group than in the non-malnourished group
(p<0.001) (Fig.  1). Cumulative incidence of MACCE
including death was signifcantly higher in the malnourished group than in the non-malnourished group
(p<0.001) (Fig. 2).
Associations of baseline systemic factors with MACCE
Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was performed to investigate associations between baseline
characteristics including malnutrition and MACCE.
In univariate analysis, age, BMI (HR 0.91; 95% CI
0.84–0.98; p=0.016), malnutrition (HR 3.69; 95% CI
2.11–6.42; p < 0.001), hemodialysis (HR 2.63; 95% CI
1.51–4.58; p < 0.001), prior heart failure, cholinesterase, hs-CRP, albumin (HR 0.43; 95% CI 0.28–0.65;
p < 0.001), eGFR, and LVEF were signifcantly associated with MACCE (Table  3). BMI and albumin were
used to calculate GNRI. Te eGFR was synonymous
with hemodialysis, and the 95%CIs of cholinesterase
and LVEF included 1.00. Tese factors were therefore
not incorporated into the multivariate analysis. Multivariate analysis showed malnutrition (HR 2.30; 95%
CI 1.13–4.67; p=0.020) and hemodialysis (HR 2.17;
95% CI 1.19–3.93; p=0.011) correlated positively with
MACCE (Table  3). Furthermore, Cox proportional
hazards models using malnutrition and hemodialysis revealed that patients with both malnutrition and
hemodialysis showed greater risk of MACCE after PCI
as compared to patients with neither malnutrition nor
hemodialysis (HR 6.91; 95% CI 3.29–14.54; p < 0.001)
(Fig. 3). A comparison of p-value for interaction of malnutrition and hemodialysis was p=0.36.
Discussion
In this retrospective cohort study of stable CAD patients
with myocardial damage, we showed that: (1) patients
with malnutrition displayed a higher incidence of
MACCE as compared to patients without malnutrition;
(2) malnutrition and hemodialysis were independent risk
factors for MACCE in stable CAD patients with myocardial damage; and (3) patients with both malnutrition and
hemodialysis were associated with an additive increase in
the risk of MACCE.
Nutritional status is an important factor that afects
the prognosis of various diseases [15, 16]. As a tool of
assessment for nutritional status, serum albumin level
and BMI are often used in routine clinical practice. However, both are infuenced by various non-nutritional factors, including infammation, fuid status, and liver and
renal functions [17–19]. BMI or albumin alone may thus
be insufcient for assessing nutritional status. GNRI, as
an index combining BMI and albumin [7], has recently
been widely used in simple screenings of nutritional status and may be useful to overcome the shortcomings of
individual indicators such as serum albumin and BMI.
Recent studies have revealed that low GNRI is associated
with worsened prognosis in patients with cardiovascular disease [8, 9, 20], and Kunimura et  al. [21] demonstrated that low GNRI was independently associated
with poor cardiac outcomes in patients with preserved
ejection fraction after elective PCI for stable CAD. Te
present study demonstrated that malnutrition as assessed
by GNRI represented an independent risk factor for
MACCE in stable CAD patients with myocardial damage. Stable CAD patients with myocardial damage show
poor prognosis compared to those without myocardial
damage [10]. In addition, the ICELAND MI study demonstrated that patients with unrecognized myocardial
infarction were at higher risk of all-cause mortality than
patients without myocardial infarction. Furthermore,
among patients with frst myocardial infarction, previously unrecognized myocardial infarction was independently related to poor long-term clinical outcome, with
a more than threefold risk of mortality [22]. Intensive
care is therefore needed to prevent recurrent cardiovascular events in CAD patients with myocardial damage
compared to those without myocardial damage, and total
management including prevention of energy and protein
waste and feeding energy based on nutritional status may
improve the prognosis for stable CAD patients with myocardial damage.
In the present study, hemodialysis was also independently associated with MACCE. Chronic kidney disease
has been established as a risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [23]. Te ISCHEMIA-CKD
trial showed stable CAD patients with advanced kidney disease including hemodialysis had high incidences
of death and cardiovascular events compared to those
without advanced kidney disease [24, 25]. Tose previous reports may support the results of the present
study. In patients with end-stage renal disease, malnutrition has been thought to have a close relationship with
infammation and atherosclerosis, and the concept of
malnutrition-infammation-atherosclerosis (MIA) syndrome has been suggested [26, 27]. MIA syndrome was
then recognized to be an important clinical issue which
should be addressed in patients with end-stage renal
disease. Furthermore, previous studies have suggested
that infammation may deteriorate a generally catabolic
state, leading to acceleration of protein degradation and
suppression of protein synthesis in patients with endstage renal disease [28]. Tese mechanisms may cause
protein-energy malnutrition [29]. Although nutritional
status is afected by the interaction of multiple other
factors, infammation is recognized as a central factor in
malnutrition. Chronic infammation is known to lead to
increase oxidative stress and the development of severe
endothelial dysfunction, in turn leading to cardiovascular
disease [27]. Indeed, we showed that patients with malnutrition and hemodialysis had additively elevated incidences of MACCE in this study. Statin therapy has not
been found to achieve any obvious efect on prevention
of cardiovascular events in patients with advanced kidney disease [30]. Hence, a novel strategy for preventing
cardiovascular events may be needed in patients with
advanced kidney disease. In recent years, some antiinfammatory therapies that do not afect lipid levels have
demonstrated the ability to reduce cardiovascular events
in CAD patients [31, 32]. Multidisciplinary care including
nutritional management and the aforementioned antiinfammatory therapies may have the possibility of stopping the malignant cycle of MIA syndrome in patients
with end-stage renal disease.
Tis study showed several limitations. First, the present retrospective study involved a relatively small
cohort of patients. Second, although we assessed nutritional status using the GNRI as a combined index of
BMI and albumin, we could not completely exclude
systemic illnesses such as occult malignancies afecting BMI or albumin. In addition, the present study
assessed the GNRI only on admission and did not
assess changes in GNRI. Tird, we were unable to
evaluate another malnutrition index such as the Nutritional Risk Index, Mini Nutritional Assessment ShortForm scale or Maastricht Index, because the present
study is retrospective, and we do not have the data
those indexes need. Fourth, participants comprised 66
patients with hemodialysis (27%) in this study, and it is
reported that hemoglobin A1c may be underestimated
in patients with hemodialysis. Tus, hemoglobin A1c
was not included in the analysis. Fifth, the association
of malnutrition with CAD or gender is an important
issue to investigate; however, we were unable to address
this association in the present study. Further clinical
investigations are necessary to clarify this association.
Conclusions
Te current study revealed malnutrition as assessed by
GNRI ofered an independent risk factor for MACCE
among stable CAD patients with myocardial damage.
Assessment of nutritional status may be helpful for
stratifying the risk of cardiovascular events and encouraging improvements in nutritional status.