Background
Infuenza A virus (IAV) is one of the most severe respiratory diseases which leads to the high rates of morbidity
and mortality [1, 2]. Vaccination, as a peventive method,
can not provide sufcient control against the spread of
this infection because of continuous antigenic drifts [3].
Te adamantane derivatives including amantadine and
rimantadine were used for the treatment and prophylaxis of infuenza disease for several years [4]. Oseltamivir
(Tamifu®), as FDA-approved drug, which is a neuraminidase inhibitor molecule with the basic structure of shikimic acid was isolated and purifed from the fruits of
Illicium verum Hook. f. (Illiciaceae) [5]. Treatment with
conventional drugs including amantadine and oseltamivir has shown side efects on the central nervous system
and the gastrointestinal tract. Also, because of the genetic
instability and reassortments of the virus from one side
and drug resistance from the other side, the prescription
of these drugs has been inefcient in some cases [6–8].
Due to the need for having other inhibitors of IAV, the
scientists have focused on the screening medicinal plants
and natural products and to fnd and introduce a lead
compound or structure for the further preclinical trials
[9].
Medicinal plants play vital roles in prevention and
treatment of several diseases. Te natural products and
medicinal plants are popular in diferent parts of the
world from developing to developed countries as complementary to common medicines [10, 11]. Medicinal
plants are cheaper, more available and culturally acceptable especially in Iran with a strong and long history of
traditional medicine in comparison with some chemical
drugs with undesirable adverse efects [12].
Tere are several plants used from ancient times till
now for the treatment of common cold, fu syndrom
and infections in throat and upper respiratory systems.
Although there were many ethnopharmacology articles
about them, a few reports highlighted their anti-infuenza
virus efects [13, 14].
To the best of our knowledge, there are no reports
about antiviral efects of G. glabra, M. commonis, S.
alba, T. platyphyllos and C. sinensis (fermented) extracts
against infuenza A virus. Also, there are no reports about
anti-infuenza efects of fractions of other mentioned
plants. Te objective of this study was to investigate the
potential efects of crude extracts and diferent fractions
of some Iranian medicinal plants against infuenza replication, and compare their activities with oseltamivir
and amantadine as control drugs. For this purpose, the
propagation and cytopathic efects of IAV in the presence
of diferent extracts and fractions were determined using
the hemagglutination (HA), hemagglutination inhibition
(HI), and MTT cytotoxicity assays. Te potent extract(s)
and fraction(s) can be introduced as sources of phytochemicals with antiviral efects against infuenza A virus.
Methods
Preparation of plant extracts and fractions
Rhizomes of Glycyrrhiza glabra (Leguminosae, PMP246), leaves of Myrtus commonis (Myrtaceae, PMP-421)
and Melissa ofcinalis (Labiatae, PMP-358), aerial parts
of Hypericum perforatum (Hypericaceae, PMP-526), and
bark of Salix alba (Salicaceae, PMP-924) were purchased
in July 2017 from market in Tehran, Iran. Dried and fermented leaves of Camellia sinensis (Teaceae, PMP-415
and PMP-416, respectively) were obtained in November 2017 from market of Lahijan, Iran. Flowers of Tilia
platyphyllos (Malvaceae, 7057-TEH) were collected from
Ramsar, Mazandaran, Iran. Te voucher speciments were
identifed by Dr. Zahra Tofghi and Dr. Yousef Ajani, and
deposited in herbarium of Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. All dried
plants were extracted with 80% methanol and fractionated with chloroform to give chloroform fractions and
the residues were named methanol fractions.
Cell culture and infuenza virus propagation
Madin Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modifed Eagle’s Medium (DMEM)
(Mediatech Cellgro, USA) containing 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum (FBS) (PAA, Austria) and 1% Penicillin and streptomycin (Mediatech Cellgro, USA) in 5% CO2 incubator
at 37°C. Infuenza virus strain [A/Puerto Rico/8/1934
(H1N1) (ATCC VR-1469™)] was prepared from Infuenza Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, and propagated in MDCK cells. DMEM supplemented with 1μg/
ml of Trypsin-TPCK (Tosylamide Phenylethyl Chloromethyl Keton-treated Trypsin) (Sigma, USA) was used as
maintenance medium during antiviral experiments. For
measuring the virus infectivity dose, the 50% cell culture
infectious dose (CCID50) was obtained by the hemagglutination assay using Karber method [15, 16].
Cytotoxicity assay
Two-fold serial dilutions of the extracts and fractions
were exposed to the sub-cultured MDCK cells in 96-well
plates (3× 104
 cell/well), for 48h at 37°C in duplicates.
Te test was repeated two times. Te colorimetric MTT
assay was performed as previously described by Mehrbod et al. [16]. Briefy, the culture medium was replaced
by MTT 1X [3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl2H-tetrazolium bromide; Sigma, USA]. Following 3–4h
incubation at 37°C in dark, DMSO (100μl) was added
to each well to release the purple color of formazan.
Te absorbance at 570nm was measured with a microplate reader (BioTek EL 800, US). Te cell viability was
calculated based on the following formula: (mean Optical Density (OD) of treated cells/mean OD of control
cells)×100. Te 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50),
the concentration that reduced the cell viability by 50%
respect to the control cells; and the 50% efective concentration (EC50), the concentration required to achieve
50% protection against virus induced cytopathic efect,
were also calculated by analyzing MTT data using SPSS
software. Te cells without any exposure which were 
considered as negative controls and DMSO as a vehicle
control with maximum 0.5% concentration were tested
in parallel. Amantadine hydrochloride and oseltamivir
carboxylate, the conventional antiviral compounds, were
also tested as positive control drugs.
Selectivity index
Te selectivity index (SI) calculated by dividing CC50 to
EC50, represents the relative safety of the extracts or frections. It has been demonstrated that compounds with
selectivity indices higher than 3 are potentially safe antiviral reagents [17].
Antiviral assay
In co-penetration procedure of antiviral evaluations,
infuenza virus (100 TCID50/0.1ml) was mixed with the
EC50 of the extracts and fractions for 30min, and then
incubated with the cells at 37 °C. In pre-penetration and
post-penetration procedures, the virus was added to the
cells after and before the extracts and fractions. Following 1h incubation, the unabsorbed viruses were replaced
by TPCK-containing medium (1μg/ml). Following 48h
incubation at 37°C, viabilities of the cells were measured
by MTT assay as described earlier. Concurrently, the
virus titer was determined by testing the cell supernatants using the HA assay [16]. Amantadine hydrochloride
(98.5μg/ml) and oseltamivir carboxylate (394.25μg/ml)
(Sigma, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA) were considered as
positive control drugs and the cells without any exposure
were tested as negative controls. DMSO was tested as a
vehicle control with maximum 0.5% concentration. Te
test was repeated two times in duplicates.
Cellular percentage of protection
Te protection percentages of the samples were calculated by SPSS from the MTT data results of mockinfected and infected cells after 48h exposure, using the
following formula: Percentage of protection=[(ODT)
V − (ODC) V] / [(ODC)M − (ODC) V]×100 where
(ODT)V, (ODC)V and (ODC)M represent the absorbance of the treated sample, the virus-infected control (no
compound) and the negative control (mock), respectively
[18].
Hemagglutination assay (HA)
For quantifcation of the virus titer from the cell supernatants, the HA assay was conducted as previously
described [19]. Briefy, serial dilutions of the culture
media were added to 96-well U-shaped microplates in
duplicates. Te test was repeated two times. Te HA
units were measured as the reciprocal of the highest
dilution giving complete agglutination with chicken red
blood cells (0.5%). Te precipitation and difuse lattice
formation of the RBCs demonstrate the absence and the
presence of the virus, respectively.
Hemagglutination inhibition assay (HI)
For investigation of the inhibitory efect of the samples
on the hemagglutinin activity, the concentration of 4 HA
unit of virus particles was used. Briefy, the extracts and
fractions were diluted 2-fold serially from CC50 concentration. Ten, 4 HA unit of the virus was added to each
well. After pre-incubation for 45min at room temperature, chicken red blood cells (0.5%) were added to the
solution. Te physical interaction between extracts/fractions and virus surface HA glycoprotein was calculated
after 1h by the agglutination inhibition pattern.
Preliminary phytochemical analysis
Crude extracts, chloroform and methanol fractions of the
efective anti-infuenza plants were tested for identifying
the class of active metabolites such as alkaloids, cardiac
glycosides, tannins, favonoids, steroids, triterpenoids
and saponins by following the standard procedures [20,
21].
Tests for alkaloids
A) Dragendorf’s test: Te apperance of reddish brown
turbidity after addition of Dragendorf reagent was indicator for the presence of alkaloids.
B) Hager’s test: By addition of Hager reagent to the
samples, yellow turbidity was seen in the presence of
alkaloids.
Tests for cardiac glycosides
Keller-killiani test: Te mixture of ferric chloride and
glacial acetic acid were added to the sample solutions.
Apperance of bluish green in the upper layer and reddish
color in the lower layer of the solutions, after addition of
concentrated sulphuric acid confrmed the existence of
cardiac glycosides in the samples.
Test for tannins
FeCl3 test: After adding a few drops of 5% w/v solution of
ferric chloride III in 90% alcohol to the sample solutions,
the appearance of deep blue or dark green color indicated
the tannin existence in the samples.
Test for favonoids (Shinoda test)
After adding few drops of concentrated HCl and magnesium metal to the samples, the appearance of pink,
red, crimson or magenta color was the sign of favonoids
presentation.
Tests for steroids and triterpenoids
Libermann-Buchard test: Te appearance of brown ring
in the middle of green upper layer and deep red lower
layer after addition of sulfuric acid containing few
drops of acetic anhydride were indicator for the presence of steroids and triterpenoids.
Salkowski test: By addition of chloroform and concentrated H2SO4 to the extract and shaking well, the
color of chloroform layer changed to red, and acid layer
showed greenish yellow fuorescent if sterols and/or
triterpenes existed.
Test for saponins (foam test)
Te volume of 50 mg of samples in water was shaken
vigorously in a test tube. If froth characteristic was
obtained, the presence of saponins was confrmed.
Statistical analysis
Te data were expressed as mean±SD, and analyzed
by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and General
Linear Model (GLM) (SPSS 18.0), Tukey and Duncan
post-hoc tests. Sample values with P ≤ 0.05 and P ≤ 0.01
were considered statistically signifcant and highly signifcant, respectively.
Results
In this study, the efcacy of the crude extracts, chloroform and methanol fractions of 8 selected plants with
history of usages in traditinal and folklore Iranian medicine were tested against IAV. Te cytotoxicity of the
extracts were evaluated, and non-toxic concentrations
were defned prior to antiviral assay. Te ability of the
samples against viral titer and viral cytopathic efects
varied with diferent extracts and fractions of the same
plant as determined by the HA and MTT assays. Te
profle of the extracts and fractions of selected medicinal plants used in this study is listed in Table 1.
Cytotoxicity and selectivity indices of the compounds
Te results for CC50 were largely diferent for various
samples (Table 2). Among the crude extracts, the highest CC50 value belonged to S. alba (3647.45±52.52 μg/
ml) and the lowest CC50 value (10.41±0.00 μg/ml)
was obtained for M. communis and H. perforatum
equally. Among the chloroform fractions, S. alba and
M. communis showed the highest (1755.28±0.89 μg/
ml) and the lowest (2.60±0.00 μg/ml) CC50 values,
respectively. Amongst methanol fractions the highest and the lowest CC50 values were obtained for M.
ofcinalis (4413.80±3.69 μg/ml) and T. platyphyllos
(277.56±3.19 μg/ml), respectively. Te EC50 values
which were the same as non-cytotoxic concentrations
(NCTC) with no signifcant efects on the cell viability
were calculated using data obtained from MTT and
one-way ANOVA analysis as compared to the negative control (Table 2). Te selectivity index values were
obtained with the highest SI value of 32 with M. ofcinalis (chloroform fraction), H. perforatum (methanol
fraction), S. alba (crude extract and methanol fraction) and C. sinensis unfermented (methanol fraction)
and the lowest value of 2 with G. glabra (chloroform
fraction).
Inhibitory efect of extracts and fractions on infuenza
a virus
Te samples were tested in an in  vitro screening assay
to defne the antiviral activity against IAV. Te antiviral activity of the plants extracts/fractions was analyzed
based on the Log10 HA titer (Table 3) and Log HA decrement (Table 4). Among them, in co-penetration treatments, G. glabra (crude extract; 5.00±4.24), G. glabra
(methanol fraction; 5.50±3.54), M. communis (chloroform fraction; 5.50±3.54) and M. ofcinalis (methanol
fraction;6.00±2.83); in pre-penetration treatment, M.
communis (methanol fraction; 5.50±0.71); and in postpenetration treatment: M. communis (chloroform fraction; 5.50±3.54) showed highly signifcant (P≤0.01)
decrease in HA titer compared to the virus inoculation.
Tese results were in accordance with the Log HA decrement (Table 5) which showed 5–6 logs decrement in Log
HA titer for all samples.
Cell viability and cellular percentage of protection
Te optical densities (ODs) in MTT assay for the antiviral activity against IAV revealed highly signifcant
increments in the majority of the combined treatments
compared to the virus-inoculated cells (P≤0.01). Amantadine and oseltamivir combined exposures also resulted
in high cell viability (P≤0.01) (Table 5). Te ODs in combined treatments were analyzed to obtain the percentage
of compounds protection on the cell viability against the
virus infectivity. Data are presented in Table 6.
In co-penetration treatments, G. glabra (methanol
fraction;0.86±0.29), M. ofcinalis (methanol fraction; 0.81±0.05), T. platyphyllos (methanol fraction;
0.81±0.05), T. platyphyllos (chloroform fraction;
0.72±0.04), S. alba (crude extract; 0.80±0.07), S. alba
(methanol extract; 0.66±0.07), S. alba (chloroform
extract; 0.87±0.11), C. sinensis (chloroform extract;
0.74±0.13), C. sinensis (fermented crude extract;
0.87±0.11), C. sinensis (fermented methanol fraction;
0.80±0.04), C. sinensis (fermented chloroform fraction; 0.81±0.12); in pre-penetration treatments, G.
glabra (crude extract; 1.05±0.10), M. ofcinalis (chloroform fraction; 1.01±0.31), S. alba (crude extract;
0.73±0.03), C. sinensis (chloroform fraction;
0.81±0.16), C. sinensis (fermented crude extract;
0.74±0.13), C. sinensis (fermented chloroform fraction; 0.79±0.25); and in post-penetration treatments,
M. communis (crude extract; 0.88±0.05), M. ofcinalis
(methanol fraction; 0.84±0.09), H. perforatum (methanol fraction; 0.79±0.06), H. perforatum (chloroform
fraction; 0.915±0.038), T. platyphyllos (chloroform
fraction; 0.68±0.07), C. sinensis (methanol fraction;
0.70±0.11) showed the highest cell viability and protection against virus cytopathic efects.
Dose‑dependent response
Te test was repeated twice. Some of the extracts and
fractions showed RBC precipitation (HI+) until a certain dilution which showed dose-dependent responses
for their HA physical interaction. But some other samples showed RBC precipitation (HI+) in all dilutions
which is indicative of HA physical interaction in all
dilutions (Table 7).
Preliminary phytochemical analysis results
Te existence of secondary metabolites was investigated
by diferent preliminary analyses for the crude extracts,
and chloroform and methanol fractions of fve potent
anti-infuenza virus plants including G. glabra, M. communis, M. ofcinalis, S. alba and C. sinensis (fermented).
Phytochemical analysis data (Table  8) confrmed the
presence of alkaloids, cardiac glycosides, tannins, favonoids, triterpenoids and steroids in the active crude
extracts of G. glabra, M. ofcinalis and S. alba. Te efective chloroform fractions of M. communis and C. sinensis (fermented) were rich in alkaloids, cardiac glycosides,
triterpenoids and steroids. Methanol fractions of M. communis and M. ofcinalis with potential antiviral activities
against infuenza virus contained high amounts of favonoids, tannins, triterpenoids and steroids.
Discussion
Medicinal plants have progressively been noticed as suitable alternatives to the synthetic antiviral agents [22–25].
In the current research, based on the antiviral properties
of medicinal plants against IAV and other viruses, and
their traditional and folklore usage in Iran, the antiviral
efcacy of the crude extracts, and chloroform and methanol fractions of some Iranian native medicinal plants
including G. glabra, M. communis, M. ofcinalis, H.
perforatum, T. platyphyllos, S. alba, and C. sinensis (fermented and non-fermented) were evaluated against IAV
with more details.
Previous investigation revealed that glycyrrhizin
derived from the rhizomes of G. glabra has protective
efects against IAV by induction of interferon [26]. In 
addition, other compounds of licorice showed signifcant
inhibition on infuenza A neuraminidase in a computerbased approach [27]. Te efects of polyherbal formula
containing licorice were confrmed for the prevention
and treatment of infuenza-like syndrome, clinically [28,
29].
M. ofcinalis essential oil could inhibit avian infuenza
virus (H9N2) through various replication cycle steps
especially direct interaction with the virus particles [30].
Also, its extract demonstrated a signifcant anti-infuenza
efect against H1N1 strain of infuenza virus [31].
Te extract of H. perforatum showed anti-IAV efect
both in  vitro and in  vivo. Te EC50 of the extract was
40 μg/ml against IAV while its CC50 in MDCK cell line
was 1.5 mg/ml [32]. In an experiment, it was observed
that H. perforatum extract had signifcant efcacy
for the treatment of mice infected with IAV [32]. In
another study an opposite response occurred. Te consumption of oral H. perforatum extract in the mice
infected with infuenza A virus, enhanced transcription
of the suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) and
led to the impaired immune defense and higher mortality [33].
Te anti-infuenza activity of green tea (Camellia sinensis) against H1N1 virus was equivalent to green tea
by-products (EC50 equal to 6.72 and 6.36μg/ml, respectively). Also, hexane-soluble and ethyl acetate-soluble
fractions of green tea by-products possessed strong
anti-infuenza activity in chickens [34]. Te other studies demonstrated that dimeric polyphenol molecules in
green tea display more potent antiviral efects against
both infuenza A and B viruses than monomers. In addition, the existance of C-4′ hydroxyl group in the B ring
of planar favonols is necessary for the anti-infuenza B
virus activity [35, 36]. It was confrmed clinically that formulations containing C. sinensis or green tea metabolites
including catechines and theanine could prevent infuenza infection [37, 38].
According to the results, in terms of the selectivity
index (SI), the extracts and fractions of all tested herbs
were considered safe for the antiviral treatments except
chloroform fraction of G. glabra. Its SI value was the
same as conventional drugs. In addition, C. sinensis, S.
alba, H. perforatum and M. ofcinalis were categorized
as the safest plants in cellular studies.
In HI test, the extracts of T. platyphyllos, S. alba and C.
sinensis showed RBC precipitation in all tested dilutions
which indicates the strong physical interaction of these
compounds with the HA surface glycoprotein of the
virus. However, amongst the others, methanol fraction of
M. ofcinalis showed the weakest interaction (3rd dilution), and on the opposite side M. communis and H. perforatum showed stronger interaction (5th dilution). Te
results of this study confrmed dose-dependent response
for most of the extracts and fractions. In a previous
research, the formation of complexes between tannins
and proteins was confrmed [39]. Also it was demonstrated that antiviral inhibitory efects of hydrolyzable
tannins were related to the intractions blocking between
viral glycoproteins and cell surface glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs) [40]. It is interesting that in our experiment, M.
ofcinalis, unlike the others, did not contain any tannin
which justifcated the weakest intraction.
With a thorough scrutiny on the Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6 and
comparing their results with the SI values in Table 2 and
the fact that SI values higher than 3 are safe compounds,
it was concluded that except one almost all tested samples were safe but not efective against IAV titer.
Moreover, General Linear Model (GLM) analysis
which estimated marginal means of all the respective values for diferent exposure ways (combined treatments)
confrmed all the outcomes. Te data are shown in the
Supplementary Figs.  1, 2, 3 and 4. Terefore, most of
the above mentioned plant species might be promising
alternatives to decrease fu unfavorable efects by afecting the viral and cellular receptors. Te data were considerable because the conventional antiviral drugs;
amantadine and oseltamivir showed promising efects
against virus infection, however, growing drug resistance
has caused a signifcant challenge [41, 42].
Te phytochemical analysis of the potent anti-IAV
extracts/fractions demonstrated that they were rich in
favonoids, tannins, triterpenoids and steroids. Natural
products have diferent mechanisms against viral infections from interfering with entry, transcription, replication and translation of the virus, nuclear export of the
virus, viral assembly, packing and budding to enhance the
host responses [43].
Tere were many reports that showed favonids act as
anti-IAV compounds with various mechanisms [44, 45].
Flavonoids are natural phenolic compounds of plants
with potent antioxidant and antiviral properties. Tey
can help viral-infected cells to fx their biochemical
imbalance resulting from oxidative stress [46]. Also they
have shown potential inhibition on the neuraminidase
active site of infuenza virus. Te potency of NA blocking reduced from aurones to favon(ol)es, isofavones,
favanon(ol)es and favan(ol)es, respectively. Te structure activity relationship (SAR) studies of favonoids
against infuenza virus demonstrated that the presence
of 7-OH, 4′-OH, C2= C3 and C4=O functionalities were
necessary, but the existance of a sugar group reduced the
efects [47, 48].
Triterpenoids and steroids are natural components
elucidated from plants and other organisms which have
various biological activities including antiviral activities.
Mechanistic studies revealed triterpenoids bind tightly to
the viral hemagglutinin (HA) and disrupt the attachment
of viruses to the cell receptors [49–51].
Infuenza virus has two envelope glycoproteins named
hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Te binding of hemagglutinin to sialic acid residues of the host
cells is a key step for initiating the IAV infection. Te role
of NA is facilitating the movement of virus from infection 
sites to the respiratory tract [52, 53]. Te presence of favonoids, tannins, steroids and triterpenoids together in
the potent anti-infuenza extracts and fractions of this
study, covers the inhibitory efects on both the HA and
NA may be a reason for such signifcant efects. It is good
to note that the virus strain used in this study, A/PR/8/34,
is not pathogenic to humans and may not be the best
model for these types of studies. However, this strain is
generally used because it provides acceptable oucomes
comparable to the pathogenic strains and is also safe for
the users.
Conclusions
Te emergence of new strains of the infuenza A virus
makes us think about innovative strategies for the
development of new drugs with improved antiviral
efects, higher safety and better tolerability. Research
focusing on traditional herbs as complementary therapies or preventive medicine is becoming more attractive. Medicinal plants have been used for various
ailments, particularly infectious diseases. Te current
study indicated that treatment of IAV with the selected
extracts and fractions reduced the hemagglutination
activity of the virus, which may result from the physical interaction of the samples with virus hemagglutinin. Based on this scientifc confrmation, the selected
plants may have the capacity to ease the symptoms and
burden of fu. Te next focus of this study will be the
purifcation of pure compounds responsible for the bioactivity against IAV infection as well as their mode of
action. Recommendations are proposed for strategizing
the future role and place of medicinal plants in prevention and treatment of infuenza and other infectious diseases in national, regional and international health
policies and programs.