Background
Most pediatric patients receiving cancer treatments experience bothersome symptoms that are poorly documented and often not treated [1, 2]. Symptom control is
important as there is a strong correlation between increasing symptom burden and inferior quality of life [1].
Improving symptom control is likely to require multiple
approaches including systematic symptom screening,
symptom feedback to healthcare professionals and adherence to symptom management clinical practice
guidelines (CPGs) [3, 4]. To address symptom screening,
we developed the Symptom Screening in Pediatrics Tool
(SSPedi), which measures the degree of bother for 15
symptoms considered most important by patients [5–7].
We then developed Supportive care Prioritization, Assessment and Recommendations for Kids (SPARK),
which is a web-based application that consists of a
symptom screening component centered on SSPedi and
a supportive care CPG component [8–10].
To test whether SPARK can improve symptom control and quality of life for pediatric patients with cancer, we were awarded operating grants from the
National Institutes of Health (1R01CA251112) and
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (PJT
169165) to perform a cluster randomized trial of 20
institutions in the United States. This trial will
randomize 10 sites to intervention and 10 sites to
control (usual care) groups. The intervention will include prompts to complete self-reported symptom
screening three times weekly for 8 weeks for newly
diagnosed pediatric patients with cancer (both inpatients and outpatients), symptom feedback to the primary healthcare team and adaptation of care
pathways for symptom management. The care pathways will be adapted by each intervention site from
generic pathways we developed using a standardized
process to identify relevant CPGs [11]. Thus, intervention sites will need to adapt and implement
evidenced-based care pathways. Planning of the trial
started concurrent with the coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19) [12, 13] thus adding potential
barriers.
There were limited reports on barriers to implementation of evidence-based care in pediatric oncology. For
the care pathways to be successfully incorporated into
routine practice, understanding implementation barriers
was essential. We hypothesized that there would be barriers relevant to the planned trial including care pathway
implementation, and that understanding those barriers
would facilitate development of strategies to improve
implementation. Thus, we circulated a survey to sites
that had committed to the trial at the grant submission
stage from which the 20 participating sites would be
chosen. Objectives were to describe barriers to pediatric
cancer symptom management care pathway implementation and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
clinical research evaluating their implementation.
Methods
Sites
The study was approved by the Research Ethics Board of
The Hospital for Sick Children and the clinical trial
registration number was NCT04614662. The sites were
25 hospitals providing care for pediatric oncology patients in the United States that supported a grant submission to conduct a cluster randomized trial focused
on improving symptom control in pediatric cancer patients. The institutions were chosen to reflect variation
in pediatric vs. mixed adult and pediatric sites and based
upon previous research collaborations.
Purpose of survey, survey creation and survey
distribution
One component of the intervention is the institutionspecific adaptation of symptom management care pathways that are based upon CPGs. The purposes of the
baseline survey were to facilitate site selection (20 of the
25 potential sites would be chosen), to measure baseline
characteristics of participating sites and to anticipate
barriers and facilitators to trial conduct and care pathway implementation that could influence implementation processes. The trial will enroll 444 patients at 20
sites to demonstrate a difference of 3 points in total
SSPedi scores between intervention and control patients,
assuming alpha 0.05, power at least 80%, intraclass correlation coefficient 0.021 and SSPedi score standard
deviation 8.8.
CPGs are statements developed to facilitate
healthcare-related decisions; they are the foundations for
translating evidence to clinical practice [14]. Rigorously
developed CPGs must include a systematic review of the
literature and convene a panel that weighs the benefits
and harms of different treatment options to arrive at
recommendations [14–16]. Care pathways are tools that
can improve CPG implementation. They can be defined
as “structured multidisciplinary care plans which detail
essential steps in the care of patients with a specific
clinical problem.” [17].
The survey (Additional file 1) measured baseline characteristics including institution, patient and healthcare
professional characteristics. In order to understand potential barriers to symptom management care pathway
implementation, we used three approaches. First, we
used the Consolidated Framework for Implementation
Research (CFIR) [18, 19]. The CFIR is a conceptual
framework that includes factors that may influence
intervention implementation. We focused on the inner
setting measures that include the following constructs:
culture, culture stress, culture effort, implementation climate, learning climate, leadership engagement and available resources. Culture may be described as a stable
attribute of an organization that reflects its norms and
values [20]. Of these constructs, implementation climate
was central to our aims and thought to be especially important to successful implementation given its specificity
to the task. It has been identified as being important to
influencing implementation in practice [18, 21, 22]. Each
of the questions was rated on a 5-point Likert scale consisting of 1 = “strongly disagree”; 2= “disagree”; 3= “neutral”; 4= “agree”; and 5 = “strongly agree”. We
dichotomized those who agreed (score of 4 or 5) vs.
those who were neutral or disagreed (score of 1, 2 or 3).
We also used a second set of questions that were specific to the proposed study and asked if the lack of the
following were potential barriers to symptom management care pathway adaptation and implementation:
person-time to create care pathways and champion their
use; education and mentorship around care pathway use;
hospital leadership support; interest from physicians;
interest from allied health; information technology resources; and collaboration between different disciplines.
These were rated on a 5-point Likert scale representing
the degree to which they were a barrier: 1 = “not at all”;
2 = “a little”; 3= “somewhat”; 4= “a lot”; and 5 = “extreme”. We focused on any barrier defined as those that
were somewhat, a lot or extreme barriers, and severe
barriers defined as those that were a lot or extreme barriers. Third, given the timing of the COVID-19 pandemic related to full grant funding (R01 notice of award
July 2020), we also asked about the impact of the pandemic across the spectrum of clinical research activities.
The primary outcomes were related to support, recognition and prioritization of symptom management care
pathway implementation from the CFIR implementation
climate construct. The survey was piloted internally
prior to distribution. It was disseminated to the participating sites by email and completed in REDCap. The respondents were the site principal investigators; they
could consult with other institutional personnel to facilitate survey completion. Reminders were sent weekly up
to three times in the event of non-response.
Statistics
Descriptive statistics were used to summarize baseline
characteristics and potential barriers to symptom management care pathway implementation. We compared
institutional characteristics of those that agreed that
their department supports, recognizes and prioritizes the
implementation of symptom management care pathways
vs. those that did not agree using the Wilcoxon rank
sum test. Analyses were performed using R studio version 3.6.1, The R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Results
Of the 25 sites who supported grant submission, one
withdrew because of institutional resource constraints
and one did not complete the survey, leaving 23 institutions included in the analysis. The survey was completed
between August 5, 2020 and September 9, 2020. Table 1
describes institutional, patient and healthcare professional characteristics. Within all institutions, health care
professionals create orders in the electronic health record for symptom prevention and management. The median number of new pediatric cancer patients diagnosed
annually was 90 (interquartile range (IQR) 63 to 200).
All institutions were described as not-for-profit. The
median number of physician full time equivalents was 9
(IQR 5 to 13).
Table 2 shows the results of the inner setting measures
from the CFIR. Across most constructs, at least 70% of
institutions agreed that the culture, climate, leadership
and resources facilitated symptom management care
pathway implementation. With respect to the implementation climate construct, less than 70% of respondents
agreed or strongly agreed with the following positively
framed statements: “department staff gets the support
they need to implement care pathways for symptom
management” (57%), “department staff gets recognition
for implementing care pathways for symptom management” (39%) and “implementing care pathways for
symptom management is a top priority of the department” (61%). Respondents from 35% of institutions indicated that “staff members often showed signs of stress
and strain”.
Table 3 shows additional barriers to implementing
symptom management care pathways among respondents. The most common barriers (somewhat, a lot or
extreme barrier) were as follows: lack of person-time to
create care pathways and champion their use (35%), lack
of interest from physicians (30%) and lack of information
technology resources (26%). Severe barriers (a lot or extreme barrier) were rare and the most common was the
lack of person-time to create care pathways and champion their use (9%).
Table 4 illustrates the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on research activities at the institutions. Most
sites reported no negative impact of the pandemic across
research activities. The most common activities that
were a lot more difficult or almost impossible were executing contracts (9%), study activation (9%) and accessing patients in person (9%).
Table 5 compares the attributes of sites who agreed
that symptom management care pathway implementation was supported, recognized and prioritized vs. those
who did not agree with these statements. Sites with
fewer newly diagnosed cancer patients and those with
fewer physician, nurse practitioner and physician
assistant full time equivalents were significantly more
likely to agree that their staff are supported. Sites with a
larger percentage of black patients were significantly
more likely to agree that their staff receives recognition
for implementing symptom management care pathways
and that implementation is a priority.
Discussion
In this study, we found that few survey respondents anticipated challenges with care pathway implementation.
However, potential barriers that were reported lay within
the implementation climate construct of CFIR and were
lack of support, recognition and prioritization at the participating institutions. Lack of person-time to create care
pathways and champion their use, lack of physician
interest, and lack of information technology were other
important potential barriers reported with respect to developing and implementing symptom management care
pathways. However, the COVID-19 pandemic did not
appear to be perceived as a major barrier to research
conduct.
We found that unfavorable implementation climate
may be a potential barrier to care pathway implementation. Other studies have also identified this construct as
a potential problem in program implementation [23, 24].
It is interesting that smaller sites reported receiving
more support for care pathway implementation. It is
possible that smaller sites are more likely to provide verbal and non-verbal support of initiatives in general and
if this is true, identifying ways to provide this type of
support across institutions could be important. Such
support could include wide availability of research staff
to address questions and provide educational materials.
It may also be important to identify site champions who
can provide this type of support locally. More specifically, our proposed strategy will focus on enhancing support and recognition for care pathway implementation
although these elements will primarily arise extrinsic to
the institution and be provided by the study team.
The finding of greater support at institutions with a
greater percentage of black patients may be spurious. It
also may reflect additional supports given to institutions
that are minority based, such as those participating in
the National Cancer Institute Community Oncology
Research Program (a program aimed at sites with greater
representation of racial/ethnic minorities or rural residents). We also found that lack of physician interest was
a potential barrier to developing and implementing
symptom management care pathways. Future qualitative
research could explore reasons behind lack of interest
and identify potential interventions to mitigate or address the issue.
We found that the COVID-19 pandemic was not
perceived as a major barrier to research conduct. This
finding is in contrast to a recent meta-analysis
suggesting that trial delays and cessation were common and were a direct consequence of the pandemic
[25]. Our findings may differ because the survey was
distributed later in the pandemic, when many institutions had adapted to it. Further, some institutions
have made distinctions based upon whether research
activities are in person vs. not in person and whether
they are essential vs. not essential. Given that our
trial could be conducted entirely remotely, and since
some could consider this type of trial essential, respondents may have anticipated fewer barriers
compared with other research studies. Lastly, respondents to our survey may not have had personal experience surmounting the logistical and bureaucratic
barriers to the conduct of research created by the
COVID-19 pandemic and, thus, may have not fully
appreciated its impact. While our findings are unique
to this particular project, they offer useful insight into
institutional support of research during the pandemic.
The strengths of this study include the utilization of
an established framework (CFIR) in addition to studyspecific items in order to identify potential barriers to
care pathway implementation. This will allow important contextual elements to be evaluated for their future relationship to implementation strategies and
outcomes. Another strength is the evaluation of the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on clinical research, a timely and important question. However,
the study is limited as two institutions either dropped
out or did not complete the survey; they are likely to
be different than the 23 institutions that did complete
the survey. In addition, these questions were mainly
answered by a single individual, namely the site principal investigator. While input from other colleagues
could have been accessed, perspectives of other
healthcare professionals at the site were not fully represented. Also, sites agreed to provide support at the
grant submission stage, suggesting they believe that
symptom management is important. Thus, participating sites are likely a positively biased cohort and the
“typical” site may report more barriers to care pathway implementation. Finally, evaluation of characteristics of sites who agreed that their department
supports, recognizes and prioritizes the implementation of symptom management care pathways vs. those
who did not agree should be considered hypothesis
generating.
Conclusions
In conclusion, respondents at pediatric oncology institutions expected few barriers to symptom management
care pathway implementation at their institutions. The
most commonly reported barriers to implementation
were lack of support, recognition and prioritization. The
COVID-19 pandemic may not be a major barrier to clinical research activities in pediatric oncology. These results were limited by being conducted at sites that have
prioritized supportive care. Future work should use this
information to improve care pathway implementation.