Background
Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless, non-irritating
gas. It is produced endogenously in small amounts as a
byproduct of the catabolism of heme molecules [1]. It
can also be inhaled when hydrocarbon-containing fuels
are not completely burned [1, 2]. Survivors of carbon monoxide poisoning may suffer neurological and psychiatric
sequelae [1]. Carbon monoxide causes electrical, functional, and morphological changes in the heart [3]. The
QT interval has long been known to vary significantly
among the individual leads of a surface 12-lead electrocardiogram [3].
A potential clinical application of this inter-lead difference was proposed in 1990 by Day et al., who suggested
that the inter-lead difference in the QT interval might provide a measure of repolarization inhomogeneity, which they
called “QT dispersion” [3, 4]. Although it has been established that carbon monoxide induces electrocardiographic
(ECG) changes and alterations of cardiac biomarkers [3, 5],
it is unclear whether the indices of myocardial damage can
predict the patient’s prognosis after carbon monoxide
toxicity. Hence, this study aimed to investigate the relationship between carboxyhemoglobin and ECG changes and
whether the ECG changes and troponin I levels are related
to the prognosis of patients with carbon monoxide
poisoning.
Methods
The sample group of this retrospective study comprised
patients suffering from carbon monoxide poisoning who
had been admitted to St. Mary’s Hospital, Kurume, Japan
for treatment between June 2013 and September 2019. St.
Mary’s Hospital is the emergency medical center for southern Fukuoka Prefecture. Clear electrocardiograms were
available for each patient and carbon monoxide poisoning
had been confirmed by arterial blood analysis. Carboxyhemoglobin was measured in the ambulance and/or at admission, with the highest values being adopted. All patients
whose blood and ECG could be analyzed using these techniques were included in the study. Encephalopathy was defined as the development or recurrence of symptoms such
as difficulty concentrating, dementia, psychomotor retardation, Parkinson’s disease, and amnesia, which were either
diagnosed by MRI at time of discharge or up to 6 weeks
after admission. Sequential disability was defined as the
major progressive outcomes resulting from carbon monoxide toxicity either at or after discharge. These include encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy, and death.
QT interval measures and cardiac enzymes
All 12-lead electrocardiograms were obtained at a paper
speed of 25 mm/s with standard lead positions. QT and
RR intervals were measured on each electrocardiogram
in all patients. The QT interval was measured from the
beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave.
The QT intervals for each lead were measured and corrected for heart rate (QTc) using Bazett’s formula (QT/
√RR) [6]. The QTc dispersion was the difference between the leads with the shortest and longest QTc intervals [4]. QT intervals were measured upon admission to
the emergency department. Additionally, blood samples
were obtained and the troponin I level was determined.
Statistical analysis
Retrospective statistical analyses were performed using JMP
and SAS university edition software (SAS Institute Inc.,
Cary, NC, USA). Results are presented as means ± SDs. An
independent sample t-test was used to compare continuous
variables, while Chi-squared tests or Fisher’s exact test were
used for categorical variables. Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient was used to examine the relationships between
carboxyhemoglobin levels and clinical variables.
Univariate and multivariate nominal logistic regression
was performed to examine the relationships between patient prognosis and the level of carboxyhemoglobin,
troponin I, and ECG parameters.
Additionally, ROC curve analysis was performed on
these data, while the cut-off values were calculated using
the Youden index. A value of P < 0.05 was considered to
be statistically significant.
Results
Patients
Altogether, 70 patients (42 men, 28 women; mean age
52 ± 18 years) were included in the study, and their
clinical characteristics are presented in Table 1. Two patients died after admission. Fifteen patients were diagnosed with encephalopathy either at or after discharge,
whereas no patients exhibited cardiomyopathy at or after
discharge.
Correlation between carboxyhemoglobin and QT intervals
The correlation between maximum QT intervals and the
carboxyhemoglobin levels was not significant.
Conversely, the correlation between the maximum QTc
interval and the carboxyhemoglobin level was significant
(P = 0.0072, R2 = 0.1017; Fig. 1), as were the relationships
between QT dispersion and carboxyhemoglobin (P <
0.001, R2 = 0.2358; Fig. 1) and the QTc dispersion and
carboxyhemoglobin (P < 0.001, R2 = 0.2613; Fig. 1).
Comparison between patients with and without a
sequential disability
Death, carbon monoxide encephalopathy, and cardiomyopathy at or after discharge were all considered
to be sequential disabilities, although none of the
patients in this study had cardiomyopathy. There
were no differences in sex or age between patients with
and without a sequential disability, while the number of
patients taking tranquilizers of varying strengths or antidepressants and other drugs did not change either (Table 2).
However, the maximum QT interval (p = 0.0269), the corrected maximum QT interval (p = 0.0002), the QT dispersion (p = 0.0003), and the corrected QT dispersion (p =
0.0001) were significantly longer in patients who had a sequential disability (Table 2, Fig. 2). Troponin I levels in
patients with a sequential disability were greater than
in those who did not (Table 2, Fig. 2). There were
also no differences in carboxyhemoglobin levels between patients with and without a sequential disability
(Table 2, Fig. 2).
Nominal logistic analyses
The reference values for the maximum QTc interval,
QTc dispersion, carboxyhemoglobin level, and troponin
I level were established based on the Classification and
Regression Tree.
The univariate logistic analysis showed that the
significant predictors of sequential disability were
consciousness disorder on admission (P = 0.0078),
QTc dispersion (> 46 ms; P = 0.0003), high levels of
carboxyhemoglobin (> 44%; P = 0.0044), and a high
Troponin I level (> 0.36 ng/ml; P = 0.0003; Table 3).
Multivariate logistic analysis was performed on QTc
dispersion, carboxyhemoglobin levels, and troponin I
levels. This indicated that the significant predictors of
sequential disability were QTc dispersion (P = 0.0042)
and troponin I level (P = 0.0021; Table 3).
ROC curve analysis was performed on QTc dispersion
and troponin I levels (Fig. 3). The area under the curve
was 0.789 for QTc dispersion and 0.780 for the troponin
I levels. There was no significant difference between the
two areas. The cut-off values were 45.6 ms for QTc dispersion and 0.12 ng/ml for the troponin I level.
Discussion
Carbon monoxide poisoning, a serious health problem,
is associated with a high incidence of severe morbidity
and mortality. It causes myocardial toxicity and lifethreatening arrhythmias. Carbon monoxide reduces the
oxygen-carrying capacity of blood and binds with cardiac
myoglobin, causing a rapid decrease in myocardial oxygen reserves [6]. Several studies have shown that carbon
monoxide intoxication causes increased QT intervals
and QT dispersions [6–8].
This study showed that QTc dispersion and carboxyhemoglobin are significantly related. Furthermore, both
QTc dispersion and troponin I are predictors of
sequential disability.
Correlation between carboxyhemoglobin and QT intervals
The QT interval is an indicator of ventricular repolarization on the electrocardiogram. A prolonged QT
interval reflects impaired myocardial refractoriness.
QT dispersion reflects the physiological variability of
regional ventricular repolarization. Increased QT dispersion is related to the heterogeneity of regional
ventricular repolarization and is accepted as a marker
for arrhythmia and sudden death [9]. Tanba et al. reported that the normal value of QTc dispersion in
Japanese patients is 31 ± 11 ms [10].
In this study, the QTc interval and QTc dispersion
correlated with the carboxyhemoglobin level. Hanci
et al. also reported that the QTc interval and QTc dispersion show good correlations with carboxyhemoglobin
[11]. Increased QTc dispersion and interval in carbon
monoxide toxicity might be caused by carbon monoxide
on the myocardium, which causes homogeneous impulse
formation in the ventricles.
Relationship between the prognosis of patients with
carbon monoxide toxicity and cardiac markers
The univariate logistic analysis indicated that the
predictors of sequential disability in patients with carbon monoxide toxicity were smoking, consciousness
disorder, maximum QTc interval, QTc dispersion,
carboxyhemoglobin, and troponin I. The multivariate
analysis that was performed on QTc dispersion and
on the levels of carboxyhemoglobin and troponin I
revealed that QTc dispersion and troponin I were
both significant predictors of sequential disability.
Note that the multivariate analysis did not find that
carboxyhemoglobin was related to a poor outcome.
Furthermore, the areas under the curve were not significantly different.
However, these indicators might be able to predict the
prognosis of patients with carbon monoxide toxicity.
Conversely, although the prognosis of patients with carbon monoxide toxicity depends on the length of exposure and its concentration, carboxyhemoglobin was not
necessarily related to exposure time or the concentration
of the carbon monoxide inhaled.
Because patients with carbon monoxide toxicity
usually receive treatment immediately after exposure,
carboxyhemoglobin was not measured at its peak
concentration.
Hampson et al. found that the level of carboxyhemoglobin in the blood was a poor predictor of the
clinical prognosis of patients with carbon monoxide
poisoning [12].
Moreover, mortality was associated with the absolute difference in carboxyhemoglobin [12]. Satran
et al., however, reported that moderate-to-severe
carbon monoxide poisoning causes myocardial injury when assessed by electrocardiography or biomarkers [5].
Because carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin with high
affinity, exposure to carbon monoxide, even in low concentrations, profound tissue hypoxia [13, 14]. Thus, carbon
monoxide might cause neurological injury and likely contribute to myocardial injury as well. Although there were no
patients with cardiomyopathy at/after discharge in this
study, the indices of myocardial injury could lead to neurological injury or even mortality. The mechanisms described
influence this result. In this study, hyperbaric therapy was
not found to be significant by the univariate logistic analysis.
However, patients with severe symptoms as a result of
serious carbon monoxide poisoning often receive hyperbaric therapy. Therefore, this result may be biased.
Limitations
The primary limitations of this study were the small
sample population, single-center design, and retrospective nature. Additionally, because our subjects included
patients who had deliberately as well as accidentally exposed themselves to carbon monoxide, several patients’
exact exposure time could not be precisely calculated.
Despite these limitations, the study may act as a good
basis for further study of the topic. The findings must be
confirmed in prospective, multicenter studies with larger
populations.
Conclusion
The prognosis for patients with carbon monoxide poisoning may be predicted based on the QTc dispersion
value and the troponin I level. Patients with myocardial
damage should be monitored not only for their cardiovascular outcome but also for their neurological outcome and their prognosis.