Introduction
Up to 50% of primary care visits in Western societies
are related to symptoms that cannot be fully explained
by well-known biomedical pathology [1–4]. While most
of these symptoms are self-limiting, 2.5–10% of cases
persist without clear medical explanation [5–9]. Tese
persistent somatic symptoms (PSS) are accompanied by
increasing disease burden for both the patient and the
healthcare system [10]. Diferentiation from well-known
chronic medical conditions and classifcation of symptoms as PSS is challenging [11]. Challenges arise from
similarities between symptoms of PSS and other conditions, possible co-existence with a well-documented
medical disorder, the heterogeneity of symptoms, lack
of universal guidelines and the lack of biomarkers [3,
12–14]. Delayed identifcation of PSS impedes early
management of symptoms, which in turn can result in
inappropriate healthcare utilization and high costs [15–
17]. Additionally, it may hinder reusability of electronic
health records (EHR) for research, quality monitoring
and proactive population health management [17–20].
Across medical and psychological specialties, a variety of terminology and aetiology is refected in diferent concepts of PSS. While some countries have specifc
guidelines for PSS, widely accepted guidelines for classifying (and treating) PSS are missing [3]. PSS is currently diagnosed as either a somatic disease or a mental
disorder, since diagnostic classifcations are inherently
dualistic in nature [21]. In the medical feld, patients
may be classifed under umbrella terms such as ‘medically unexplained physical symptoms’ (MUPS), ‘functional somatic symptoms’, and ‘somatically fxed’ [9, 22],
which indicate a negative symptomology – i.e. a lack of
medical pathology [23]. PSS may also be classifed as syndromes such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), chronic
fatigue syndrome (CFS) or fbromyalgia (FM). Ongoing debate about terminology has redirected the most
recent versions of the diagnostic and statistical manual
of mental disorders (DSM-5) [24] and the international
classifcation of disease (ICD-11) [25] towards no longer
requiring the explicit exclusion of any underlying medical condition (this only applies to PSS-related classifcations in the mental health chapter). Both focus on
positive symptomology, such as maladaptive cognitions,
emotions and/or behaviours related to the somatic symptoms [3, 13], as described in the DSM-5 as the so-called
B-criteria of somatic symptom disorder (SSD) [24, 26].
Still, consensus on labelling and addressing these symptoms is limited. In this paper, the term ‘persistent somatic
symptoms’ (PSS) is used since the descriptive nature of
the term transcends the problem of dualism. Moreover,
recent research has found that this term is generally preferred over other terms [27].
In the Dutch health care system, as well as in many
(Western) countries, the GP serves as a gatekeeper for
health care in general. Te classifcation of symptoms and
illnesses in EHRs by Dutch GPs is based on the International Classifcation of Primary Care (ICPC) system [28].
Since medical practice historically operates according to
mind–body dualism, physicians are required to locate
complaints either in the body or the mind [21]. Accordingly, most symptoms and disorders – physical and psychological – have a domain specifc diagnostic code in
the ICPC. Nonetheless, the current ICPC lacks a specifc
and clearly defned code for PSS and the ICPC system
instructs to register symptoms not fulflling the criteria
for a diagnosis on a symptom level [28, 29]. Arguably,
registration of cases with PSS is less straight forward
due to the multi-domain nature of PSS even though the
ICPC does contain a chapter with multi-domain codes
(A-chapter). Nonetheless, there are international codes
available for some PSS-related syndromes (such as, IBS),
and the Dutch ICPC also contains codes for FM and CFS
[28].
While several studies have documented ample diagnostic variation regarding patients with PSS in general
practice [30, 31], it is not well documented which codes
or other methods GPs use for registration of PSS and if
they fnd their current approach to registration satisfactory. Te primary aim of the present study was, therefore,
to explore how GPs currently register PSS. Te secondary aim was to gauge GPs’ perspective on their needs to
improve classifcation, registration and care for PSS.
Methods
Study design
A cross-sectional online survey was developed to reach
our aims. Te survey questions were developed in collaboration with experts in general practice, medical psychology and PSS. Te survey was set up in Qualtrics [32]. Tis
paper focuses on GPs’ registration behaviour and needs,
using the STROBE cross-sectional reporting guidelines
[33]. Prior to distribution, the survey was pilot tested
among four GPs and modifed based on their feedback.
Informed consent was included at the start of the survey.
Te ethics committee of Leiden University Medical Centre supplied a waiver of ethical approval (C1O8.045/DJ/
gk).
Procedure
Te survey was sent out via e-mail between June and
September 2018 to mailing lists of Dutch GPs who consented to be approached anonymously for research
purposes, and to email addresses obtained through an
overarching Dutch healthcare website (www.zorgkaartn
ederland.nl). Tis method ensured optimal distribution
over all regions of the Netherlands in order to obtain a
representative and generalizable sample. Reminders were
sent two weeks after frst distribution. Ten gift cards of 25
euro were allotted to GPs who participated and provided
us with their email address. Te email addresses were not
linked to the survey responses.
Measures
To adhere to the term currently used in guidelines for
PSS-related complaints, the Dutch term for MUPS
(‘SOLK’) was used to indicate PSS in the survey. Somatisch onvoldoende verklaarde lichamelijke klachten
(SOLK) is literally translated as somatic insufciently
explained physical complaints. In the introduction of the
survey, a description of the defnition of SOLK was presented: ‘We speak of SOLK when regular medical care
cannot fnd an adequate explanation for the complaints
with which the patient presents him/herself. Patients with
a well-known somatic condition can also have SOLK,
either presenting with a totally diferent complaint or
presenting with more severe complaints than is expected.’
Distinction and explanation about self-limiting and persistent symptoms were provided. To address conceptual
diferences between GPs regarding PSS and to ensure
that both the medical and psychological domain of PSS
was captured, separate questions were added which specifcally addressed PSS in patients with a(n explained)
chronic medical condition (i.e., ‘patients presenting with
more or more severe symptoms than you would expect’)
and/or the B-criteria of SSD (i.e., ‘patients who have maladaptive cognitions, emotions and/or behaviours related
to the somatic symptoms’). At the start of the survey, GPs
were asked to fll in non-identifying demographic questions. All questions required at least one response to
continue to the next question, except comment sections.
Below you fnd a description of the survey questions (for
an exact outline of the survey, see additional fle 1).
Primary aim (‘registration of PSS’)– Te following four
items were constructed to reach the primary aim: (1)
First a description of a hypothetical patient was given as
follows: ‘Imagine a patient visiting your ofce who has
consulted you frequently in the previous 6 months with
the same or difering complaints. Extensive research has
excluded a medical explanation for the complaint(s). For
each complaint presented, choose the ICPC-code which
you would use most often. You can choose a maximum of
three ICPC-codes per complaint.’ Ten followed 4 complaints on diferent pages: bowel problems, fatigue, neck
and back pain, and shortness of breath. A drop-down
menu contained all codes related to the complaint in the
thesaurus menu from ICPC-online [34], which refects
the presentation in GPs’ EHR. Tis list was supplemented
with suitable codes based on a PSS-expert panel of GPs
(see additional fle 2 for the full list of ICPC-codes from
which GPs could choose). Te four separate complaints
were ofered in random order to minimize bias due to
presentation order. Next, (2) GPs were asked whether
they use the PSS-related syndrome codes A04.01 (CFS),
D93 (IBS) and/or L18.01 (FM). Respondents selected one
or more of fve options: ‘Yes, I diagnose the syndromes
myself sometimes’, ‘Yes, I use this code when the syndrome is diagnosed by a medical specialist’, ‘No, I think
these complaints should be reported on a symptom level’,
‘No, I am not convinced these are distinguishable syndromes’, and ‘Other, namely…’ (with an additional comment section). Tis question was added to the survey
in a later stage and was therefore only presented to 73%
(n=189) of the GPs.
Subsequently, (3) GPs were asked whether they mention PSS-related terminology in the (3a) episode name
or (3b) free text area (two 4-point scale items (ranging
from ‘never’ to ‘always’)). Lastly, (4) a description of a
hypothetical consultation with a patient with a diagnosed
medical condition was given, whereby the patient presented with specifc cognitive, emotional and behavioural
problems (conforming to the B-criteria of SSD) [24]. GPs
were asked if they would mention this in their EHR (yes/
no, and a comment section).
Secondary aim (‘GPs needs’) – Te following four items
were constructed to reach the secondary aim: First, (1)
GPs were asked if the lack of an unambiguous way of
classifying or coding PSS was problematic for them (yes/
no, and a comment section). Next, (2) GPs were asked if
they had a need for a code which captures the specifc
cognitions, emotions and behaviour conforming to the
B-criteria of SSD (yes/no, and a comment section). Subsequently, an open-ended question was presented where
GPs were asked (3) what they need to be able to improve
registration and classifcation of PSS; and, in order to
ensure not missing any needs, this was followed by three
specifc semi-open-ended questions – (4) if they have
needs regarding training, (online) tools or other support, to improve consultations and classifcation of PSS
(response options were: ‘no’ and ‘yes, namely…’).
Data analysis
All results are based on descriptive statistics. Survey
responses were summarized as is, using sample sizes
and percentages, unless otherwise specifed above. For
the frst hypothetical consultation, codes were frst categorized into four groups: symptom-specifc codes (e.g.,
A04-fatigue), general codes – i.e., non-specifc codes
(e.g., P28-limited function/disability(p)), somatization
(P75-somatization disorder) and syndromes (A04.01-
CFS, D93-IBS and L18.01-FM) (see additional fle 2). Te
responses on the four single complaints were analysed
both combined and as separate complaints. For the question regarding the use of PSS-related syndrome codes,
the two ‘Yes, …’ answering options were combined and
the two ‘No, …’ answering options were combined to construct total scores.
Results
Of the approximately 12,000 active GPs in the Netherlands, an estimated 2,000 GPs were reached through our
distribution method. In total, 259 GPs (13%) fully completed the survey, with exception to the fourth item (4)
which was completed by 189 GPs. Table  1 displays the
characteristics of the total sample. Of the GPs who flled
out the survey, 60.2% were female, which refects the current trend towards increasing numbers of female GPs in
the Netherlands [35]. GPs from all regions in the Netherlands completed the survey. GPs years since graduation is reasonably evenly distributed over 5-year periods,
varying between the smallest group of GPs graduating
between 26 to 30 years since participating in the survey
(8.5%) and the largest group of GPs graduating between 6
to 10 years before participation (17.8%).
Registration of PSS
As shown in Fig.  1, GPs vary in their way of reporting
PSS. Combining the preferred frst choices of code for
the four PSS case examples, the general trend indicates
that GPs were most likely to register PSS on a symptomspecifc level (89.3%). Te frequency of choosing general
codes increased from 6.9% as a frst choice to 31.1% for
the second and 45.5% for the third choice. Te choice
for ICPC code P75 (somatization disorder) increased
from 1% as a frst choice, to 5.1% and 8.0% for the second and third choice respectively. When presented with
fatigue complaints, more than 35.7% chose to report the
complaint with P75 (as a second or third choice). Looking at the number of times a syndrome code (IBS, CFS or
FM) was generally chosen either as a frst, second or third
choice, 144 chose D93 (IBS) in case of bowel complaints,
69 GPs chose A04.01 (CFS) in case of fatigue complaints,
and 6 chose L18.01 (FM) in case of neck and back pain.
For a more detailed description of the choices of ICPC
codes per presented symptom, see additional fle 3.
Table  2 shows the reported likelihood that GPs mention PSS-related terminology and cognitions, emotions
or behaviour related to PSS in their EHR. Some GPs
mentioned in the comment section that a fear of stigmatization was the reason for avoiding PSS-related terms.
Of all GPs who answered the question regarding ICPCcodes for recognized PSS-syndromes (n=189), 91.5%
indicated that they use the codes for IBS (D93), CVS
(A04.01) and FM (L18.01) (not shown in Table). Te
answering options given in the survey are depicted in
Table 3. While 68.3% of GPs reported diagnosing the syndrome themselves, several GPs commented that this was
only the case for IBS (which was also the case in most
GPs who selected the answer ‘Other, namely…’).
GPs needs
Table  4 shows the results relating to the second aim of
this study. Approximately half of GPs (47.9%) reported
that the lack of an unambiguous way of classifying or
coding PSS is a problem for them. Many GPs commented
that a specifc code for PSS would be helpful, and some
suggested that PSS-codes per tract or a specifc code
with diferent severity levels would be helpful. GPs commented requiring widely accepted guidelines in combination with a new PSS-code. Of those who did not see the
lack of a specifc PSS code as a problem (52.1%), many
commented they sometimes describe PSS in the available free text area when registering the patient’s somatic
complaint. Others felt there is still too much uncertainty
regarding PSS to code it, felt unwilling to apply “that
label” to a patient, or commented that registration at a
symptom level was sufcient. Of all GPs, 32.8% reported
that they would like to be able to express PSS-related
components – i.e., specifc thoughts, feelings and behaviour conforming to the B-criteria of SSD – in a code.
Although some of these GPs commented that they found
it difcult to specify the components. Additionally, GPs
indicated a need for training (56.7%) and/or an – (online)
classifcation and/or risk assessment – tool (58.3%) and/
or other support (69.7%). Other PSS-related needs mentioned by GPs in the elective comment sections regarded
clearer or more referral options, more time and fnancial
compensation for consultations and better guidelines
(although others explicitly mentioned that they found the
current guidelines adequate).
Discussion and conclusion
Discussion
Te results of this survey indicate that codes used for
registration of PSS in primary care varies widely among
GPs. PSS are primarily coded at a specifc somatic symptom level and GPs often avoid using terminology related
to PSS in their EHR. In addition, GPs indicate they us
the codes for well-known PSS-syndromes as IBS, CFS,
or FM, although IBS is coded more often than CFS and
FM. Besides, the cognitive, emotional or behavioural
components of PSS are sparsely reported in EHRs. Some
GPs indicated that they have difculties in specifying
these components. Overall, half of GPs are unsatisfed
with current registration options for PSS. Many GPs have
a need for additional tools, training or support regarding
PSS registration and classifcation. Still, while GPs provide several suggestions for improvements of the classifcation system, there is little consensus on this matter.
Looking more specifcally at the frst aim of this study,
many GPs are struggling with registration of PSS and are
hesitant to use codes beyond the somatic complaints they
objectively observe. Tis is in line with instructions of the
ICPC [13, 28] and previous research fndings, reporting
that GPs’ fear of stigmatization may lead them to avoid
codes related to social and psychological problems [29,
36, 37]. On the other hand, respondents did indicate
more frequently diagnosing the PSS-related syndrome
IBS, compared to CFS and FM, which is in line with previous research indicating that GPs are more profcient
in diagnosing IBS [11]. Tis suggests that registration
behaviour may be more depended upon the GP’s confdence in classifying PSS than upon fear of stigmatization.
Regarding the second aim of this study, our results
show that the current registration and classifcation
options for PSS are insufcient for a substantial number of GPs. Tese GPs reportedly require a specifc code
for PSS, in combination with training, tools, a widely
accepted guideline, and referral options. In contrast,
the literature shows that there are a variety of training
options [38], concise and validated screening questionnaires [26, 39, 40], and referral options [3, 13, 41] available to GPs. Besides, the Dutch GP association has an
elaborate PSS guideline [13]. In line with this guideline,
some GPs suggested coding of PSS should be done by
severity, which is also in line with studies which propose the introduction of codes that specify severity to
improve documentation of mild PSS [8, 9, 29]. Interestingly, research demonstrated that the GPs’ use of subcategories directed at classifying severity is challenged
by the GPs’ conceptual understanding of PSS [8]. It is
therefore conceivable that GPs do indeed need training,
and knowledge of the availability of training, to increase
their understanding of PSS.
Strengths and limitations
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the frst to
capture an overview of GPs’ perspectives regarding registration and classifcation of PSS through exploration
of their specifc ICPC-registration behaviour. Our data
sheds light on GPs’ reasoning regarding PSS, confrms
the lack of consensus on registration and classifcation
and ofers guidance for improvements in registration
and classifcation based on the GPs’ reported needs.
Nonetheless, some limitations should be noted. First, in
order to distribute the survey as broadly as we have, we
involved third parties (i.e. regional GP-networks) to promote distribution. Tis resulted in a limited overview of
the number of GPs reached, leading to a rough estimate
of the response rate. Second, responses may have been
biased by elective participation. Still, although adequate
reference data is limited, responses appear fairly representative for the population of GPs in the Netherlands
[35, 42]. Regarding the content of the survey, a strength
is that face valid answers were facilitated for the choice
in ICPC codes by presenting GPs with codes in a dropdown menu, similar to their EHRs’ set-up. Nonetheless,
this came with the limitation that it is unclear if the more
frequently coded ‘P75-somatization disorder’ in case of
fatigue compared to other complaints is a true fnding, or
whether it demonstrates the limitations of the ICPC coding system itself to facilitate classifcation of PSS, or if it is
related to a lack of potential alternative codes (see additional fle 2). Lastly, generalisation of the fndings should
be done with caution, since many questions were based
on hypothetical situations.
Practical implications
Te great variance in responses and methods for registration of PSS found in our research suggests that clinical
practice may be improved by better registration of PSS.
Improving classifcation and providing adequate registration options may support GPs in the overall care for
PSS. To improve registration, a clear defnition with a
specifc code for PSS should be implemented in the ICPC
system. Introduction of such a code should be combined
with (communication on) training options for GPs, which
also broadens the GPs’ knowledge on currently available diagnostic tools, guidelines and referral options.
Besides providing more accessible coding and training
options, research could support the GP further by developing a data-based screening tool for early identifcation
of patients at risk for PSS. Tis could be another way to
support the GP with their challenges in conceptualizing
PSS. Besides, this may promote timely treatment of the
cognitive, emotional and behavioural components of
PSS, which, in turn, may decrease the burden of PSS and
reduce the risk of iatrogenic harm.
Conclusion
Registration of PSS in primary care is currently ambiguous. Specifc complaints presented by patients with
PSS are primarily coded on a symptom-specifc level.
Approximately half of GPs expressed a need for more
coding options for PSS and over half of GPs reported a
need for further training, tools or other support regarding PSS. Since many of the latter already exist, improvements should be directed at new options for registration,
specifcally coding, and increasing and spreading knowledge about PSS, guidelines, available tools and referral
options.