Background
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are widely
used antihypertensive agents. One of the ARBs is olmesartan,
which has been available since 2002. In 2012,
Rubio–Tapia et al. first described olmesartan-associated
spruelike enteropathy [1]. Thus, the United States Food
and Drug Administration issued a warning for the risk
of enteropathy in 2013. Spruelike enteropathy is characterized
by severe diarrhea, weight loss, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, bloating, and fatigue. Additionally,
villous atrophy, mucosal inflammation, and subepithelial
collagen deposition are observed in small intestinal
biopsy [1]. Other gastrointestinal tract parts also manifest
various alterations. Furthermore, enteropathy reportedly
exhibits collagenous and/or lymphocytic gastritis
and colitis [1, 2]. Pathological evidence of the stomach
and colon suggests that olmesartan may affect the entire
gastrointestinal tract. There were few reports in which
spruelike enteropathy and collagenous colitis were both
observed and could be followed up.
Herein, we report a case of severe enteropathy and collagenous
colitis associated with olmesartan use.
Case presentation
A 73-year-old Japanese man with a history of olmesartan
intake (20 mg daily for 5 years) for hypertension
treatment was admitted to a local hospital
complaining of watery, nonbloody diarrhea approximately
10 times daily since 2 months. In 2 months, he
lost 10 kg of his weight. Blood tests, CT, and endoscopy
were performed, but the cause of his diarrhea
remained unknown. Hence, he was referred to our
hospital for further examination. His physical examination
results were unremarkable. However, laboratory
results (Additional file 1) indicated anemia (hemoglobin,
10.5 g/dL) and hypoalbuminemia (3.4 g/dL). We
searched DQA1 and DQB1. HLA DQ4 and DQ6 were
positive. Meanwhile, stool culture, Clostridium difficile
toxin, HLA-DQ2/DQ8, and IgA antibodies to tissue
transglutaminase and endomysial, were all negative.
Abdominal computer tomography was unremarkable.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed villous
atrophy and a mosaic pattern of the duodenal mucosa
(Fig. 1), while colonoscopy (CS) detected villous atrophy
of the terminal ileum and diffuse slight edema of
the colon (Additional file 2). The stomach, duodenum,
terminal ileum, and colon were randomly biopsied.
Pathological findings of the duodenum and ileum
showed villous atrophy, intraepithelial lymphocyte
infiltration, and collagen band, and those of the colon
showed a 14 μm collagen band (Fig. 2). Moreover, capsule
endoscopy displayed villous atrophy of the entire
small intestine. Taken together, we suspected that the
patient had olmesartan-associated spruelike enteropathy.
Hence, olmesartan, which was stopped on admission
because of hypotension, remained withdrawn, and
was switched to amlodipine.
Within 3 weeks after olmesartan discontinuation, his
clinical symptoms improved. Three months later, diarrhea
resolved, and the duodenum, terminal ileum, and
colon showed a normal appearance on EGD/CS (Fig. 3).
As shown in the biopsies of the duodenum and terminal
ileum, the villous architecture of the duodenal and
ileal mucosa almost completely recovered (Fig. 4), but in
colonic biopsies, the collagen band only slightly improved
(Additional file 3). Six months after discontinuing olmesartan,
follow-up endoscopy showed a histologically normal
colonic mucosa.
Discussion and conclusion
Olmesartan-associated spruelike enteropathy is a type
of enteropathy induced by olmesartan administration.
It is characterized by severe diarrhea and weight loss.
The duration of olmesartan exposure before the onset of
diarrhea varies from months to years [1, 3]. Diagnosis of
olmesartan-induced spruelike enteropathy requires the
following: gastrointestinal symptoms, negative IgA tissue
transglutaminase antibodies, evidence of enteropathy
with or without collagen deposition or intraepithelial
lymphocytosis, lack of clinical response to a gluten-free
diet, exclusion of other causes of enteropathy, and evidence
of clinical and histologic improvement after olmesartan
discontinuation [1]. However, the mechanisms
responsible for this enteropathy remain unknown. The
long period between the start of olmesartan therapy and
the onset of diarrhea suggests cell-mediated immunity
rather than type 1 hypersensitivity [1]. ARBs inhibit the
transforming growth factor, which is responsible for gut
immune homeostasis [1, 4]. HLA-DQ2 or DQ8 haplotypes
were present in 71% of patients with olmesartanassociated
spruelike enteropathy [3]. The prevalence of
HLA DQ2/DQ8 in these patients is higher than in the
general population, suggesting some genetic component
[1]. However, neither DQ2 nor DQ8 was present in our
patient’s case. Previous reports have shown that improvement
of symptoms begins in approximately 1 week [5,
6], and that the average time to complete improvement
of symptoms is 8 months [2]. Our patient’s symptoms
improved in approximately 3 months, with no results
contradictory to the past reports.
The endoscopic findings of this disease are generally
nonspecific. Mosaic mucosa, ulceration, and villous atrophy
in the duodenum may be shown in EGD [2]. CS or
capsule endoscopy may reveal villous atrophy and ulceration
in the jejunum and ileum [2]. In our case, the duodenal
mucosa appeared to have a mosaic pattern. Capsule
endoscopy also showed villous atrophy of the entire small
intestine.
Celiac disease is well known to cause villous atrophy
similar to this pathology, and magnification endoscopy
is useful for evaluating villous atrophy [7]. In the present
case, villous atrophy could not be observed using a
nonmagnification endoscope during the first CS but was
clearly visualized using a magnification endoscope during
EGD. Therefore, in the endoscopy of patients with diarrhea
of unknown cause, including this disease, magnification
endoscopy of the duodenum and terminal ileum
should be employed. In addition, capsule endoscopy is
useful for observing the entire small intestine in celiac
disease and this disease [8, 9]. In the present case, duodenal
biopsy results already revealed the characteristic
findings of spruelike enteropathy; hence, we observed the
small intestine by capsule endoscopy instead of balloon
endoscopy. In cases when mucosal biopsy is not required,
such as this case, capsule endoscopy is preferred because
it is less invasive and more useful than enteroscopy.
Pathological examination of spruelike enteropathy
shows total or partial intestinal villous atrophy, increased
intraepithelial lymphocytes, and a thick band of subepithelial
collagen deposition [1], which were all present in
our patient. When olmesartan was discontinued, clinical
and pathological abnormalities improved. It is important
to distinguish olmesartan-associated spruelike enteropathy
from celiac disease. Celiac disease is extremely rare in
Japan [10]. In this case, IgA tissue transglutaminase antibodies
and HLA DQ2/8 were negative, and celiac disease
was excluded. In addition, collagenous sprue, which is a
typical non-celiac villous atrophy disease, has been rarely
reported in Japan [11]. Other diseases that may cause villous
atrophy include autoimmune enteropathy, amyloidosis,
eosinophilic enteritis, human immunodeficiency
virus, tropical sprue, giardiasis, and common variable
immune deficiency [12]. Through medical history, blood
tests, histopathological examination, and stool culture,
we ruled out these diseases.
To date, several cases of olmesartan-related spruelike
enteropathy combined with collagenous colitis have
been reported. There are some Japanese cases of olmesartan-
related spruelike enteropathy [13, 14], but there
are almost no cases combined with collagenous colitis.
Globally, the course of collagenous colitis after improvement
of symptoms has not yet been fully reported.
Rubio–Tapia et al. reported that 13 patients with olmesartan-
associated spruelike enteropathy underwent random
colon biopsy, and 3 of them had collagenous colitis
[1]. However, no follow-up colon biopsy was performed
in all three cases. Bashari DR et al. also reported a case
of olmesartan-associated spruelike enteropathy complicated
with collagenous colitis, but they did not report a
follow-up CS [15]. Ebrahim VS et al. reported that collagenous
colitis was observed in 2 of 3 cases, and in 1
case, a reexamination was performed 4 months after the
withdrawal of olmesartan, and it is mentioned that histopathological
improvement was observed [16]. Recently,
Costetti M et al. reported a histopathological follow-up
of the stomach and duodenum [17]. However, they did
not evaluate the histopathological findings at colonic
level. In our case, clinical improvement of collagenous
colitis occurred within a month after olmesartan was discontinued,
but the pathological improvement of the small
intestine mucosa occurred within 3 months, and that of
the colonic mucosa occurred after six months. This outcome
supported a previous report that showed that histologic
recovery was not observed for several months
but the patient’s symptoms clinically were relieved by
olmesartan discontinuation [15]. Some patients with
collagenous colitis showed a typical histology but had
no symptoms [
18]. Possibly, villous atrophy of the small
intestine affected diarrhea in this case more strongly than
collagenous colitis. However, this is a single case report.
Therefore, further studies and discussion are needed in
this regard.
Hence, this report presents a rare case in which spruelike
enteropathy and collagenous colitis were both
observed and could be followed up. Villous atrophy of
the small intestine may have a greater effect on diarrhea
caused by olmesartan even in cases with collagenous
colitis.
In conclusion, both the large and small intestines
should be assessed for villous atrophy and other
abnormalities.