Background
Monitoring tissue perfusion is important for the management
of critically ill patients in intensive care units
(ICUs), since insufficient oxygen delivery to peripheral
tissues is strongly associated with organ dysfunction in
many conditions such as sepsis and postsurgical organ
failure [1–3]. In contrast to hemodynamic parameters
that can be measured by pulmonary artery catheters and
ultrasound techniques, only few measurements that can
evaluate tissue perfusion are clinically available. Sublingual
videomicroscopy can measure tissue perfusion in a
real-time manner; however, these devices are expensive
and not easily applied to clinical use [4, 5].
Capillary refill time (CRT) is a simple, fast, and noninvasive
method for evaluating tissue perfusion. This
method has been used in the field of disaster medicine
as a triage tool [6, 7]. A recent clinical trial demonstrated
that inclusion of CRT measurement in septic
shock management at ICUs can reduce mortality risk
[8]. Although CRT may be affected by inter-examiner
differences [9, 10], a recently developed device can
measure CRT quantitatively by using a pulse oximeter
[11]. Our recent validation studies discovered a significant
correlation between venous blood lactate levels and
quantitative CRT (Q-CRT), as measured via the pulse
oximeter-based device, in a cohort of ICU patients and
emergency department (ED) patients [11, 12]. Q-CRT in
23 ICU patients was demonstrated to be statistically correlated
with lactate levels (Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient, 0.681; p < 0.001) [11]. In addition to Q-CRT,
we developed the delta Ab (ΔAb) measure, which is
based on the amount of light absorbed into finger tissue
and blood flow by subtracting the light quantity input
value from the output value. ΔAb is assumed to reflect
overall peripheral oxygen delivery and integrates blood
flow, oxygenation, and hemoglobin concentration [12].
Liver transplantation is widely performed for endstage
liver failure. Advances in surgical procedures and
immunosuppressive therapy significantly improved the
outcomes of liver transplantation [13–15]. Postsurgical
management of liver transplantation is of great importance
in critical care medicine, because large amounts of
fluid administration is frequently necessary to maintain
intravascular volume and adequate portal vein blood
flow to the grafted liver. Although the blood lactate level
is utilized to evaluate oxygen delivery to peripheral tissues
in managing septic shock, alterations in lactate
levels are influenced by factors other than peripheral hypoperfusion,
including liver dysfunction [16, 17]. Several
studies reported on the benefit of lactate reduction as a
clinical parameter for monitoring early graft function
following liver transplantation [18–20]. So, far, no study
has assessed the clinical application of Q-CRT in liver
transplantation, although we previously evaluated QCRT
in septic patients. This prospective observational
study was performed in order to examine whether QCRT
and ΔAb values measured following liver transplantation
are associated with postoperative outcomes.
Methods
Patient population and study design
In this single-center prospective cohort study, we enrolled
patients who received liver transplantation and
who were admitted to the ICU of the University of
Tokyo Hospital between June 2018 and July 2019.
Orthotopic liver transplantation followed the standardized
procedure in all cases with the living donor partial
liver or the deceased donor whole liver. Intraoperative
porto-caval shunt was never created in this series. All
18 years old or older patients were eligible, and patients
who did not agree to participate and/or who demonstrated
missing data were excluded. The study protocol
adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved
by the institutional review board of the University of
Tokyo. Informed consent was obtained from each
participant.
Regarding postoperative management, chest and abdominal
radiographs, and abdominal and cardiac ultrasonography
examinations were performed at least daily
until POD14. Treatment with diuretics such as furosemide,
spironolactone, and human atrial natriuretic peptide,
albumin preparations, and vasopressors was administered
at the physician’s clinical discretion.
Q-CRT and ΔAb measurements
Measurements of Q-CRT and ΔAb were performed
based on the principle of pulse oximetry. The measurement
principle and device wearing method are described
in detail, in our previous report [12]. Briefly, transmitted
light quantity was measured by a pulse oximeter (OLV-
3100, Nihon Kohden Corporation, Tokyo, Japan)
equipped with an SpO2 sensor. This device has not been
approved for clinical use yet. Mechanical pressure with
500 mmHg lasting for 5 s was applied to the patient’s
nail bed of the index or middle finger. The values of QCRT
and ΔAb were determined as the average of five
measurements. The ICU room temperature was kept between
24 °C and 26 °C, and the room lighting was on
during the measurement.
Quantitative CRT was defined as the time in seconds
from the release of the pressure to the time when the
blood flow reached 90% of the original flow, which was
measured for 5 s at the beginning of the test before applying
pressure. Transmitted light quantity measured by
a pulse oximeter is equivalent to the amount of light
absorbed into finger tissue and blood flow and equivalent
to the amount of light absorbed into finger tissue
only under compression. The quantity of light dimmed
by blood only defines the ΔAb (delta Ab), which is the
difference between the quantity of light dimmed under
infrared light and that dimmed under red light. In short,
ΔAb can be determined by oxidized hemoglobin levels
(oxygen saturation), hemoglobin concentration, and tissue
thickness with blood flow (peripheral circulation
blood volume) [12].
Data collection
The following patient characteristics and clinical data
were collected from the medical records: age, sex, body
temperature, height, weight (before transplantation),
amount of ascites, and underlying liver disease. Preoperative
model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) and
Child–Pugh scores were calculated. Donor information
such as age, sex, weight, and graft size were collected.
The following clinical variables were evaluated as intraoperative
factors: operative time, bleeding volume, intraoperative
fluid balance, anhepatic time, and ischemic
time of graft.
At ICU admission after liver transplantation surgery,
Q-CRT and ΔAb measurements were performed. Other
clinical parameters, including vital signs, usage of vasoactive
agents, and measurements of central venous pressure
(CVP), were also obtained. Additionally, laboratory
data recorded at ICU admission included blood lactate,
hemoglobin (Hb), total bilirubin, and prothrombin time
international normalized ratio (PT-INR). We performed
hepatic blood flow assessment twice daily, determining
the amount of fluid volume based on the results of echocardiography
and CVP monitoring. Q-CRT, ΔAb, and
blood lactate were also measured at postoperative day 1
(POD1).
Daily ascites was defined as the total amount of ascites
through the abdominal tube and exudate. Abdominal
drain tubes were routinely inserted near the surface of
the donor graft, behind the graft hilum, and into the rectovesicular
(Douglas) pouch. In cases with simultaneous
splenectomy, an additional drain tube was placed into
the left sub-phrenic cavity. In patients with pleural effusion,
drainage was performed by the placement of thoracic
catheter. The total amount of discharge was
recorded, including pleural effusion.
Sample size estimation
As a small pilot study, we compared the Q-CRT at ICU
admission between five liver transplant patients with
massive ascites (ascites volume > 1000 ml/day on POD
14) and five liver transplant patients with non-massive
ascites. The estimated difference of the mean and standard
deviation were 0.55 and 0.41, respectively, using logtransformed
data. On this basis, the sample size was calculated
as being 10 patients with massive ascites and 10
patients with non-massive ascites, assuming a type I
error rate of 0.05, a power of 0.8, an anticipated effect
size d = difference of means/ standard deviation = 1.34.
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were presented as medians with
interquartile ranges, and categorical variables were presented
as percentages. Categorical data were compared
by the chi-square or Fisher’s exact test, while continuous
data were compared by Student’s t test or Wilcoxon’s
rank-sum test. Correlations between variables were analyzed
using Spearman’s rank correlation. All continuous
parameters with a skewed distribution were entered into
these models as log-transformed variables using the natural
logarithm to the base e. A multivariable logistic regression
model was used to evaluate the independent
contribution of Q-CRT or ΔAb to the outcomes by
adjusting predefined preoperative (MELD score) and operative
(blood loss during surgery) factors. The cut-off
point was determined using receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis with Youden-index. All statistical
analyses and calculations were performed using the
JMP® Pro software (version 14.2.0; SAS Institute, Cary,
NC). A two-tailed probability (p) value < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant for all tests.
Results
Patient characteristics
We enrolled a total of 33 patients with liver transplantations.
Table 1 shows characteristics and clinical parameters
at ICU admission after surgery. Hyperlactemia and
hyperbilirubinemia were observed. Additional file 1 summarized
the preoperative baseline characteristics, graft
conditions, surgery-related factors of the study population,
and other clinical parameters at ICU admission
after surgery.
Q-CRT and ΔAb at ICU admission
Figure 1a and b show the values of Q-CRT and ΔAb at
ICU admission, respectively. Significant correlations
were observed for Q-CRT and ΔAb with regard to mean
arterial pressure (MAP) (Fig. 1c), portal vein (PV) velocity
(Fig. 1d), while no significant correlation of Q-CRT
or ΔAb with blood lactate, heart rate (HR), CVP,
hemoglobin, and hepatic artery (HA) velocity was observed
(Additional file 2).
Postoperative data
Four patients developed early allograft dysfunction
(EAD) [21], and one patient had graft failure 6 months
following transplantation. The Q-CRT and ΔAb values
showed no difference between the EAD and the non-
EAD patients (data not shown). One year later, all patients
were still alive.
The median lengths of ICU and hospital stay were 13
days (IQR 9–18) and 47 days (IQR 30–71), respectively.
With regard to the length of ICU stay and post-surgery
hospitalization, significant correlations were observed for
both Q-CRT and ΔAb (Fig. 2a-b). The median total ascitic
discharge at 7 and 14 days was 20.6 L (IQR 10.3–
36.9) and 45.4 L (IQR 21.9–72.7), respectively. Both QCRT
and ΔAb showed significant correlations with the
total amount of ascites discharge 7 and 14 days after the
surgery (Fig. 2c-d). Portal vein, not hepatic artery and
vein, blood flow measured just after the surgery demonstrated
significant correlation with ascites discharge 7
and 14 days after surgery (Additional file 3).
Based on the preoperative ascites volume, the patients
were divided into three groups (a no ascites group, a
non-massive ascites group: 1–999 ml, and a massive ascites
group: > 1000 ml). Patients who had preoperative
massive ascites displayed the largest amount of postoperative
ascites (Additional file 4). The enrolled patients
were divided into two groups using a cutoff value of the
total amount of ascitic discharge of 1000 mL/day at
POD14, based on the diagnostic criteria for small-forsize
syndrome and previous reports [22–24] (Table 2
and Additional file 5). The group exhibiting more ascitic
discharge showed significantly longer Q-CRT and lower
ΔAb values at ICU admission. The Q-CRT and ΔAb cutoff
values, the area under the curve (AUC), and the 95%
confidence interval (CI) for each outcome in patients
with massive ascites are shown (Additional file 6). Multiple
regression analysis demonstrated that Q-CRT and
ΔAb at ICU admission were significantly associated with
the length of ICU stay, length of post-surgery
hospitalization, and total amount of ascitic discharge for
14 days after surgery, even after adjusting confounding
factors of preoperative MELD score and intraoperative
blood loss (Table 3).
Serial measurements of Q-CRT and ΔAb
Quantitative CRT and ΔAb were measured at POD1.
Due to missing data, three patients were excluded from
the analysis. No significant correlations for Q-CRT at
POD1 were observed between these measurements and
length of ICU stay, post-surgery hospitalization, or total
amount of ascites for 14 days after surgery. ΔAb at
POD1 did not significantly correlate with length of ICU
stay or post-surgery hospitalization but with the total
amount of ascitic discharge for 14 days after surgery
(Fig. 3). The absolute changes in Q-CRT from ICU admission
to POD1 failed to show any significant association
with these outcomes. The absolute changes in ΔAb
from ICU admission to POD1 did not show any significant
correlation with length of ICU stay or number of
days of hospitalization after surgery but with the total
amount of ascitic discharge for 14 days after surgery
(Additional file 7). We also evaluated a possible correlation
between Q-CRT and ΔAb and the change of
MELD score before and after the transplantation surgery.
No significant correlation was found in perioperative
changes of the MELD score with Q-CRT and ΔAb
(data not shown). Maximum lactate values during surgery,
ICU admission, 12 h after admission, and POD1
are shown in Fig. 4a. No significant correlation between
the absolute changes in Q-CRT and ΔAb from ICU admission
to POD1 with lactate clearance was observed
(Fig. 4b-c). No significant correlation was observed between
the lactate clearance and 14 days total discharge,
length of ICU stay, and length of hospitalization after
surgery (data not shown). The enrolled patients were divided
into two groups by the change in Q-CRT and ΔAb
from ICU admission to POD1, but no significant difference
in the outcomes between the two groups was observed
(Table 4).
Discussion
This study evaluated tissue perfusion in patients with
postoperative liver transplantations by a quantitative
CRT method using a pulse oximeter. Significant associations
between Q-CRT and length of ICU and hospital
stays and large postoperative ascitic discharge were observed.
The newly developed parameter of ΔAb, which is
expected to reflect the total oxygen delivery to the peripheral
tissues, was also significantly associated with
these outcomes. These observations suggest that the
newly developed Q-CRT method might be helpful to
detect tissue perfusion abnormalities influencing organ
function of the grafted liver in postoperative period. This
suggestion may be supported by the observation that QCRT
and ΔAb were significantly correlated with portal
and hepatic vein blood flow rate measured using ultrasound.
Q-CRT technique is expected to be accomplished
more easily than blood flow measurement using ultrasound.
It should be addressed that a single measurement
of peripheral tissue perfusion was associated with the
outcomes; however, many related mechanisms are presumed
to be involved in these significant associations.
This study suggested that a simple evaluation method of
Q-CRT may be useful for clinical management in liver
transplantation patients, and further evaluation is absolutely
necessary.
CRT is a simple and non-invasive test used to assess
peripheral perfusion at the bedside. Although CRT can
be used without any equipment, intra-examiner differences
and poor reproducibility, even by the same observers,
were reported [9, 10, 25]. CRT can be affected
by the surrounding environment such as temperature
and lightning [10, 26], unifying measurement condition
is an important point. To overcome this problem, several
investigations were conducted. Kawaguchi and
colleagues developed a device that can be adjusted for
pressing strength and time using an electric actuator
and strength and color sensors [27, 28]. Shinozaki and
colleagues used fingernail video recording and image
analysis software for calculating CRT [29]. We developed
a new device that can measure CRT quantitatively by
using the pulse oximeter. This new device automatically
compresses the finger with a constant pressure of 500
mmHg [11] and was applied to patients with suspected
sepsis at ED [30]. Another study also evaluated quantitative
CRT using a pulse oximeter in ED patients [31].
Our device demonstrates the advantage of measuring
not only Q-CRT but ΔAb, an index of integrated peripheral
oxygen delivery status, because pulse oximetry
enables the measurement of transmitted light quantities
under red and infrared light [12]. In this study, both QCRT
and ΔAb showed significant associations with post
liver transplantation outcomes. Further investigation is
necessary to identify which of these parameters would
serve the patients better in other specific situations such
as septic shock, post-cardiac surgery, and severe trauma.
Liver transplantation is expected to reduce portal
hypertension and associated ascites transudation. However,
massive ascites is one of the most frequent
complications and poor prognostic factors in liver transplantation
[32–34]. Several clinical risk factors for considerable
amounts of postoperative ascites include
preoperative MELD score, large blood loss volume, and
small-sized grafts [35–37]. Our previous study reported
that 48% of patients receiving living donor liver transplants
developed massive postoperative ascites (> 1000
mL/day at POD14), and it also reported that preoperative
ascites, intraoperative blood loss, and duration of
anhepatic phase were associated with considerable
amounts of postoperative ascites [22]. This study also disclosed
that patients with a particularly high amount of
preoperative ascites tended to have more postoperative ascites.
The amount of ascites noted in this study was similar
to our previous report [22] and other studies [33, 38].
Values and rates reflecting postoperative total bilirubin,
acute rejection, and length of hospital stay were significantly
higher in patients with massive ascites, although no
significant impact of massive ascites on the 5-year survival
rate was observed [22]. In this study, all the patients survived
for the observation period of 1 year. Large amounts
of diuretics including furosemide, spironolactone, and human
atrial natriuretic peptide and albumin administration
together with intensive evaluation of intravascular volume
are required to control massive ascites.
In patients with a large amount of ascites, close
monitoring of the in–out balance and optimal adjustment
of fluid administration, which can be
achieved in the ICU, is necessary. This may explain
the correlation between the length of ICU stay and
the amount of ascites present. Although management
regarding ICU stay may differ in each country, several
Japanese studies reported similar lengths of ICU
and hospital stays to this study [39, 40]. It should be
noted that other treatments, such as colloid and
pressor administration, nutritional support, and antimicrobial
agents against infection, should be conducted
properly, in addition to a large of fluid
resuscitation for perioperative management in liver
transplantation.
This study demonstrated that Q-CRT and ΔAb measured
immediately after transplantation surgery could
identify the patients who would potentially require
highly intensive care due to the development of considerable
postoperative ascites. Furthermore, it was shown
that portal blood flow was associated with Q-CRT and
ΔAb, and that the closer to normal range was, the less
postoperative ascites. Several possible mechanisms may
explain this finding. First, Q-CRT and ΔAb can detect a
decrease in peripheral perfusion resulting from preoperative
liver failure. It is known that a reduction in
systemic vascular resistance due to primary arterial vasodilatation
in the splanchnic circulation is observed in patients
with liver cirrhosis [41, 42]. Activated vasodilator
factors such as nitric oxide [43] and endogenous cannabinoids
[44] before surgery might exhibit some impact
even immediately after transplantation surgery on peripheral
tissue perfusion. Second, Q-CRT and ΔAb may
indicate the progress of normalization of portal blood
flow, and detect the reduced perfusion caused by endotoxin.
It is recognized that portal vein blood flow is normalized
as the function of the graft liver is restored [45].
A high portal pressure is strongly associated with poor
liver transplantation outcomes [46, 47]. A high portal
venous pressure reportedly increases gut-related
bacteremia in living donor patients with liver transplantations
[48] and increases blood endotoxin levels [49,
50]. Several mechanisms such as a vulnerable intestinal
barrier [51], changes in the intestinal microbiota [52],
and decreased endotoxin clearance in the liver [53] were
reported. Hepatic ischemia reperfusion injury negatively
affects allograft function following liver transplantation.
Although many different involved cell types (sinusoidal
endothelial cells, hepatocytes, Kupffer cells, neutrophils,
and platelets) and mechanisms (toll-like receptor signaling,
micro-RNA expression, production of reactive oxygen
species, autophagy, and activation of hypoxiainducible
factors) were reported so far [54], it is uncertain
whether Q-CRT can detect hepatic ischemia reperfusion
injury. It should be noted that many pathological
mechanisms, other than ischemia reperfusion injury, are
deemed to contribute to poor outcomes for liver
transplantation.
Elevated blood lactate levels traditionally were considered
a signal of tissue hypoxia. The third international
consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-
3) defines septic shock as a clinical construct of sepsis
with persisting hypotension requiring vasopressors to
maintain a MAP ≥65 mmHg and exhibiting a serum lactate
level > 2 mmol/L despite adequate volume resuscitation
[55]. Our earlier study found that ΔAb was
significantly associated with high lactate levels [12], and
we observed a significant correlation between Q-CRT
and ΔAb and mean artery pressure in this study,
although we did not find any correlation between QCRT
and ΔAb with the blood lactate level. The liver
plays a major role in systemic lactate clearance, and
hyperlactatemia is related to impaired hepatic clearance
in advanced cirrhosis [56]. The patients in this study experienced
an anhepatic period of approximately 2 h duration.
It assumed that blood lactate and Q-CRT and
ΔAb were reflecting different conditions of the patients
immediately following liver transplantation surgery; elevated
blood lactate was largely influenced by insufficient
liver function, and Q-CRT and ΔAb were reflective of
peripheral perfusion. The lactate value decreased following
perfusion, supporting the lactate clearance function
in the liver.
In contrast to Q-CRT and ΔAb values measured immediately
after surgery, those measured at POD1 were
not significantly associated with the outcomes. Changes
from immediately post- surgery to POD1 demonstrated
no significant association; however, serial measurements
would have provided more information than just single
measurements. Several clinical interventions, such as
fluid administration, optimizing sedation depth, and
mechanical ventilation settings with spontaneous breathing,
may affect Q-CRT and ΔAb measurements. It is
known that a reliable analysis of respiratory changes in
arterial pressure is possible in patients who are sedated
and mechanically ventilated with conventional tidal volumes
[57, 58]. Intraoperative measurements may provide
a more accurate prediction of postoperative outcomes,
as hemodynamics, sedative status, and ventilation are
more homogenously managed during general anesthesia.
Further assessment during surgery is necessary in order
to demonstrate this conjecture.
Several limitations that might affect the results of this
study should be acknowledged. First, this study was performed
at a single ICU, and the number of patients was
relatively small. Second, no evaluation study of Q-CRT
and ΔAb using the widely accepted gold standard of
hemodynamic assessment such as cardiac output, oxygen
delivery (DO2) and oxygen consumption (VO2) has
been conducted to date. Third, Q-CRT and ΔAb measurements
were recorded only at ICU admission and
POD1. As discussed above, adding intraoperative and
preoperative measurements may have provided more
useful information. Presumably, the hypoperfusion evaluated
by Q-CRT and ΔAb measurement reflects hypoperfusion
of the grafted liver, and hypoperfusion to the
liver might have induced massive ascites. Further investigation
is necessary to clarify the pathophysiological
mechanism causing massive ascites after liver transplantation.
Finally, an earlier study reported CRT longer than
3 s was not predictive of mortality in patients complicated
with malarial anemia [59], although no patients
manifested severe anemia in our- study.
Conclusion
This prospective observational study found that Q-CRT
with a pulse oximeter was significantly associated with
postoperative outcomes in patients receiving liver transplantations.
Q-CRT may be relevant as a new noninvasive
monitoring tool for patients treated in ICUs
upon validation by several different ICU patient cohorts
such as post-cardiac surgery, heart failure, and patients
with multiple organ failures.