Background
The past few decades have shown an increasing awareness
of the physiological mechanisms and effects of
temperature on perioperative morbidity and mortality
[1]. Inadvertent perioperative hypothermia (IPH)
has been defined as a core temperature of < 36 °C in the
perioperative period [2].
Anesthesia leads to impairments in central and
peripheral thermoregulatory responses. This is
exacerbated by cool ambient operating room temperatures
and exposed body cavities, resulting in
inadvertent perioperative hypothermia in unwarmed
surgical patients [3]. Complications include coagulopathy,
increased surgical site infection, delayed drug
metabolism, prolonged recovery, and shivering [4–6].
Today, temperature monitoring is the standard of care
across perioperative monitoring guidelines around the
world [7].
In tandem with increasing recognition, an array of
options have become available for perioperative patient
temperature monitoring and warming. A single layer of
passive insulation only compensates for 30% of cutaneous
heat losses that occur during general anesthesia, and
additional layers of insulation have diminishing effectiveness
[3]. Adequate temperature management requires
methods of active warming, most commonly forced air
warming blankets. Multiple randomized trials [8, 9] and
systematic reviews [10–12] have shown the effectiveness
of these options in maintaining normothermia, and hospitals
have incorporated them into perioperative protocols
[1].
Preoperatively, guidelines recommend that the patient’s
core temperature be measured before the start of anesthesia,
and that elective surgery be postponed until the
patient is normothermic [2, 13]. It is also increasingly
recognized that prewarming i.e. warming of peripheral
tissues before induction of anesthesia [14], is an effective
technique to reduce redistributive heat loss intraoperatively,
and should optimally be performed for 30 min
preoperatively [15–17]. Intraoperatively, most guidelines
advise for temperature monitoring when changes in temperature
are intended, anticipated or suspected. It is typically
recommended that temperature is monitored for
patients undergoing general anesthesia for more than
30 min. Guidelines also advocate routine active warming
for surgical patients, especially those at higher risk
[2, 13]. Postoperatively, temperature monitoring is considered
standard of care, and active warming is indicated
when patients are hypothermic [2, 7, 18].
Contrary to the growing evidence base surrounding
perioperative temperature management, a wave of studies
across Europe [19], Australia [20], and China [21] has
consistently shown poor compliance to perioperative
temperature management guidelines. This study aims to
evaluate the prevalent practices and attitudes to perioperative
temperature management in the Asia–Pacific
region, as well as determine the individual and institutional
factors that lead to noncompliance.
Methods
We conducted a cross-sectional survey on anesthesiologists
and anesthesia trainees in six countries in the
Asia–Pacific, namely Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines,
Thailand, India and South Korea. The survey was conceived
in June 2017, and the study protocol was approved
by the National Healthcare Group Institutional Review
Board (NHG DSRB 2017/00973) prior to study commencement.
Written informed consent was waived, and
return of anonymous completed questionnaires implied
consent to participate. It was then progressively rolled
out over an approximately one-and-a-half-year period in
the six study countries. All methods were performed in
accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
Survey administration
A 40-question anonymous online questionnaire was
developed and distributed via a shareable weblink. This
weblink was disseminated to local anesthesiology societies,
conferences and hospitals in the surveyed countries.
All physicians practising or undergoing training in anesthesiology
were invited to participate in the survey. The
questionnaires were prefaced by a cover letter describing
the survey, and there was no direct contact between
study authors and survey participants.
A self-reported questionnaire format was chosen to
maximise the outreach of the survey to cover anaesthesia
practices from a wide range of settings. This was
especially important as at least half of the countries surveyed
had a disproportionately large proportion of small
hospitals [22], which may be challenging to obtain direct
audit data from. The choice of the sharable weblink was
to ensure all anaesthesiologists could participate in the
survey, as long as they had a valid internet connection
and an email address. The authors also felt that the anonymous
survey format would encourage more truthful
responses as compared to a direct audit, and would hence
be more representative of current practices.
To encourage participation and completion of the survey,
five vehicle air purifiers were offered as lucky draw
prizes for each country. Registration for the lucky draw
was optional and conducted with a different form which
was linked at the end of the study questionnaire. Participant
information from this lucky draw was entirely separate
from the study questionnaire, could not be linked
back to survey responses in any way, and was not used in
the study.
Questionnaire development
Creation and hosting of the online questionnaire were
performed with the web-based survey tool Survey-
Monkey [23]. Predominantly closed-ended questions
were used, which were a combination of dichotomous,
checkbox, multiple select and Likert-scale questions,
although options for open-ended responses were provided.
Phrases such as “majority of patients” were used
when it was recognised that the variable of interest may
not be clinically appropriate in all circumstances and
patients. Attempts were made to use forced-answer questions
where possible, within the limitations of the survey
tool, to improve data integrity.
The questionnaire was designed to examine current
practices and perceptions, as well as the limitations that
may exist that prevent the use and/or adoption of best
practices, best monitoring and best interventions for
perioperative temperature management. Questions were
based on currently published literature as well as the
authors’ own experiences, and was jointly constructed
and reviewed by authors across the surveyed six Asia–
Pacific countries. The primary outcome was to determine
the proportions of participants who monitor temperature
perioperatively, and actively warm their patients in the
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative phases.
The secondary outcome was to determine the factors that
affect compliance to perioperative temperature.
First, the participants’ current practices in patient
warming and temperature measurement across the preoperative,
intraoperative and postoperative periods were
determined. Next, participants were queried regarding
the influencing factors and their personal opinions
with regards to perioperative temperature management.
Finally, participants were asked regarding the availability
of patient warming options and temperature measuring
equipment in their hospital, as well as any hospital-specific
protocols or training courses. To examine the variations
across individual practices or countries, additional
questions were added to allow for cross-cultural comparison
in the exploratory analysis.
Statistical analysis
Data analysis was conducted using SPSS 23.0 for Windows
(IBM, Armonk NY, USA). Descriptive statistics
were performed for survey responses and participant
demographics. Univariate analyses were performed to
identify correlations between demographics and primary
variables, and conducted with logistic regression for categorical
and ordinal variables, linear regression for continuous
variables, and Kruskal–Wallis test for ranked
ordinal data.
Results
A total of 1249 unique survey responses were obtained
and exported from the survey software over a one-anda-
half-year period between Oct 2017 to Feb 2019, representing
a response rate of 14.9%. Of these responses,
1154 responses (92.4%) were valid. A proportion of
questionnaires were largely empty or more than 50%
incomplete (7.6%), likely from premature closure of
the webpage, and were excluded from the study via
case deletion to ensure data integrity. Most respondents
practised in India (32.7%), followed by the Philippines
(29.6%), Singapore (15.2%) and Malaysia (11.8%).
The majority of respondents were specialists (71.6%),
and practised in tertiary care hospitals (52.0%). These
hospitals range widely in terms of number of beds,
number of operating theaters, and number of patients
anaesthetized annually. 593 (51.4%) respondents had
temperature measuring equipment always available at
the operating complex reception or induction room,
and 783 (67.9%) respondents had temperature measuring
equipment always available at anesthesia recovery
area. Similarly, only 521 (45.1%) respondents had
active warming devices always available at the operating
complex reception or induction room, and 850
(73.7%) respondents had active warming devices always
available at the anesthesia recovery area. 624 (59.3%)
of respondents were “Often” to “Always” financially
restricted in their usage of temperature management
equipment. Only 210 (20.0%) respondents’ practice
locations conducted training courses on the subject
of perioperative temperature management, and 228
(21.7%) had a hospital standard operating procedure
(SOP) for perioperative temperature management.
Demographic data of the respondents and their practice
settings are further elaborated in Table 1.
Preoperatively, 531 (46.0%) respondents measure the
temperature of the majority of their patients, and 279
(24.2%) respondents perform prewarming for the majority
of their patients, and 203 (17.6%) respondents perform
prewarming for patients undergoing neuraxial
anesthesia. During the intraoperative phase, 767 (67.5%)
of respondents measure temperature “Often” to “Always”
during general anesthesia, compared to 291 (25.6%) during
neuraxial anesthesia. 508 (44.0%) respondents perform
intraoperative active warming in the majority of
their patients. Postoperatively, 953 (82.6%) of respondents
measure temperature in the majority of patients,
while 486 (42.1%) respondents perform postoperative
active warming for the majority of patients (Table 2). The
respondents’ compliance to key principles of perioperative
temperature management guidelines are presented in
Fig. 1.
On univariate analysis, the availability of active warming
devices in the operating room (p < 0.001, OR 10.040),
absence of financial restriction (p < 0.001, OR 2.817),
presence of hospital training courses (p = 0.011, OR
1.428), and presence of a hospital SOP (p < 0.001, OR
1.926) were significantly associated with compliance to
intraoperative active warming (Table 3).
When respondents were asked about their perspectives
on compliance, a commonly cited barrier to effective
perioperative temperature management was the lack
of equipment for perioperative temperature monitoring
(34.3%), prewarming (34.2%), intraoperative warming
(31.6%) and postoperative warming (33.5%). 729 (63.2%)
respondents were keen for more active warming devices,
and 577 (50.0%) respondents were keen for more temperature
measurement devices. Another area which
respondents were keen for was more education for staff
(73.2%), as well as an implementation of an official hospital
standard operating procedure (SOP) (65.2%) (Table 4).
Three variables, namely the number of beds, the
number of ORs, and the number of patients anesthetized
annually, were used to estimate hospital size. As
expected, all three variables were highly correlated, and
number of ORs was chosen to as the main variable indicative
of hospital size as showed the highest correlation to
the other study variables.
In the exploratory analysis, it was found that countries
differed significantly in terms of the number of operating
theaters at the respondent’s practice location (p < 0.001).
Additionally, an increasing number of operating theaters
was significantly associated with the availability of
active warming devices (p < 0.001) and temperature
measurement devices (p < 0.001) in the operating room,
the absence of financial restriction (p < 0.001), the presence
of hospital training courses (p < 0.001), and presence
of a hospital SOP (p = 0.001). As the number of
operating theaters in their practising location increased,
the number of respondents who measure temperature
preoperatively (p = 0.023), perform prewarming
(p < 0.001), measure temperature during general anesthesia
(p < 0.001), perform intraoperative active warming
(p < 0.001), and perform postoperative active warming
(p < 0.001) were found to significantly increase (Table 5).
Exploratory analyses did not reveal correlations between
primary variables and training/professional designation
or hospital type.
Discussion
This is the first multinational survey of perioperative
temperature management in Asia, and is particularly
unique in its inclusion of a large proportion of developing
countries. Importantly, a quarter of respondents
were from small hospitals with less than 250 beds. A
number of international guidelines have been published
to reduce inadvertent perioperative hypothermia,
largely by national societies based in developed
countries [2, 7, 13, 24–29]. None of the studied countries
have national guidelines to reduce perioperative
hypothermia.
Nevertheless, compliance rates to international perioperative
temperature management guidelines across countries
and institutions are generally poor [30, 31]. This
survey similarly found a poor compliance rate to perioperative
temperature management guidelines among
respondents. Less than half of respondents (44.0%)
perform intraoperative active warming for the majority
of their patients. Additionally, less than a quarter
of respondents (24.2%) prewarm the majority of their
patients. Even when active warming or temperature
monitoring is carried out, most respondents do not follow
best practices laid out by international guidelines.
The greatest barrier to compliance appears to be the
availability of equipment for perioperative temperature
management in all three perioperative phases. A substantial
proportion of survey respondents do not have ready
access to temperature measuring equipment and active
warming devices at critical locations, namely the operating
complex reception / induction room, the operating
theater, and the anesthesia recovery area. Having active
warming equipment readily available in the operating
room was associated with ten times the odds of performing
intraoperative active warming.
Often, the lack of resources is due to financial constraints,
which many respondents face. Respondents with
financial constraints were about a third as likely to perform
intraoperative warming. The association between
lack of equipment and noncompliance has also been
noted in another national study on perioperative temperature
management [32]. It must be emphasized that
compliance to guidelines leads to a reduction in perioperative
hypothermia and associated adverse events, which
can result in net cost savings from fewer complications
and a shorter hospital stay [8, 9]. This has been examined
in cost analysis reports in the UK [33] and Australia [34].
In the face of significant resource constraints, it can be
exceedingly difficult for full compliance to best practices.
These guidelines need to be contextualized to the local
hospital setting and available resources, such as through
hospital training courses or SOPs, to be truly effective.
As seen from their survey responses, most respondents
already believe in the key tenets of perioperative temperature
management guidelines, but are still keen for more
training and hospital SOPs on perioperative temperature
management. Additionally, respondents in hospitals with
training courses or SOPs were 42 and 92% more likely to
be compliant to intraoperative active warming respectively.
Systematic changes to hospital SOPs have been
shown to improve compliance to guidelines and translate
into improved clinical outcomes [35–38]. Ideally, various
stakeholders in hospital management as well as local
experts need to be involved for the conceptualization of
the most optimal local strategy, and this can be disseminated
into individual hospital training courses or SOPs.
For instance, more than a third of respondents have
a cold average operating room temperature of less than
21.0 °C. Raising ambient room temperatures in the
induction room and operating theaters can alleviate cutaneous
heat losses [39–42]. While this is no replacement
for active warming devices, in situations when active
warming devices need to be rationed, this can reduce the
risk of inadvertent intraoperative hypothermia.
As others have found before [43], it appears that the
smaller hospitals face more constraints implementing
best practices. Additionally, smaller hospitals also have
greater difficulties in terms of resource constraints, and
have fewer hospital training courses and hospital SOPs.
Having these institutional support mechanisms may be
important to improving temperature measurement and
patient warming rates in these practice settings. Unfortunately,
smaller hospitals also often account for a disproportionately
large proportion of patients treated, and this
especially true in at least 3 of the 6 countries surveyed
[22]. Furthermore, the countries surveyed also tended
to have significantly different hospital sizes, which may
account for cross-cultural differences in compliance. As
these hospitals have the greatest potential for improvement,
they should not be neglected in national guidelines
and policy-making.
Another significant observation was that compliance
rates to intraoperative temperature monitoring during
neuraxial anesthesia was half that of general anesthesia
(25.6% vs 67.5%), despite the fact that neuraxial
anesthesia also impairs thermoregulatory mechanisms
to a similar degree as general anesthesia [3]. The importance
of intraoperative warming even in patients undergoing
neuraxial anesthesia should be further emphasized
in subsequent iterations of perioperative temperature
management guidelines.
Only a small proportion of respondents feel that active
warming is intraoperative warming is unnecessary, or
that forced air warming can increase infection risk or
interfere with surgical access. While these were traditionally
thought to be important barriers to intraoperative
active warming, these factors appear to be less important
to the study participants, and other factors (eg. resource
constraints, training and SOPs) may be more critical.
The focus of this study was to provide a broad overview
of perioperative temperature management practices
in a wide variety of practice locations. However, as this
study was based on self-reported data, there are inherent
reporting and recall biases. The study had a relatively
limited response rate of 14.9%, which is similar to other
published surveys of physicians using a weblink-only
survey methodology [44]. Additionally, over 92% of the
respondents completed the survey, attesting to the accuracy
of the information.
If present, the important sources of response bias
would be from respondents who are (1) unable to complete
the survey, such as those in low-resource locations
without internet access, or (2) are not keen to complete
the survey, such as those who do not value perioperative
temperature management as important to patient
outcomes. These respondents will be under-represented
the study. Such biases would be expected to artificially
inflate compliance rates, although this was not observed
in the study results. Nonetheless, the results of this study
should be verified by local audits where possible, ideally
in tandem with changes to institutional policies, followed
by efforts to close the audit loop.
Conclusions
In conclusion, this survey found that compliance to
perioperative temperature management guidelines is
generally poor, especially among smaller hospitals. Environmental/
resource limitations is the single largest contributor
to noncompliance in the study population as it
is a key enabler in effective perioperative temperature
management. From an institutional perspective, other
areas that are likely to improve compliance rates would
be more training on perioperative temperature management,
and the development of a hospital SOP. These
findings may inform international guideline committees
on the needs of developing countries, or may spur local
anesthesiology societies to publish their own guidelines
specific to the local context.