Background
Although the occurrence of bleeding after thyroidectomy
is relatively low (0–4.2 %), it is regarded as a severe complication
that can be life-threatening and requires immediate
treatment [1]. Many cases of post-thyroidectomy
bleeding occur due to violent cough that develops particularly
while waking up from anesthesia and during
extubation [2]. Various trials have examined the effects
of administering remifentanil or dexmedetomidine on
suppressing cough during the extubation period and
emergence [3, 4].
Dexmedetomidine, a highly selective α2-receptor agonist,
has recently gained attention as an intraoperative adjuvant
in various situations. Dexmedetomidine helps
decrease emergence agitation and helps keep a patient in
a calm state after surgery [5, 6]. Moreover, a small dose of
dexmedetomidine is effective in suppressing cough during
emergence from anesthesia without respiratory depression
[4]. Thus, a small dose of dexmedetomidine may also reduce
postoperative bleeding after thyroidectomy by reducing
cough and emergence agitation. However, no studies
have shown if the effect of dexmedetomidine on reducing
emergence agitation and cough can reduce postoperative
bleeding after thyroidectomy.
The purpose of the present study was to determine
the effect of dexmedetomidine, administered during
emergence without a loading dose in female patients
undergoing elective thyroidectomy, on postoperative
bleeding by reducing coughing and emergence agitation.
Methods
This randomized, double-blind, controlled study was
conducted after it was approved by the Institutional Review
Board of Chosun University Hospital (2014-04-004)
and was registered at http://clinicaltrials.gov (registration
number NCT02412150, 09/04/2015).
A total of 139 female patients who were undergoing
elective total thyroidectomy under general anesthesia
(ASA class 1–2, aged over 20–60 years) in our hospital
were enrolled in the study. Patients with the following
conditions were excluded: risk of a difficult airway, history
of respiratory disease, chronic cough, cardiovascular disease,
or pregnant or breast-feeding woman. All patients
agreed to participate in the study after careful explanation,
and written informed consent for participation in the
study was obtained. The recruited patients were randomly
allocated in a 1:1 ratio according to computer-generated
random numbers, and sealed envelopes were prepared by
an independent anesthesiologist. When the patients
agreed to participate in the study, the envelopes were
opened in sequential order and the patients were allocated
according to the number into two groups: Group D (n =
69): Dexmedetomidine (Precedex®; Pfizer, New York, NY,
USA) was administered (0.6 μg/kg/h) after stopping the
administration of remifentanil 15 min before the end of
surgery; Group S (n = 70): Normal saline was administered
as a control in the same way. For blindness, an independent
nurse and anesthesiologist who did not participate in
the anesthetic procedure prepared the study drugs and
assessed the outcomes. Dexmedetomidine, which was diluted
to a 50 mL volume (diluted to 0.2 μg/mL) and normal
saline were prepared in a code-labeled 50-mL syringe
according to the coded number of the patients.
Patients were advised to fast overnight and were administered
intramuscular midazolam (0.05 mg/kg) before
being transferred to the operating room (OR).
When the patients arrived at the OR, a monitoring
device (Carescape; GE Healthcare, USA) was used to
perform electrocardiograms, measure blood pressure in
a non-invasive way, and perform pulse oximetry and
neuromuscular and bispectral index (BIS) monitoring.
The induction of anesthesia was performed by a skilled
anesthesiologist who was blinded to the allocation of the
patient. For the induction, 2.0 mg/kg propofol was administered
and a targeted effect-site concentration (Ce)
of remifentanil was adjusted as 2.0 ng/mL using a targetcontrolled
infusion device (Orchestra® Base Primea;
Fresenius-Vial, France) based on a Minto pharmacokinetic
model. When the patients lost their consciousness,
rocuronium bromide (0.8 mg/kg) was administered and
endotracheal intubation with an armored tube (internal
diameter: 7.0 mm) was performed after confirming adequate
neuromuscular blockade by a train-of-four (TOF)
ratio of 0 and no neuromuscular blocker was used during
the surgery. To maintain anesthesia, desflurane with
a 50% O2-air mixture was used, and the end-tidal concentration
of desflurane and the Ce of remifentanil were
adjusted according to the BIS score (between 40 and 60)
and vital signs (within 20 % of baseline values). The initial
tidal volume was set at 8 mL/kg with respiratory
rates of 12 breaths per min, which were adjusted to
maintain the end-tidal CO2 between 35 mmHg and 40
mmHg and peak inspiratory pressure below 28 mmHg.
When the surgeon performed the subcutaneous suture,
which was approximately 15 min before the end of
the surgery, the infusion of remifentanil was discontinued,
and a code-labeled syringe was prepared and infused
at a rate of 3 mL/kg/h until the patient was fully
awake and transferred to the post-anesthetic care unit
(PACU). When the surgeon ended the suture, desflurane
was discontinued approximately 5 min before the end of
the surgery and the patient was ventilated with 100 % O2
(5 L/min). To control postoperative pain, fentanyl was
administered with a patient-controlled analgesia instrument
according to the hospital protocol (basal infusion,
0.625 μg/kg/h without a loading dose; intermittent bolus,
1.0 μg/kg/h; lockout time, 15 min). After the use of reversal
agents [pyridostigmine (0.15 mg/kg) with
glycopyrrolate (0.2 mg/5 mg of pyridostigmine)], recovery
from neuromuscular blockade was confirmed using a
neuromuscular monitor (TOF ratio > 99 %). During recovery,
the patients were asked to open their eyes by
verbal request without any other stimulation or disturbance.
When the patient regained spontaneous ventilation
and consciousness (BIS score > 90), careful extubation
was performed while avoiding irritation, and the patient
was transferred to the PACU.
The primary objective of the study was to measure
the amount of postoperative bleeding for three consecutive
days. The amount of postoperative blood that
was collected in the drainage system was measured by
an independent nurse before leaving the PACU and
measured at the ward at 24 h intervals. The amount
of blood in each period was measured after emptying
the blood collected from the previous period in the
drainage. Secondary outcomes such as vital signs,
extubation time, recovery time, cough reflex, Ramsay
Sedation Scale (RSS), 11-point numeric rating scale
(NRS, 0 = no pain and 10 = worst pain imaginable) for
pain measurement, etc., were assessed by independent
anesthesiologists and surgeons. The patient characteristics,
duration of surgery, duration of infusion of
study drugs, and amount of fluid administered during
the surgery were recorded. Vital signs such as mean
blood pressure (MBP) and heart rate (HR) were measured
according to the time interval as follows: T0,
before the administration of the study drugs; T1,
5 min after the administration of the study drugs; T2,
10 min after the administration of the study drugs;
T3, 15 min after the administration of the study
drugs; T4, just before extubation; T5, 5 min after
extubation; T6, after arrival at the PACU. During recovery
from anesthesia (time interval from discontinuing
desflurane to transfer to the PACU), the cough
reflex was measured visually and graded according to
the severity (grade 0, no cough; grade 1, single cough
with mild severity; grade 2, cough persistence less
than 5 s with moderate severity; grade 3, severe, persistent
cough for more than 5 min) [7]. Extubation
time (time interval from the discontinuation of desflurane
to extubation) and recovery time (time interval
from the discontinuation of desflurane to transfer
to the ward) were assessed. Approximately 5 min
after arriving at the PACU, the RSS of the patient
was measured as follows: 1, patient anxious and agitated
or restless or both; 2, patient cooperative, oriented,
and tranquil; 3, the patient responds to
commands only; 4, asleep or a brisk response to a
light glabellar tap or loud auditory stimulus; 5, sluggish
response to a light glabellar tap or loud auditory
stimulus; 6, no response to a light glabellar tap or
loud auditory stimulus [8]. The patients were also
classified according to the RSS as follows: agitated,
RSS 1; calm, RSS 2–3; sedated, RSS 4–6 [9]. In the
PACU, the incidence of desaturation (< 90 %) was
assessed as an adverse effect of dexmedetomidine.
After the patient was transferred to the ward, the
amount of postoperative bleeding and pain score
using NRS were assessed daily until the third postoperative
day (POD). The duration of drainage catheter
placement after surgery was also recorded.
The sample size was calculated using “G*Power3” free
software. The effect size was calculated based on a previous
study in which the incidence of cough was 55 % after
a single use of dexmedetomidine infusion [4]. The total
sample size was calculated to be 136 with a calculated
effect size of 0.441, α = 0.05, and a power of 80 %. The
drop-out rate was assumed to be 10 %, and 70 patients
were allocated to each group.
Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics
for Windows, version 21.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk,
NY, USA). Normality was assessed using the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test and the Shapiro-Wilk test. Values are
expressed as the mean (SD), median (interquartile range),
or number of patients (%) with exact P values. Normally
distributed data (age, height, weight, and BMI) were analyzed
using Student’s t-test. Non-normally distributed data
(duration of surgery, amount of intraoperative fluid, infusion
duration of study drug, extubation time, recovery
time, and duration of the drainage catheter placement)
were analyzed using the Mann–Whitney U-test. Categorical
variables (ASA class, coexisting disease, grades of
cough response, incidence of severe cough, and RSS) were
analyzed using either the Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact
test. The change in vital signs, NRS score, and amount of
postoperative bleeding according to the time sequence
were analyzed by a repeated-measures two-way ANOVA,
and post-hoc testing was performed using the Mann–
Whitney U-test. The odds ratio, relative risk, and risk differences
with 95 % confidence intervals (95 % CI) were calculated
as a measure to compare the risk of severe cough
and agitated state in the PACU according to the RSS associated
with the use of dexmedetomidine. Differences were
considered statistically significant when the P value was
less than 0.05.
Results
A total of 140 female patients scheduled for elective thyroidectomy
were assessed for eligibility. Among the 140
patients, none did not meet the inclusion criteria or refused
to participate. A total of 140 patients were enrolled,
but one patient in group D was excluded because
of re-operation according to the biopsy results. Finally,
data from 139 patients (group D, n = 69; group S, n = 70)
were analyzed (Fig. 1).
There were no significant differences in patient characteristics,
duration of surgery, amount of intraoperative
fluid, and infusion duration of study drugs between the
two groups (Table 1). The MBP and HR of both groups
showed little change during the infusion of the study
drugs, which increased during the periods of extubation
(Fig. 2). There were no significant differences in MBP
between the two groups (P = 0.143). The HR was significantly
different between the two groups (P = 0.001). Just
before extubation, the HR of group D was significantly
lower than that of group S (P = 0.015, Fig. 2a).
The emergence profiles are presented in Table 2.
There were no significant differences in extubation time
(P = 0.728) and recovery time (P = 0.604). The cough reflex
was significantly different between the two groups
(P = 0.015), and the incidence of severe cough (grade 3)
was significantly lower in group D than in group S (P =
0.022). The odds ratio of severe cough was 0.321 (95 %
CI, 0.118–0.879) in group D. The relative risk of severe
cough was 0.635 (95 % CI, 0.460–0.876) in group D and
1.974 (95 % CI, 0.978–3.987) in group S. The risk difference
between the two groups was 1.339 (95 % CI, 1.277–
1.401). The RSS also showed significant differences between
the groups (P < 0.022). According to the RSS classification,
the patients in group D maintained a calmer
state (36.0 % in group D vs. 29.5 % in group S, P = 0.01)
in the PACU. In particular, the patients in group D
showed a lower incidence of the agitated state compared
to the control in the PACU (7.9 % in group D vs. 20.1 %
in group S). The odds ratio of the agitated state was
0.284 (95 % CI, 0.127–0.635) for group D. The relative
risk of the agitated state was 0.585 (95 % CI, 0.432–
0.792) in group D and 2.056 (95 % CI, 1.409–1.533) in
group S. However, the risk difference between the
two groups was 1.471 (95 % CI, 1.409–1.533). There
was no event of oxygen desaturation in the PACU in
either group.
The amount of postoperative bleeding was significantly
different between the two groups (P = 0.015, Table 3;
Fig. 3a). The amount of drained blood during emergence
and duration of stay in the PACU was significantly decreased
in group D compared to group S (19.0 mL vs.
33.1 mL, P = 0.001), and the decrease in postoperative
bleeding in group D lasted for the first and second POD
(P = 0.016 and 0.003, respectively). However, there were
no significant differences in the duration of drainage
catheter placement between the groups (group D: 3.7
days vs. group S: 4.0 days, P = 0.103).
The NRS pain score was also significantly different between
the two groups (P < 0.001, Table 3; Fig. 3b). The
NRS was significantly lower in group D than in group S
at the PACU (P < 0.001), but there were no significant
differences during POD.
Discussion
In this study, dexmedetomidine infusion during emergence
from anesthesia significantly decreased the incidence
of severe cough, emergence agitation in the
PACU, and the amount of bleeding that was measured
by the drainage system. To our knowledge, the current
study is the first to report that the administration of dexmedetomidine
(0.6 μg/kg/h) without a loading dose during
recovery from anesthesia is significantly associated
with the decrease of postoperative bleeding after
thyroidectomy.
As the thyroid gland is an organ with high blood flow,
severe bleeding after thyroidectomy is related to a major
life-threatening complication that requires intensive care,
although the incidence of significant bleeding after thyroidectomy
is as low as 2.0 % [1, 2]. In particular,
hematoma formation due to bleeding after thyroidectomy
can be fatal due to airway obstruction; therefore, bleeding
after thyroid surgery should be observed. Even though
there are numerous risk factors associated with postoperative
bleeding after thyroidectomy, such as male sex, older
age, and postoperative hypertension, bleeding frequently
occurs with sudden violent cough during extubation and
emergence [2]. Cough after thyroidectomy lifts the thyroid
cartilage and loosens the ligation, leading to bleeding [2].
Even in the absence of rapid bleeding from ligated vessels,
severe cough while the patient awakens can increase venous
pressure to encourage bleeding from the cauterized
vessels and create hematoma [10]. Moreover,
thyroidectomy is associated with postoperative cough, especially
in women [11]. Additionally, the violent movement
of the neck after surgery carries a risk of bleeding
from the cauterized infrahyoid muscle, which leads to
slow hemorrhage and hematoma formation [2]. Thus, reducing
severe cough and emergence agitation can be helpful
in decreasing postoperative bleeding. Therefore, we
hypothesized that the effect of dexmedetomidine, which
reduces cough and emergence agitation while the patient
awakens, would decrease postoperative bleeding after
thyroidectomy.
Various efforts have been made to reduce coughing
during the time the patient awakens; such efforts include
the administration of lidocaine either intravenously or
topically, sub-hypnotic propofol, and remifentanil [12–
14]. Dexmedetomidine has sedative and analgesic effects
without significant respiratory depression and can be
used during stressful procedures such as awake intubation
[15]. Moreover, dexmedetomidine has recently
gained attention as an adjuvant drug during emergence
from anesthesia. In this study, we focused on the effects
of dexmedetomidine. However, we omitted a loading
dose as in previous studies of dexmedetomidine because
of the possibility of sudden hemodynamic changes [4, 6].
Lee et al. reported that a single dose of dexmedetomidine
(0.5 μg/kg for 10 min) with a low-dose remifentanil
infusion (Ce of 1.0 ng/mL) at the end of thyroid surgery
effectively suppresses cough during emergence and
hemodynamic stability. However, only dexmedetomidine
infusion at a rate of 0.4 μg/kg/h does not reduce the
cough grade during emergence [6]. Unlike previous
studies, in our study the administration of dexmedetomidine
alone (0.6 μg/kg/h) without a loading dose during
emergence from anesthesia resulted in a significant
decrease in the cough reflex. The incidence of cough
was significantly lower in group D (69.7 %) than in group
S (82.9 %). In particular, the incidence of severe cough as
grade 3 in group D decreased significantly compared to
that in group S (4.3 % in group D and 11.5 % in group
S). We considered gender as the cause of these differences.
A previous study revealed that there are gender
differences in the estimated EC50 of remifentanil for reducing
cough during emergence, which was significantly
lower in females than in males (1.30 ng/mL in females
vs. 2.57 ng/mL in males) [16]. Unlike previous studies,
all the subjects of our study were women. Therefore, in
the present study, these gender differences were thought
as being one of the factors that along with the use of
only dexmedetomidine (0.6 μg/kg/h) had a sufficient effect
on reducing the cough reflex. However, further research
on gender-specific dexmedetomidine sensitivity is
required.
It is well known that the sedative effect of dexmedetomidine
is associated with a decreased incidence of
emergence agitation. Dexmedetomidine administration
(0.4 μg/kg/h during anesthesia) without a loading dose
also provides smooth emergence after surgery and reduces
emergence agitation [5, 6]. In the present study,
we measured the RSS score to compare the emergence
profiles, which revealed that dexmedetomidine resulted
in calm awakening in the PACU (36.0 % in group D vs.
29.5 % in group S, P = 0.01). In particular, we classified
RSS to compare the incidence of emergence agitation
[9], and the results showed that dexmedetomidine decreased
agitation (7.9 % in group D vs. 20.1 % in group S,
P = 0.01) during the emergence period in the PACU.
Despite the sedative effects, there were no significant differences
in extubation time (P = 0.728) and recovery
time (P = 0.604) and there was no event of desaturation
after the administration of dexmedetomidine.
The unique result of this study was an assessment of postoperative
bleeding. Our results showed a decrease in the
amount of bleeding after thyroidectomy along with a reduction
of the cough reflex and emergence agitation, although
the was no significant difference in the duration of the drainage
catheter placement. However, there is disagreement
among studies regarding the effect of dexmedetomidine on
perioperative bleeding. Dexmedetomidine decreases perioperative
bleeding by maintaining a stable hemodynamic response
during tympanoplasty or septoplasty, when
administered as an adjuvant drug for the maintenance of
anesthesia [17]. However, dexmedetomidine slightly increases
perioperative bleeding after thyroidectomy in
pediatric patients when administered before anesthesia induction
(0.5 μg/kg) owing to its vasodilative effect as an α2
adrenergic agonist [18]. Moreover, the continuous infusion
of dexmedetomidine attenuates the activation of coagulation
in patients undergoing radical gastrectomy according to
thromboelastography, by reducing the intraoperative stress
response and an anti-inflammatory effect [19]. Nevertheless,
in the current study, we administered a small dose of dexmedetomidine
at the end of surgery when vascular ligation and
bleeding control ended. A previous study also showed that a
low dose of dexmedetomidine, similar to that used in our
study, does not affect clotting profiles [18]. We assessed the
amount of postoperative bleeding for three days and revealed
a significant decrease in bleeding during emergence and
while staying in the PACU (19.0 mL vs. 33.1 mL, P = 0.001),
and the decrease of bleeding was confirmed until the second
POD. Considering that hematoma usually occurs within
24 h after surgery [10], the difference in the amount of bleeding
was statistically significant, although the absolute difference
was relatively small (48.1 mL vs. 73.1 mL during the
first 24 h). However, the size of the hematoma is not always
proportional to the amount of bleeding [20], and hematoma
formation in the deep layer of the neck, which compresses
the airway, is lethal [21]. Therefore, efforts to reduce postoperative
bleeding after thyroidectomy, such as reducing cough
and decreasing emergence agitation, may be clinically
necessary.
Additionally, dexmedetomidine decreased postoperative
pain in the PACU in our study, although there were no
significant differences in the NRS scores after the second
POD. The analgesic effect of dexmedetomidine is well
known, and intraoperative dexmedetomidine can effectively
decrease postoperative pain [22]. Even low doses of
dexmedetomidine (0.4 μg/kg/h infusion during laparoscopic
surgery) result in a reduction in postoperative analgesic
requirements [23]. According to a study by Yoo
et al. [24], the intensity of postoperative pain after thyroidectomy
is greatest at 30 min after surgery in the PACU
and decreases by one-third after 24 h. As postoperative
pain is identified as an independent risk factor for postthyroidectomy
hemorrhage [25], the analgesic effect of
dexmedetomidine may also contribute to the reduction of
postoperative bleeding. However, we only measured the
intensity of postoperative pain on the first day in the
PACU, which is considered a limitation of our study.
The administration of dexmedetomidine without a loading
dose showed no significant differences in MBP between
the two groups (P = 0.143), but the HR in our study
was significantly lower before extubation compared to the
control (P = 0.015). The infusion of a loading dose of dexmedetomidine
can significantly increase blood pressure
and decrease the heart rate [26]. We omitted the loading
dose to prevent sudden hemodynamic fluctuations.
Hemodynamic changes after the administration of dexmedetomidine
vary according to individual variability and infusion
methods. Lee et al. [4] showed no differences in
MBP and HR compared to the control that received a
small dose of dexmedetomidine without a loading dose.
However, the infusion rate (0.6 μg/kg/h vs. 0.5 μg/kg/h)
and duration of infusion (median 34 min vs. 10 min) of
dexmedetomidine were higher and longer than those
mentioned in the previous study. This difference in
methods may have resulted in a decrease in heart rate
without a difference in blood pressure.
This study has several limitations. First, only female
patients were selected as the subjects of the study. This
was because most of the patients with thyroid cancer
were women in our hospital, as thyroid cancer is 2.9-
times more common in women than in men [27]. Postthyroidectomy
cough is associated with females, as was
mentioned above. Therefore, we restricted the study to
women. However, drug sensitivity may be genderspecific,
and the results of the current study are
applicable only to women. Second, we did not evaluate
postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). After thyroidectomy,
PONV is a common complication and is associated
with postoperative bleeding [2]. Adjuvant
dexmedetomidine is effective in preventing PONV [28].
The dexmedetomidine used in our study may have
reduced PONV and this could have been related to the
outcome of our study, which was the reduction of postoperative
bleeding. We only focused on the cough reflex
and emergence agitation resulting from dexmedetomidine
administration; therefore, further evaluation of
PONV is required. Third, the optimal dosing method for
dexmedetomidine should be evaluated. We used a low
dose of dexmedetomidine for a relatively short time
without a loading dose. Two previous studies and this
study had different infusion rates and durations of dexmedetomidine
[5, 6]. There are no guidelines yet for the
appropriate infusion dose and rate of dexmedetomidine
administration to reduce coughing or emergence agitation.
Finally, the effects of dexmedetomidine may vary
depending on the blood concentration of dexmedetomidine,
and further research on the exact plasma concentration,
infusion rate, and dosage is required.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the administration of dexmedetomidine
(0.6 μg/kg/h) without a loading dose during recovery
from anesthesia decreased the incidence of severe cough
and emergence agitation. These effects of dexmedetomidine
can be helpful in reducing postoperative bleeding
after thyroidectomy. However, further evaluation of the
prevention of critical hemorrhage after thyroidectomy is
required.