Background
Laparoscopic surgery has been widely used in pediatric
surgery in recent years. Compared with the traditional
surgery method, it possesses many advantages,
such as slight trauma, rapid postoperative recovery, low
incidence of infection and less pain, etc. [1]. Due to the
complicated effect of carbon dioxide (
CO2) pneumoperitoneum
stimulus on children’s hemodynamics [2], it
raises a higher requirement for anesthesiologists to use
drugs reasonably and maintain hemodynamic stability
skillfully. Previous studies have shown that anesthesia
with sevoflurane alone requires a higher minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC) to block adrenergic response
(BAR) in adult patients with CO2
pneumoperitoneum
stimulus [3, 4]. However, a high concentration of sevoflurane
for only use is usually associated with hemodynamic
instability, myocardial depression, and postoperative
delirium in children [5]. Nowadays, balanced anesthesia
is used more frequently to provide better pain control
and also to achieve an adequate depth of anesthesia. It is
often necessary to use other analgesics to reduce sevoflurane’s
concentration and its side effects. Remifentanil
is a strong short-acting opioid, does not rely on liver and
kidney metabolism, and is suitable for target-controlled
infusion. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the
effects of different remifentanil plasma target concentrations
on the MACBAR
of sevoflurane in children with
laparoscopic surgery.
Methods
Subjects
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the
Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College,
Nanchong, China (Approved No. 2018ERR009). Written
informed consent was obtained from each child’s
guardian. All experiment procedures (consisted of invasive
manipulation) and data collection were conducted
with prior informed consents. The manuscript adheres to
CONSORT guidelines and was registered with the Chinese
Clinical Trials Registry at http:// www. chictr. org. cn
(ChiCTR1800019393, principal investigator: Juan XU,
date of registration: Nov. 8, 2018).
This research was conducted between November 2018
and June 2019. Seventy-five child patients, scheduled
for laparoscopic herniorrhaphy, with American Society
of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status I-II, aged
between 3 and 7 years, were selected. Exclusion criteria
included a history of cardiovascular, brain, liver, kidney,
or hematological disease; a history of allergies to inhalation
anesthetics or opioids; a history of recent upper respiratory
tract infection. The flowchart of patients through
the trial is shown in Fig. 1.
Study design
All children were randomly assigned to three groups (
R0,
R1,
R2)
with 25 cases in each group according to computer-
generated randomization. Children in the three
groups were anaesthetized by inhalation of sevoflurane
and intravenous infusion of remifentanil with different
plasma target concentrations (0, 1, 2, ng ml-
1), respectively.
During the creation of CO2
pneumoperitoneum,
the sympathetic adrenergic response was monitored in all
patients. A positive response was defined as an increased
heart rate (HR) or mean arterial pressure (MAP) over
its baseline value more than 20%. On the contrary, if the
increase of HR and MAP was less than 20% of its baseline
value, the sympathetic adrenergic response was defined
as a negative response. The mean value of MAP or HR
measured 3 and 1 min before pneumoperitoneum stimulus
was defined as its baseline value. The mean value of
HR or MAP measured 1 and 3 min after the pneumoperitoneum
pressure maintained stable was defined as
its changed value. Patients would be excluded from the
experiment if hypotension or bradycardia occurred at
the period of determination. Hypotension was defined
as systolic blood pressure (SBP) (5th percentile at 50th
height percentile), less than 2 x age in years + 65 and was
treated with intravenous ephedrine. Similarly, bradycardia
was defined as HR < 80 bpm and was treated with
intravenous atropine [6, 7].
Anesthesia administration
Induction
All children were fasted for 6 h and not allowed to
drink water for 2 h before operation, and not received
premedication routinely. Before induction of anesthesia,
a venous channel was established and infused
with compound sodium chloride solution at a rate of
10 mlˑkg-1ˑh-1. Electrocardiogram, pulse oxygen saturation,
non-invasive blood pressure were routinely
monitored with a PM-9000 express monitor (Mindray
Medical International Limited, Shenzhen, China), and
depth of anesthesia was monitored by using bispectral
index (BIS) (Canwell Medical International Limited,
Zhejiang, China). In each group, anesthesia was induced
by inhalation of 7% sevoflurane with 100% oxygen. After
children had lost their consciousness, the inhaled sevoflurane
concentration was reduced appropriately, and
1 μgkg-1 remifentanil and 0.6 mgkg-
1 rocuronium were
intravenously injected. After tracheal intubation, sevoflurane
concentration was adjusted to a preset endtidal
concentration of 3.0%, 2.2% and 1.4% in group R0,
group R1
and group R2,
respectively. Sevoflurane concentration
was monitored by a multifunctional monitor
(Shenzhen Mindray Biomedical Co., Ltd., PM9000). At
the same time, remifentanil was administered by targetcontrolled
infusion in each group with the Minto model
using a micro pump (TCI-I, ver 4.0, Guangxi VERYARK
Technology Co., Ltd). The degree of neuromuscular
relaxation (2 Hz for 1.5 s every 11.5 s) was continuously
assessed by acceleromyography using a TOF-watch SX
system (Veryark-TOF, Guangxi, China), starting when
the children were unconscious [8, 9].
Measurement of MACBAR
When the preset end-tidal sevoflurane concentration
had maintained stable at least 20 minutes, CO2
pneumoperitoneum
was established, and its pressure was set
at 9 mmHg with a flow rate of 2 Lmin-
1. The first child’s
preset end-tidal sevoflurane concentration in each
group was obtained from our preliminary test. The next
child’s end-tidal sevoflurane concentration for maintenance
in each group would be adjusted based on the
result of the previous child’s cardiovascular response.
If the response was positive (negative), the subsequent
child’s end-tidal sevoflurane concentration would be
increased (decreased) by 0.2%. The person for recording
the data was blinded to the plasma target-controlled
remifentanil concentrations used in all groups.
The test was over in each group when six crossing
points of a positive versus negative response or a negative
versus positive response in the pre and the next child
had occurred. The MACBAR
of sevoflurane in each group
was calculated as the mean value of the end-tidal sevoflurane
concentrations corresponding to the six crossing
points. After the above test had been done, 0.1 mg kg-
1 of
midazolam was given intravenously to prevent a potential
intraoperative awareness. All the children were received
a routine intravenous and inhaled combined anesthesia.
The BIS value was maintained between 40 and 60. The
administration of sevoflurane and remifentanil were discontinued
5 minutes before the end of operation, and 1.5
μgkg-1 of fentanyl was intravenously injected for analgesia.
All children were transferred to the pediatric intensive
care unit.
Determination of blood samples
Arterial blood samples (each for 3 ml) were collected
3 min before and after CO2
pneumoperitoneum with
sodium-heparin-containing tubes. Soon after, the plasma
was separated and frozen at -70°C in a refrigerator until
analysis. After the sample collection had been completed,
the concentrations of epinephrine (E) and norepinephrine
(NE) were measured using a method that has been
described previously [3].
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS22.0 software.
All measurement data were expressed as mean
± SD. Only these data from the 12 cases at 6 crossing
points of a positive (negative) versus negative (positive)
response in each group were analyzed. The delta
HR, delta MAP, delta E, and delta NE value was calculated
as the difference between its change value and
baseline value, respectively. One-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) for the complete random design was used to
compare the differences of age, weight, MACBAR,
delta
HR, delta MAP, delta E, and delta NE among the three
groups, respectively. The sex constituent ratio was tested
by Fisher’s exact probability among the three groups. P
value <0.05 was considered as a statistical significance.
Results
A total of 52 cases from the anticipant 75 child patients
were used in this study. Two cases in group R2
due to
hypotension were withdrawn from the study. Ultimately,
to obtain six crossing points (Fig. 2), 18, 13, and 21 cases
were used in groups R0,
R1,
and R2,
respectively. The general
information and the MACBAR
of sevoflurane in the
three groups were shown in Table 1. Target-controlled
infusion of 1 ngml-
1 and 2 ngml-
1 remifentanil can reduce
the MACBAR
of sevoflurane in children by 36% and 61%,
respectively (P<0.05). The baseline values of HR and
MAP in groups R1
and R2
were lower than those in group
R0
(P<0.05), but no significant differences were found
between group R1
and group R2
(P> 0.05). No significant
differences were found in the delta HR, delta MAP, delta
E, and delta NE among the three groups, respectively
(P>0.05).
Discussion
Previous studies have found that opioid analgesics can
reduce the MACBAR
or MAC of inhalation anaesthetic
under skin-cutting stimulus both in children and adults
[4, 10–12] and also can reduce the MACBAR
of sevoflurane
when using pneumoperitoneum stimulation in
adults [3]. However, whether opioid analgesics have the
same effect on sevoflurane’s MACBAR
in children under
pneumoperitoneum stimulus has not been reported.
This study found that remifentanil plasma target concentrations
1 ngml-
1 and 2 ngml-
1 could make the
MACBAR
of sevoflurane (3.29%) in children decreased
36% and 61% under pneumoperitoneum stimulus,
respectively. The decreased degree is very similar to our
previous result when the same target concentrations
of remifentanil were used in adult’s laparoscopic surgery
(decreased 48% and 63%) [3]. It is also similar to
another study’s result in adult patients with the similar
plasma target concentrations of remifentanil by skincutting
stimulus [13]. It means that a same plasma target
concentration of remifentanil can induce a similar
decreased degree of sevoflurane’s MACBAR
no matter
using pneumoperitoneum stimulus or incision stimulus
either in adults or in children.
However, at a same target concentration of remifentanil,
the MACBAR
of sevoflurane in children using
pneumoperitoneum stimulus is higher than that using
skin incision stimulus, which may be mainly related to
that pneumoperitoneum stimulus is more intensive
than skin incision stimulus [3] because laparoscope
pneumoperitoneum stimulus not only includes a direct
stimulus of the needle to the skin but also include
the stimulus of CO2
pneumoperitoneum pressure. A
stronger pneumoperitoneum stimulus must induce a
greater impact on children’s heart rate and blood pressure
[14]. A deeper anaesthesia is required to inhibit an
intense cardiovascular response. As all known, the setup
of CO2
pneumoperitoneum will increase patient’s intraabdominal
pressure and thoracic pressure, which will
induce a decrease of venous return and cardiac output
and excite the sympathetic nervous system. In addition,
the absorption of CO2
through the peritoneum can also
indirectly stimulate the central nervous system and activate
the sympathetic adrenal system [15]. As a result, it
will lead to a significant increase in the secretion of cortisol,
epinephrine, norepinephrine, rennin and vasopressin,
and eventually manifest as an increase of patients’
blood pressure and heart rate [16]. However, when we
analyzed the changes of plasma epinephrine and norepinephrine
concentrations, heart rate, and blood pressure
before and after pneumoperitoneum stimulus in pediatric
patients with crossover points to cardiovascular
response, no significant differences were found among
the three groups, respectively (Table 1). It indicates that
at a similar depth of anesthesia, the changes of plasma
epinephrine and norepinephrine levels and hemodynamic
parameters are consistent and not affected by
different plasma target concentrations of remifentanil,
which is consistent with the results of Zou’s study in
adult patients with laparoscopic surgery [3].
In this study, the HR and MAP in groups R1
and R2
were significantly lower than those in group R0
before
the creation of pneumoperitoneum, which may be
related to multiple mechanisms of remifentanil causing
slow heart rate and low blood pressure, such as exciting
vagus nerve, inhibiting sinus node’s self-regulation,
and relaxing the peripheral vascular smooth muscle
and so on [17, 18]. However, no severe hypotension
and bradycardia occurred when 1 ngml-
1of remifentanil
target concentration was used. Only 2 cases experienced
transient hypotension in the group with 2 ngml-
1
of remifentanil target concentration. It can be quickly
corrected by intravenous bolus injection of ephedrine
3-5mg. Our preliminary experiment found that severe
hypotension or bradycardia would happen when the
remifentanil plasma target concentration was more
than 3 ngml-
1, and the end-tidal sevoflurane concentration
would be close to its MACawake
value [19], which
may appear intraoperative awareness. Therefore, we
had not attempted to measure the MACBAR
of sevoflurane
using a higher remifentanil target concentration
over 2 ngml-
1.
Although the basal stress level and related plasma
levels of stress hormones might be affected in children
who were taken to the operating room without premedication.
The premedication, like as midazolam and
atropine, will also affect the changes of hemodynamics
(such as HR and MAP). It may induce a dual effect
with remifentanil on the MACBAR
of sevoflurane, so
that none of our patients received premedication in this
study. During our study, as per the study protocol, the
MACBAR
of sevoflurane was calculated depending on
the changes of MAP and HR values that were recorded
after anesthesia induction and before the surgical incision
and establishment of pneumoperitoneum. During
this period, we maintained a stable hemodynamical
status. Therefore, the measured result of sevoflurane
MACBAR
should be little affected by the stress situation
before anaesthesia.
There are several limitations of our study. One of the
limitations is that this study mainly focused on child
patients at preschool age group between 3 and 7 years
old. We did not choose infants, school-age and adolescent
children in this study. The effects of infants,
school-age and adolescent children on the MACBAR
of
sevoflurane with pneumoperitoneum stimulus needs
further study. Another limitation is that we have not
measured the actual plasma remifentanil concentration,
although the Minto pharmacokinetic model for
target-controlled infusion is safe in adults [20–23].
The accuracy of the Minto pharmacokinetic model of
remifentanil in the pediatric population needs further
study.
Conclusions
Remifentanil by target-controlled infusion can significantly
reduce the MACBAR
of sevoflurane responding to
laparoscopic pneumoperitoneum stimulus in children of
3 to 7 years old. In addition, at a similar effect of sevoflurane’s
MACBAR,
the changes of adrenergic response are
similar.