Background
Childhood obesity is one of the major challenges in developed
and developing countries where the prevalence
of obesity amongst secondary school children has increased
in the last few decades [1, 2]. Childhood obesity
is a major concern for policy makers because overweight
and obese children are likely to remain obese into adulthood
[3]. They are also more likely to develop noncommunicable
diseases at a younger age and have a
shorter life expectancy. One of the main reasons behind
the growing childhood obesity epidemic is low levels of
physical activity. A systematic review showed a high
prevalence of insufficient physical activity among adolescents
needed for the maintenance and development of
cardiovascular health and cardiopulmonary fitness [4].
Previous literature showed evidence of a steep decline in
physical activity among boys after primary school years,
and low levels of activity among girls throughout
primary and high school years, with adolescent years experiencing
the largest declines [5, 6]. Given that adolescence
is a crucial phase to develop and establish healthy
lifestyle behaviours, it is important to explore potential
interventions that focuses on increasing physical activity
during adolescent years [7].
A strategy that is particularly promising among adolescents
is social norm messages [8]. This is based on the
notion that individuals use peer norms as a standard to
compare their own behaviours. Adolescents care about
how they perform against their peers or whether their
behaviour is approved by others [9], as childhood (including
adolescence) is a formative period when friends
are primary points of reference in deciding which behaviours
and values are desirable and which are not [10]. In
fact, in studies conducted with adolescents, peer influence
was found to be a significant correlate of physical
activity [11].
Descriptive social norm is the perceptions about the
prevalence of a specific behaviour. According to Social
Cognitive Theory, perceptions of others’ behaviour lead
to behaviour change in an individual [12]. This has been
used to change several unhealthy behaviours, such as alcohol
and drug use, gambling and recycling [13, 14]. Recent
studies have used descriptive norms where study
participants were presented with physical activity information
of others, and found significant association between
receiving descriptive norms and self-reported
physical activity, intention to be active or attitude toward
physical activity [15–17]. However, none of these studies
used an objective assessment of physical activity (e.g.,
steps directly extracted from pedometers) to measure
the study outcome.
Previous studies also showed that descriptive norms
feedback is helpful in promoting the intended behaviour
for individuals who are worse than the norm. However,
this may lead to decline in intended behaviour for individuals
who are already better than the norm [18, 19].
Disclosing descriptive norm information with personal
identification may overcome this problem. It was reported
that individuals are more likely to adhere to
norms when their behaviour is observable by other individuals
[20, 21]. This could be explained by their desire
to fulfil others’ expectations and their concern about
how adherence or non-adherence to social norms may
affect their reputation. As such, individuals who know
that their information will be shared with others may be
more motivated to achieve a goal visible to others, regardless
of their state of activity.
In this study, we tested whether providing descriptive
norm messages with personal identification (Onymous
Arm) increases physical activity among adolescents compared
to providing descriptive norm messages without
personal identification (Anonymous Arm). Adolescents
aged 13 to 16 were randomized into one of two arms,
and each arm consisted of 13 groups of 12 participants.
Participants in the Anonymous Arm received information
on the step counts of their group members ranked
from highest to lowest, while participants in the
Onymous Arm received the same information plus the
full names of their group members next to the respective
step counts. We hypothesized that the average number
of steps taken by adolescents will be higher when descriptive
norm message is onymous compared to when
it is anonymous. We also investigated the trajectories of
physical activity. We hypothesized that, among those in
Onymous Arm, girls and those who know other participants
in their group will be more likely to be in a trajectory
with increasing step counts because perceived peer
pressure tends to be stronger among females than
among males [22, 23] and among those who know each
other compared to those who do not [24]. The secondary
aim of this study was to investigate the quality of life,
depression, social support, self-efficacy and physical activity
enjoyment of participants in both arms before and
after the trial.
Methods
Recruitment and Eligibility
Between December 2016 to December 2017, 342 participants
were recruited on a rolling basis. Recruitment was
achieved via a combination of different recruitment
strategies such as newspaper advertisement and wordof-
mouth. Individuals who were interested were asked to
contact the study coordinator for their eligibility. To be
eligible for the study, participants must be: (1) Singaporean
or Singapore Permanent Resident; (2) between 13
and 16 years old; (3) willing to wear a pedometer for 16
weeks; and (4) English-speaking, which is the dominant
language spoken by this age group in Singapore [25–28].
Participants were also screened for exercise-related risks
using Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PARQ).
A doctor’s approval was required if the participant
answered “YES” to any of the items in PAR-Q.
Eligible participants were invited to attend a briefing
session by the study team at Duke-NUS Medical School
Singapore. Informed consent was obtained according to
the National University of Singapore-Institutional Review
Board (NUS-IRB) protocol, both from the participant
and one of the parents or guardians. Consenting
participants were then issued a pedometer wristband
and asked to complete the baseline assessment that included
wearing the pedometer for 2 weeks and answering
the baseline survey. The trial lasted 16 weeks and
participants were compensated for SGD 50 (~USD
36.23) upon completion of end-of-study survey.
Sample Size Calculation
The sample size calculation was powered to detect a mean
difference of at least 0.25 standard deviations in the average
number of steps taken by adolescents between the two
study arms, accounting for the correlation between observations
at the baseline and at 6 months. Based on 5% level
of significance and a power of 80%, and by accounting for
a potential 20% attrition, the target sample size was determined
to be 312 (156 in each arm).
Randomization and Intervention Design
Randomization was performed after baseline assessment
was completed. Of the 342 participants who registered
for the study, 13 participants did not complete the baseline
assessment and were excluded from the study.
Eighteen of those who completed the baseline assessment
were not contactable and were not included in the
study. Participants were randomized based on gender
and baseline step counts via block randomization. The
randomization algorithm was pre-programmed by a statistician.
The allocated arm was sealed in an envelope. A
total of 311 participants who completed the baseline assessment
(31 dropped out) were randomized to either
Anonymous (n = 155) or Onymous (n = 156) Arms. The
participants were informed of their allocated arms after
they completed the baseline assessment. Since the aim
of the intervention was to provide descriptive norm information
about the participants, we could only start the
intervention only when all 311 participants were recruited.
However, since recruiting 311 participants could
have taken us several months and we did not want participants
who were recruited earlier in the study to lose
interest, we decided to roll out the intervention in
batches. A batch included one Anonymous Arm and
one Onymous Arm, consisting of 12 participants in each
arm. This method resulted in 13 batches in total. We
chose 12 participants since we found this number to be
large enough to create competition among group members,
but small enough that participants can start the
trial before they lose interest in the study. Figure 1
shows the recruitment and randomization process.
During the 16-week study period, both study arms received
weekly notification of their physical activity performance
from the past week via automated short
message service (SMS). Participants were ranked according
to the total step count accumulated in the past week
within their group. For participants in the Anonymous
Arm, the weekly information included step count ranked
from the highest to lowest within all participants in the
same group. Participants in the Onymous Arm received
the same information plus the (real) full names of the
participants next to the step count. To discourage lower
levels of physical activity, those with a step count of zero
were not included in the list for both arms.
Participants were asked to complete a survey at both
baseline and end of the study. The baseline survey captured
socio-demographic information and self-reported
physical activity. Paediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL)
scale, Asian Adolescent Depression Scale (AADS), Social
Support and Exercise scale, Physical Activity Self-
Efficacy (PASES) scale, and Physical Activity Enjoyment
Scale (PACES-8) were administered in both surveys. The
end-of-study survey also included questions about participants’
experience with the study and whether they
knew participants in their group and in the study. The
survey instruments developed for this study are provided
as Additional File 1.
Measures
Steps (primary outcome)
Steps were measured by a Fitbit Flex™ wireless pedometer.
Fitbit devices have been validated in measuring step
counts among healthy individuals [29]. The step counts
recorded by the device can be easily visualized and monitored
with a Fitbit account by synchronizing the data to
an installed mobile phone or computer application.
Average weekly number of steps was used for the
analysis.
Pediatric Quality of Life (PedsQL) Inventory Score
Quality of life (QoL) was assessed using PedsQL™ 4.0
Generic Core Scales, a 23-item scale that was developed
to evaluate QoL in teenagers, and has been widely used
in other pediatric QoL studies [30]. The scores were
transformed on a scale of 0 to 100. Higher score indicates
better QoL [31]. License was obtained to use this
scale for this study.
Asian Adolescent Depression Scale (AADS)
Depressive symptoms were measured using AADS, a 20-
item instrument that was developed in Singapore to 
assess depression among adolescents [32], and has been
successfully used in other studies [33]. The total score is
the sum of the 20 items. Possible score for this instrument
ranges between 20 to 100. A higher score indicates
higher level of depressive symptoms, a total score that
exceeds 80 is an indicator of depression [33].
Social Support and Exercise (SSE) Survey
Exercise-related support from family and friends was estimated
using the Social Support and Exercise Survey
[34]. This 13-item instrument evaluates the behaviour
and attitude of family and friends toward their participation
in exercise in the past 6 months with a 5-point
Likert scale. Eleven of the 13 items measure supportive
behaviour and attitude toward exercise, while two items
measure negative social support associated with exercise.
Reverse scoring was performed for the two items, measuring
negative social support. A total score was generated
by summing scores from both family and friends.
Possible score for this scale ranges between 26 to 130. A
higher positive support score reflects having received
frequent positive support.
Physical Activity Self-Efficacy (PASES) Scale
This instrument contains 17 items that assess children’s
self-efficacy in overcoming barriers to physical activity
[35]. It is a dichotomous scale where “Yes” is coded as
“1”, while “No” is coded as “0”. The total score ranges
from 0 to 17. Higher score indicates a higher level of
self-efficacy associated with physical activity.
Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale (PACES-8)
Enjoyment of physical activity was assessed using a set
of 8 questions derived from an original 18-item scale to
measure enjoyment [36]. Participants were asked to rate
their level of exercise-related enjoyment on a 7-point
Likert scale. Possible scores for PACES-8 range from 7
to 57, with higher values reflecting greater enjoyment of
physical activity.
User experience
Participants were asked to report their satisfaction with the
intervention and level of participation. We also asked if they
know anyone in the study or in their group, and their feelings
when they ranked either the top or bottom five.
Statistical analysis
Analyses were done on an intention-to-treat basis for
311 adolescents who were randomized into one of the
arms. The missing data (i.e., zero steps) for the number
of steps were imputed based on 30 multiple imputed
datasets by employing predictive mean matching [37].
Main analysis of primary outcome was conducted by
comparing steps from the 155 participants in Anonymous
Arm and 156 participants in the Onymous Arm.
Secondary outcomes were analysed based on the completed
surveys by the 138 participants in the Anonymous
Arm and 144 participants from the Onymous Arm. For
the secondary outcomes, scores were not computed if >
50% of the items in the scale were missing [31]. The
means of the completed items were imputed only if
≥50% items were completed.
We used a multilevel mixed-effects model to compare
the differences between the two arms with random effects
for groups and individual effects. In the mixedeffects
model, we included the number of steps for the
16 time points, comparing each week in the trial to the
baseline.
Group-based trajectory modelling was used to investigate
the step trajectories over the trial period [38]. Following
the methods from Nagin and Odgers (2010) [38]
we identified 4 group trajectories based on the following
considerations: 1) obtaining a minimal increase in the
Bayes Information Criterion for an additional trajectory
group, 2) obtaining for each trajectory group a close correspondence
between the estimated probability of group
membership and the proportion assigned to that group
based on the posterior probability of group membership,
3) ensuring that the average of the posterior probabilities
of group membership for individuals assigned to each
group exceeds a minimum threshold of 0.7, and 4) ensuring
that the odds of correct classification based on
the posterior probabilities of group membership exceed
a minimum threshold of 5. The functional form of the
trajectory for each group was based on the significance
of the polynomial terms by iteratively dropping nonsignificant
terms. Dummy variables on gender (female =
1, otherwise = 0) and knowing other participants in the
group (know someone = 1, otherwise = 0) were created.
They were then interacted with the Onymous Arm
dummy variable (Onymous arm = 1, Anonymous arm =
0) and were used as predictors of trajectory group membership.
All statistical analysis was performed using Stata
15 [39].
Results
Table 1 presents baseline characteristics of the two study
arms. The average age was 14.6 ± 1.0 years and most participants
(42.9%; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 37.3–
48.6%) were in their 4th year of secondary school. Consistent
with Singapore’s population demographics, most
participants were Chinese (89.4%; CI = 85.4–92.6%).
There were more females (67.9%; CI = 62.3–73.0%) than
males in the study. The median time spent outdoors was
2.5 and 3.5 h per day on weekdays and weekends, respectively.
About 45.3% (CI = 39.7–51.1%) and 36.9%
(CI = 31–42%) reported exercising more than 1 h on
weekdays and weekends, respectively. There were no statistically
significant differences between baseline characteristics
of the two arms. (p > 0.05 for all).
Participants’ total weekly steps and p-values for each
trial week from the multi-level mixed-effects model are
presented in Table 2. In this model, the intervention
arms were regarded as a fixed effect, while groups and
individuals were regarded as random effects, with individuals
nested in the groups. The null hypothesis was
not rejected since the number of steps taken by adolescents
was not higher when descriptive norm information
was onymous compared to when it was anonymous (p >
0.05 for all time points).
Table 3 shows the secondary outcomes of both study
arms. Compared to participants in the Anonymous Arm,
participants in the Onymous Arm reported slightly
higher QoL (PedsQL) and lower depression (AADS)
scores. However, they reported lower social support for
exercise (SSE), lower physical activity self-efficacy (PASE
S) and lower physical activity enjoyment (PACES) scores
compared to Anonymous Arm participants. None of the
differences were statistically significant (p > 0.05 for all),
except for physical activity self-efficacy score which was
significant at the 10% level (p = 0.075).
Table 4 presents the user experience reported by participants
at the end of study. Majority of the participants
were somewhat satisfied with this intervention, with no
significant difference between the two study arms (Anonymous:
63.8%, CI = 55.2–71.8%; Onymous: 63.2%, CI =
54.8–71.1%, p = 0.774). About two-thirds of the participants
reported wearing the pedometer nearly every day
(Anonymous: 66.7%, CI = 58.1–74.5%; Onymous: 63.9%,
CI = 55.5–71.7%, p = 0.542). Most participants reported
that they checked the weekly ranking SMS sent to them
every week (Anonymous: 67.4%, CI = 58.9–75.1%;
Onymous: 64.6%, CI = 56.2–72.4%, p = 0.591). When
ranked in the top five, most participants stated that they
felt accomplished (Anonymous: 79.0%, CI = 70.9–85.3%;
Onymous: 76.5%, CI = 68.5–83.0%, p = 0.890) or felt
good (Anonymous: 84.7%, CI = 77.2–90.0%; Onymous:
74.2%, CI = 66.1–81.0%, p = 0.111). When ranked in the
bottom five, the most commonly reported response was
‘not a big deal’ (Anonymous: 51.6%, CI = 42.8–60.3%;
Onymous: 51.4%, CI = 43.1–59.7%, p = 0.800) or ‘did not
care’ (Anonymous: 32.3%, CI = 24.6–41.0%; Onymous:
31.2%, CI = 24.0–39.4%, p = 0.646). Of note, there was a
significant difference between two arms in knowing
someone in the same group. There were significantly
more participants in the Onymous arm who reported
that they knew someone in the same study group (Anonymous:
21.7%, CI: 15.6–29.4%; Onymous: 50.7%, CI:
42.5–58.8%).
Figure 2 shows the trajectories of weekly steps over
the trial course for the pooled data from both arms. Results
show that a 4-group trajectory class was the best fit
to the data. Group 1 consisting of 15.9% of the participants
and Group 4 consisting of 5.7% of the participants
made an effort to increase their physical activity. However,
participants in Group 1 started at a much lower
step counts at baseline and maintained the lower step
counts when compared with other groups. In contrast,
Group 4 logged in the highest step counts in the sample.
Group 2 (50.3% of the participants) and 3 (28% of the
participants) had similar step counts at baseline. Group
2 reduced their steps in the first 4 weeks and remained
stable for the rest of the trial. On the other hand, Group
3 increased their steps in the first 4 weeks but decreased
slightly in the remaining weeks. Table 5 shows the
multinomial logit model estimates for the predictors of
trajectory group membership. Compared with Group 1
(reference group), Onymous Arm female participants
were more likely to be in Group 3 (beta: 2.418, SE =
0.706; p = 0.001) and in Group 4 (beta: 2.650, SE = 0.942;
p = 0.005). Knowing someone in the same group in
Onymous Arm was not a significant predictor (p > 0.05
for all).
Discussion
Based on our findings, the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected. The average number of steps taken by adolescents
was not higher when social norm message was
onymous compared to when it was anonymous. There
were also no significant differences between the two
arms in QoL, depression, social support for exercise,
physical activity self-efficacy and physical activity enjoyment
scores.
The normative reference group used in the study may
explain the lack of effectiveness of the descriptive norms
used in our study. In this study, participants were recruited
on an individual basis and they did not share a
proximal social network. Although 36.5% reported that
they knew someone in the same group, the person that
they knew may not have been in their close social network.
It is possible that adolescents in our sample did
not care about being compared to other adolescents
who were not in their close social network. In fact, majority
of the reported reaction to being ranked at the
bottom five of a group was that it was not a big deal or
that they did not care. Descriptive norms might have
been more effective in persuading subjects to adopt target
behaviour if the normative reference group was a
more relevant social group such as close friends, or
peers that they interact regularly with such as classmates.
According to social identification theory, not all
groups are equal and an individual’s behaviour is influenced
by the group to which he or she perceives a sense
of belonging [40, 41]. In addition, a norm describing the
behaviour of a relevant or salient social group leads
people to identify more with and feel more selfefficacious
regarding this particular target behaviour [24,
42, 43]. Therefore, it is possible that the effect of norms
on increasing self-efficacy in relation to physical activity
can only be activated by increasing the saliency or relevance
of the normative reference group.
Although the effect of descriptive norms was not evident
in the main analysis, further analysis using group-
based trajectory analysis revealed that being a female in
the Onymous Arm was a significant predictor of trajectory
group membership with increased step counts. Females
were more sensitive to social norm messaging at
the beginning of the trial. This implies that social norms
may not be effective for all adolescents, and interventions
targeting specific groups may be more successful
in promoting physical activity.
One concern is that providing participant full names
together with the step count information may lead to
negative outcomes for adolescents. In fact, participants
in the Onymous Arm where participants were identified
with their full names reported slightly worse outcomes
in social support for exercise, physical activity selfefficacy,
and physical activity enjoyment scores compared
to those in the Anonymous Arm. Participants who
logged in lower step counts might have questioned their
ability to achieve higher step counts and not enjoyed
physical activity when they were ranked low in their
group, knowing that others had seen this information.
However, the differences were statistically significant at
the 10% level only for the physical-activity self-efficacy.
In addition, participants in both groups did not report
significantly different responses on how they felt when
they were ranked in the top 5 or bottom 5. These findings
imply that providing full names did not lead to
negative outcomes, although it did not contribute to a
higher step count.
Our study has several limitations. Some participants
stopped wearing their pedometers before the study ended,
which resulted in incomplete data. However, we conducted
intent-to-treat analyses to account for this. Second,
it is possible to generate step counts on pedometers
without the user walking or running. We tried to
minimize this possibility by asking participants to sign a
statement of oath to log their steps accurately and honestly.
Third, our findings were based on a very specific descriptive
norm messaging in one type of setting. Different
framing or methods of presenting descriptive norms with
more relevant reference group may be more successful in
promoting physical activity among adolescents.
To our knowledge, this is the first study that measured
the effect of descriptive norms objectively by using step
count directly extracted from pedometers. Previous
studies that used descriptive norms to promote physical
activity have used either self-reported activity levels or
intention to exercise as primary outcomes, which could
potentially over-reported physician activity as a result of
social desirability bias [44]. Although the implementation
of descriptive norms are different between our study
and other studies, the difference in findings suggests that
conclusion based on subjective measures of physical activity
may not be an accurate reflection of the actual
physical activity as participants might have overreported
experienced recall bias on the amount or intent
of physical activity. In addition, this study contributes to
the knowledge concerning whether the effect of descriptive
norms can be amplified when the targeted behaviour
is observable. Future studies should explore different
framing of descriptive norms and we recommend using
a more relevant reference group to facilitate social
norms among adolescents.
Conclusions
The effect of descriptive norms messages containing personal
identification on physical activity promotion was
not evident in the main analysis. As adolescence is an
important phase for the cultivation of healthy lifestyle, it
is important to explore interventions that could motivate
adolescents to increase their physical activity. Future
study may consider exploring the effect of similar intervention
among adolescents using a more relevant reference
group.