Background
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a heterogeneous group
of malignancies, which derived from any part of the
biliary epithelium [1, 2]. According to the location
within the biliary system, CCA can be classified into
intrahepatic, perihilar, and distal CCA [3]. Intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is the second most
common malignant tumor in liver, and its incidence
has been increasing continuously in the past decades
[4]. Surgical resection is the most effective treatment
for patients with ICC. However, long-term outcome
after radical resection is still unsatisfactory [5, 6]. It
has been reported that the current 5-year survival
after resection of ICC is only 20% ~ 35% [7–9]. Lots
of factors, including tumor characteristics and resection
factors, are associated with long-term survival
after resection of ICC [10, 11]. Among them, surgical
margin status and width have attracted many attentions
of surgeons and researchers.
Surgical margin status has been reported to be associated
with overall survival (OS) and achieving R0 resection
is the ultimate objective in resection of ICC [12, 13]. However,
the impact of surgical margin width on long-term
survival remains controversial. Several studies reported
that a gradual better long-term survival was observed as
surgical margin width increased [14]. In contrast, some
scholars concluded that not all patients with ICC could
benefit from a wide margin hepatectomy (WMH) [15].
Assessing the prognostic value of surgical margin width is
vital for clinical management of ICC. Given this, we
conducted this multicenter study to investigate the impact
of surgical margin width on long-term outcomes in ICC
patients.
Patients and methods
Study cohort
Patients who underwent radical hepatic resection for ICC
between November 2011 and August 2017 were identified
from a multicenter database that included 13 major hepatopancreatobiliary
centers in China (Eastern Hepatobiliary
Surgery Hospital of Navy Medical University, Second Hospital
Affiliated to Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Mengchao Hepatobiliary Hospital of Fujian Medical University,
First Hospital Affiliated to Army Medical University,
Cancer Hospital Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tongji Hospital
Affiliated to Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Beijing Friendship
Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University, West
China Hospital of Sichuan University, Renji Hospital Affiliated
to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of medicine,
Xuanwu Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University,
Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College,
Beijing Tiantan Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical University,
Zhongda Hospital Southeast University). Diagnosis
of all enrolled ICC patients were histopathologically confirmed.
R0 resection was defined as macroscopic and
microscopic removal of all tumors [16]. Patients who
underwent palliative resection and patients with positive
surgical margin, mortality within 1 month of surgery, peritoneal
seeding, distant metastasis and incomplete information
were excluded. This study was approved by the
institutional review board of each participating center.
Data collection
Data, including patient demographics, perioperative
variables, tumor-related clinicopathological characteristics,
and follow-up data, were collected using a standardized
data sheet. The resectability of the tumor
was determined according to the performance status,
liver function reserve and tumor imaging features of
the patients before surgery. Operative information included
the type of hepatectomy, receipt of lymph
node dissection, margin status, intraoperative blood
loss, transfusion. Postoperative pathological variables
included tumor number, size, morphology, grade, vascular/
perineural/biliary/adjacent organ invasion, lymph
node metastasis, satellite nodules, and surgical margin
width. Adjuvant therapy was performed after assessing
by a multidisciplinary team. Tumor staging was evaluated
according to the 8th edition of the AJCC staging
system [17].
Patients were divided into two groups according to
the surgical margin width: narrow (< 10 mm) and
wide (≥10 mm).
Follow-up
Patients were regularly followed up every 3–6 months
after surgery, during which serum carbohydrate antigen
19–9 (CA19–9) and abdominal CT or MRI were routinely
performed. The endpoints of this study were OS
and DFS. OS was defined as the interval between the
date of surgery and the date of death from any cause or
the date of the last follow-up. Disease-free survival
(DFS) was defined as the interval between the date of
surgery and the first recurrence or the last follow-up.
Statistical analysis
Categorical variables were expressed as number and percentages,
and differences were compared by Chi-square
test or Fisher’s exact test. OS and DFS were analyzed by
the Kaplan-Meier method, and the log-rank test was
used for between-group comparisons. The Cox proportional
hazards model was used to identify risk factors of
OS and DFS, and variables with statistically significant
differences in the univariate analysis were included in
the multivariate analysis.
Since patients who underwent WMH and narrow margin
hepatectomy (NMH) were not randomly distributed,
propensity score matching (PSM) was used to minimize
selection bias. The caliper was set at 0.01, and an optimal
match ratio of 1:1 was used according to the nearest
neighbor method. Statistical analyses were performed
using R 3.6.1. A two-tailed P value less than 0.05 was
considered statistically significant.
Results
Patient characteristics
Figure 1 presented the flowchart of patients’ enrollment.
The median age of the enrolled 478 patients
was 58 years (IQR, 49–64 years) and 287 were male
(60.0%). The median tumor size of patients was 6.7
cm, and the majority were single tumor (n = 344,
72.0%). In total, 283 (59.2%) underwent NMH,
whereas 195 (40.8%) underwent WMH. Several factors,
including gender, CA19–9, CEA, blood loss,
transfusion, tumor diameter, tumor number, lymph
node invasion, gross type, differentiation, satellite,
perineural invasion and adjuvant therapy, were associated
with margin width (Table 1). Wide margin resection
was more frequently performed among
patients had a small, single and CA19–9 level raised
tumor, and more frequently performed by laparoscopic
approach. While age, HBsAg, MVI, and major
hepatectomy have no difference between the two
groups (P > 0.05). Propensity score matching was
performed for the above factors that might influence
the prognostic analysis. After 1:1 PSM, there were
79 of the 195 WMH patients were matched with 79
of the 283 NMH patients, and all baseline characteristics
were compared between the groups.
Impact of surgical margin width and long-term outcomes
Among all patients, overall median, 1-, 3-, and 5-year OS
was 22months, 69.20, 36.60, and 26.70%, respectively. Overall
median, 1-, 3-, and 5-year DFS was 21months, 59.80,
41.20, and 37.60%, respectively. Patients underwent WMH
had a longer median OS compared with patients undergoing
NMH (33 vs 18 months, P<0.05; Fig. 2 A). The 1-, 3-, and
5-year OS in WMH were also higher significantly than in
the NMH (76.10%, vs 66.22, 56.10% vs 39.86, 50.24% vs
37.16%, all p<0.05, respectively).Meanwhile, patients underwent
WMH had a longer median DFS compared with patients
undergoing NMH (16 vs 8months, P<0.001; Fig. 2 B).
The 1-, 3-, and 5-year DFS inWMH were also higher significantly
than in the NMH (58.05% vs 40.88, 45.85% vs 28.04,
36.59% vs 27.36%, all p < 0.001, respectively).
After 1:1 PSM, the median, 1-, 3-, and 5-year OS of
patients in the WMH were still better than that in NMH
(40 vs 21 months, 81.51% vs 67.23, 63.87% vs 40.34,
57.14% vs 40.34%, all p < 0.05, respectively; Fig. 2 C).
Similarly, the median, 1-, 3-, and 5-year DFS of patients
in the WMH were also better than that in NMH (17 vs
9 months, 60.50% vs 45.38, 46.22% vs 34.45, 45.38% vs
33.61%, all p < 0.05, respectively; Fig. 2 D).
Univariate and multivariate cox analyses of OS and DFS in
patients with intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
Before PSM, univariate analysis identified surgical margin
width was associated with OS and DFS (all P < 0.05).
Additionally, multivariable analysis showed that surgical
margin width was an independent prognostic factor affecting
OS and DFS (Table S1). After PSM, univariate
analysis identified surgical margin width was associated
with OS and DFS (all P < 0.05). However, multivariable
analysis showed that surgical margin width was an
independent prognostic factor affecting OS but not DFS
(Table 2).
Subgroup analysis based on clinicopathologic feature
To identify the optimal ICC patients for WMH, subgroup
analysis was conducted based on clinicopathologic
feature. As shown in Fig. 3, The following factors may
benefit DFS of the patients who underwent WMH:
CA199 ≤ 200 U/mL, CEA ≤ 5μg/L, no lymph node metastasis,
MF type, mild tumor differentiation, no MVI, and
no perineural invasion (Fig. 3). The following factors
may benefit OS of the patients who underwent WMH:
female, ≥60 years, non-HBV infection, CA199 ≤ 200 U/
mL, CEA ≤ 5μg/L, tumor size > 5 cm, no lymph node
metastasis, MF type, mild tumor differentiation, no MVI,
and no perineural invasion (Fig. 4).
Subgroup analysis based on AJCC staging system
To comprehensively understand the relationship between
clinicopathological features and surgical margin,
subgroup analysis was further conducted based
on the 8th AJCC staging system. In total, there were
258 (54.0%), 132 (27.6%), and 88 (18.4%) patients
were assigned to stage I / II / III groups. The impact
of the surgical margin width depended on the context.
As for stage I, patients underwent NMH had
an inferior OS and DFS than patients underwent
WMH (median OS was 37 vs 22months, P<0.05,
Fig. 5 A; median DFS was 20 vs 11 months, P<0.05,
Fig. 5 D). However, we did not observe a significant
difference between the WMH and NMH in terms of
OS and DFS for ICC patients with stage II or III
(Stage II: median OS was 15 vs 14 months, P = 0.63,
Fig. 5 B; median DFS was 6 vs 4 months, P = 0.45,
Fig. 5 E; Stage III: median OS was 16 vs 12 months,
P = 0.20, Fig. 5 C; median DFS was 10 vs 5 months,
P = 0.16, Fig. 5 F).
Discussion
For ICC, liver resection remains the most effective
treatment strategy at present. While surgical margin
status was identified as a prognostic factor, the
impact of surgical margin width on long-term outcome
following R0 resection of ICC has been less
well studied and remains controversial. In addition,
the biological characteristics of high heterogeneity
determined the ICC patients with different clinicopathological
characteristics have significantly different
prognostic outcome [18, 19]. Therefore, it is
necessary to further explore and discuss the prognostic
value of WMH in ICC patients with different
characteristics and stages. In this study, we conducted
a PSM analysis using multicenter ICC data,
and discovered that patients underwent WMH had
better prognosis outcomes compared with patients
undergoing NMH; however, subgroup analysis found
that WMH improved OS and DFS in AJCC I patients,
but did not improve long-term prognosis in
AJCC II-III patients. To our knowledge, this is the
first study to evaluate the impact of surgical margin
width on the outcome of ICC with different characteristics
and stages.
Previous studies have offered varied views on whether
margin width improves the long-term prognosis of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma. Ribero M et al. [20] found
that margin width had no effect on OS (P = 0.61) and
DFS (P > 0.05) in patients with negative margins. In
addition, Watanabe et al. [15] showed that wide margins
did not improve the long-term prognosis of all patients
undergoing R0 hepatectomy. However, Spolverato et al.
[12] showed that margin width was positively correlated
with prognosis, and the prognosis was better when margin
width > 1 cm. Besides, Farges et al. [14] suggested
that margin width < 5mm was an independent risk factor
for poor prognosis. A meta-analysis showed a consistent
result that WMH could benefit long-term
survival in patients with ICC [21].
Although it is still controversial whether WMH
improves prognosis, several studies have shown that
margin distance is positively correlated with improved
prognosis, and the wider the surgical margin,
the greater the prognostic improvement [12, 14, 22].
In this study, it was further found that this improvement
is undermined by an increase in the tumor
stage when the surgical margin ≥1 cm, and ICC patients
with stage II-III did not benefit from WMH.
We believe that this is mainly due to the highly invasive
characteristics of ICC. Compared with hepatocellular carcinoma,
ICC has more aggressive biological characteristics,
such as bile duct invasion, nerve invasion and lymph node
metastasis, which are hard to be eliminated by hepatectomy
alone. At present, AJCC TNM staging is the most commonly
used prognostic system for ICC, and higher AJCC
staging is associated with more aggressive invasion [23].
In patients with stage II of AJCC, multiple tumors
usually reflect intrahepatic metastasis, and a study of
European Network for the Study of Cholangiocarcinoma
(ENS-CCA) has shown that the prognosis of these patients
is as poor as that of patients with extrahepatic metastasis
[24]. Besides, ICC with vascular invasion is also
classified as stage II, which is also reported to be the independent
risk factor of prognosis for patients with ICC
[18, 25]. ICC with stage III represents an extensive range
of invasion and metastasis, including extrahepatic
invasion and lymph node metastasis. Patients with stage
II-III are likely to benefit from a R0 resection,[26] however,
our result showed that a wider surgical margin
could hard further improve prognosis of these patients.
Several previous studies conducted subgroup
analysis to evaluated the impact of WMH on the outcome
of ICC. Studies of Farges et al. and Watanabe
et al. documented that WMH could not provide
benefit for patients with lymph node metastasis [14,
15]. Similarly, we found patients with lymph node
metastasis had no benefit from WMH. This reflects
that lymph node metastasis was a factor that played a
fatal role for the outcome of patients with ICC and
WMH is not enough to improve the prognosis of
these patients. In addition to lymph node metastasis,
many other factors may affect the prognosis of hepatectomy.
In this study, we found WMH had a longer
OS and DFS than NMH in patients with CA199 ≤
200 U/mL, CEA ≤ 5μg/L, MF type, mild tumor differentiation,
no MVI, and no perineural invasion.
In clinical practice, the operation of WMH in ICC
patients would be affected by many factors, including
inadequate residual liver volume, tumors adherent to
major vessels. Some researchers suggested preoperative
portal vein embolization could improve the
resectability and increase the percent of WMH in
these patients, although the following surgical delay
may cause tumor progression [14]. Besides,
approaches such as extended resection and vascular
reconstruction were considered to improve outcome
further [22, 27]. Of note, aggressive approaches used
to achieve a WMH may lead to an increase in
adverse events, such as liver failure and massive
bleeding [15]. In this study, a higher rate of intraoperative
blood loss, transfusion, and postoperative
complication were observed in WMH group. Given
that, we suggested that wide surgical margin is
recommended to improve the long-term outcome for
ICC patients with AJCC stage I on the basis of adequate
preoperative preparation and ensuring surgical
safety. As for patients with stage II or III, WMH
alone is not sufficient to improve the survival, and
adjuvant therapy and other effective treatments may
still needed.
There are several limitations that should be
acknowledged when interpreting this study. First,
this was a retrospective study and selection bias may
have been present. To mitigate this bias, we conducted
PSM to match the prognostic factors between
the two groups. Second, detailed surgical margin
width was lacked in this database, and further
subgroup analyses focused on the influence of different
width groups were affected. Third, due to the
data of surgical margin width was from pathological
exam, the measurement of it may affected by shrinkage
of pathological specimens during the production
process. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out
prospective multicentre studies on the basis of
standard intraoperative measurement of margin
width.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we suggest surgeons should strive to
achieve a wide surgical margin for ICC patients with
AJCC stage I to optimize the long-term outcome. As for
ICC patients with AJCC stage II or III, WMH alone
could not improve the survival and more effective treatments
are still needed.