Background
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), a family of structurally
related proteolytic enzymes, participate in the degradation
of various extracellular matrix (ECM) components, e.g.,
collagen, elastin, fibronectin and gelatin [1, 2]. To date, over
20 MMP members have been identified in humans, which
are divided into different subtypes according to their substrate
specificity such as collagenase: collagenase-1 (MMP-
1), collagenase-2 (MMP-8), collagenase-3 (MMP-13) and
collagenase-4 (MMP-18); gelatinase: gelatinase A (MMP-2)
and gelatinase B (MMP-9); and stromelysin: stromelysin-1
(MMP-3) and stromelysin-2 (MMP-10) [1]. Through regulation
of ECM remodeling, MMPs play an essential role in
a wide range of physiological processes, e.g., embryonic development,
tissue morphogenesis, reproduction, angiogenesis,
and wound healing [3–8]. Dysregulation of MMPs has
been found to be involved in diverse pathological conditions
including arthritis, fibrosis and neoplasia [9–23].
Cutaneous basal cell carcinoma (cBCC) and cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) account for approximately
80 and 20% of nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC),
respectively [24, 25]. A systematic analysis of the global
burden of disease showed that there were 7.7 million incident
NMSC cases and sixty-five thousand NMSC deaths
worldwide in 2017 [26]. While cBCC is a locally destructive
cancer that rarely results in metastasis or death [27],
cSCC is the main contributor of NMSC deaths. A number
of MMPs including MMP-13 have been implicated in
cSCC genesis and development [22, 28, 29]. MMP-13, also
termed collagenase-3 responsible for cleavage of fibrillar
collagens, gelatin and fibronectin, is not detectable in intact
normal skin [30], but its expression has been shown
in tumor tissues from patients with cSCC and SCC of the
head and neck [30–34]. However, serum MMP-13 as a
diagnostic marker for cSCC has not been explored.
Methods
Study subjects
Patients who had cSCC and underwent surgical procedures
at our department from March 2016 to March
2019 were recruited. All methods were carried out in accordance
with relevant guidelines and regulations. Diagnosis
of cSCC was confirmed by pathological analysis of
excised tumor tissues. Staging of cSCC was done according
to the eighth edition of American Joint Committee
on Cancer (AJCC) cancer staging system: T1, tumor
diameter < 2 cm; T2, tumor diameter ≥ 2 cm and < 4 cm,
T3, tumor diameter ≥ 4 cm, or minor bone erosion, or
perineural invasion, or deep invasion; T4, tumor with
gross cortical bone/bone marrow invasion [35]. Histology
typing of invasive cSCC and cSCC in situ, and further
subtyping of invasive cSCC into well-differentiated,
moderately-differentiated and poorly-differentiated were
done at our pathology department. Healthy individuals
undergoing cosmetic procedures from the department of
plastic surgery were recruited as controls. Patients with
other skin disorders, connective tissue disease, renal disease,
other tumors, hepatic disease, severe cardiovascular
or pulmonary disease were excluded.
Serum preparation
Serum samples were obtained before surgery as follows:
after overnight fasting, 10 ml of whole blood from each
subject was collected into serum separator tubes which
were then left undisturbed at room temperature for 30
min; afterwards, blood samples were centrifuged at 2000
g for 10 min, and the resulting supernatant was collected
and frozen at − 80 °C in aliquots until further analysis.
Measurement of MMP-13 by ELISA
Serum MMP-13 was measured using the Human MMP-
13 ELISA Kit obtained from Sigma China Co., Ltd.
(Shanghai, China). ELISA was performed according to
the manufacturer’s instructions with standards and samples
run in duplicate. Briefly, 100 μl of each standard
and sample were added into appropriate wells of the 96-
well ELISA plate and incubated for 2.5 h at room
temperature. After 4 washes with the Wash Solution,
100 μl of 1x Detection Antibody was added into each
well and incubated for 1 h at room temperature followed
by 4 washes with the Wash Solution. Subsequently,
100 μl of Streptavidin solution was added into each well
and incubated for 45 min at room temperature followed
by 4 washes as described above. Afterwards, 100 μl of
TMB One-Step Substrate Reagent was added into each
well and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in
the dark. Finally, 50 μl of Stop Solution was added into
each well, and absorbance at 450 nm of each well was
read immediately using a microplate reader (BioTek,
Winooski, VT, USA). Sample MMP-13 levels were determined
against the concentrations of standards.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Routine tissue fixation, paraffin-embedding and sectioning,
inactivation of endogenous horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) and antigen retrieval were performed as described
elsewhere [36]. Primary antibody incubation (1:50 dilution
of anti-MMP-13 polyclonal antibodies from Boster
Biological Technology, Wuhan, China) was done at
room temperature for 1 h. After 3 washes with PBS,
subsequent secondary antibody incubation and detection
were performed using the PV-9000 IHC Kit containing
biotinylated anti-rabbit secondary antibody, HRP-labeledstreptavidin,
and the substrate diaminobenzidine
(Zhongshan Golden Bridge Biotechnology, Beijing, China)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Hematoxylin
was used for counter staining. Under a high power field,
the immune-reactive intensity was scored from 0 to 3: 0,
no brown color; 1, light brown; 2, brown; and 3, dark
brown. The percentage of immune-positive cells over the
total cells in a high power field was scored 0–4: 0, < 5%, 1,
5–25%; 2, 26–50%; 3, 51–75% and 4, > 75%. The final
immune-score was calculated by multiplying the intensity
score and the percentage score, and determined as: < 3,
negative; 3–5, weak; 6–8, moderate; and 9–12: strong [36].
All scorings were done by two pathologists in a blind
manner and the average immune-score from 10 high
power fields for each sample was compared between patients
and healthy controls.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis
To determine the diagnostic value of serum MMP-13
levels for the differentiation of invasive cSCC and cSCC
in situ, and the detection of cSCC lymph node metastasis,
ROC curve analysis was performed using the Graph-
Pad 8.0 statistics software (GraphPad Software Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA).
Statistical analysis
Data normality was determined by Shapiro-Wilk test.
Parametric variables were presented as mean ± standard
deviation and non-parametric variables as median (first
quartile, third quartile). Unpaired t test for parametric
variables or Mann-Whitney test for non-parametric
variables was performed to analyze data between two
groups of subjects. Serum MMP-13 levels among patients
with different stages of cSCC and different histology
subtypes (well-differentiated, moderately-differentiated
and poorly-differentiated) were analyzed by one way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with post-hoc Tukey test.
Categorical data were analyzed by chi-square test. P value
< 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical
analyses were performed and graphs created using the
GraphPad 8.0 statistics software.
Results
A total of 77 patients (49 males and 28 females) and 50
healthy individuals (33 males and 17 females) were included
in this study. For patients, fifty-seven cases of
cSCC occurred in sun-exposed areas and 20 in the genital
areas. The ratio of male to female, and the age in the
two groups were not significantly different (Table 1).
The cSCC group had significantly higher serum
MMP-13 levels than the control group (Fig. 1). Furthermore,
patients with stage 3 cSCC had markedly higher
serum MMP-13 levels than those with stage 1 and stage
2 cSCC, and patients with stage 2 cSCC had substantially
higher serum MMP-13 levels than individuals with
stage 1 cSCC (Fig. 2 a). However, there was no significant
difference in serum MMP-13 levels between healthy
controls and patients with stage I cSCC. Histologically,
there were 17 cases of cSCC in situ and 60 cases of invasive
cSCC, and the latter had remarkably higher serum
MMP-13 levels than the former (Fig. 2 b). We did not
observe significant difference in serum MMP-13 levels
between healthy controls and patients with cSCC in situ.
Furthermore, there were no significant differences in
serum MMP-13 levels among patients with welldifferentiated,
moderately-differentiated and poorly- differentiated
cSCC (data not shown). Significantly higher
levels of serum MMP-13 were also detected in subjects
with lymph node metastasis compared with those without
lymph node metastasis (Fig. 2 c). Patients with nonmetastatic
cSCC had significantly higher serum MMP-
13 levels than healthy controls (p < 0.001). Post-surgery
measurement of serum MMP-13 was performed in 12
patients, which showed a marked decrease of serum
MMP-13 concentrations after the removal of cSCC
(523.0 ± 231.4 pg/ml prior-surgery versus 296.4 ± 92.6
pg/ml post-surgery, p < 0.001).
MMP-13 expression in excised samples from all 77 patients
and 30 healthy subjects were analysed by IHC.
The results showed that negative and weak expression of
MMP-13 were detected in 23 and 7 healthy individuals,
respectively. In contrast, a significantly higher proportion
of patients had positive MMP-13 expression in the
resected samples (32 with moderate, 32 with weak and
13 with negative MMP-13 expression, p < 0.01). IHC microphotographs
are shown in Fig. 3.
was examined. Patients were divided into two groups:
one group with age < 60 years and the other with age ≥
60 years. There were no substantial differences in serum
MMP-13 levels between these two groups (Table 2).
Moreover, the ratio of male to female, and the percent
of patients in each stage were not markedly different between
the two groups (Table 2).
When serum MMP-13 levels were compared between
male and female patients, no significant differences were
observed (Table 3). Moreover, the age and the percent
of patients in each stage were not significantly different
between male and female patients (Table 3).
The ROC curve analysis revealed that serum MMP-13
predicted the presence of invasive cSCC with an AUC of
0.87 (95% CI [0.78 to 0.95]) for sensitivity and specificity
of 81.7 and 82.4%, respectively for a cut-off value of 290
pg/mL (Fig. 4 a). Serum MMP-13 predicted lymph node
involvement with an AUC of 0.94 (95% CI [0.88 to
0.99]) for sensitivity and specificity of 93.8 and 88.5%, respectively
for a cut-off value of 430 pg/mL (Fig. 4 b).
Discussion
In the present study, we examined the diagnostic value
of serum MMP-13 for cSCC, and reported the following
findings: 1) patients with cSCC had significantly higher
serum MMP-13 levels than healthy controls; 2) the stage
of cSCC was associated with the concentration of serum
MMP-13; 3) serum MMP-13 possesses high diagnostic
value for the differentiation of invasive cSCC and cSCC
in situ; 4) serum MMP-13 serves as an excellent diagnostic
biomarker for cSCC lymph node metastasis; 5)
post-surgery serum MMP-13 measurement was done in
12 patients, and a significant MMP-13 decrease was observed
after removal of cSCC; 6) tumor tissues had a remarkably
higher level of MMP-13; and 7) age and
gender were not related to the elevation of serum MMP-
13 levels in patients.
Although surgical resection is effective in the treatment
of cSCC, it has been shown that 14% of cSCC
cases at the first diagnosis have metastasis and of these
patients, 40% will eventually die [37]. Currently, biomarkers
that can be used for early detection of cSCC
aggressiveness, risk assessment and monitoring are lacking
[37–39]. Johansson et al. revealed that MMP-13
mRNA was expressed in head and neck SCC cell lines
but not in normal intact skin [30]. The same group also
showed that MMP-13 protein was expressed in cSCC
tissues as assessed by immunohistochemistry [32]. In another
study, Culhaci et al. observed a positive correlation
between the degree of immunostaining for MMP-13 in
tumor tissues and the invasiveness of tumor in head and
neck SCC [33]. These findings suggest that analysis of
MMP-13 expression in small biopsy samples may be
used to determine the invasive capacity of SCC at an
earlier stage. However, an objective method for quantifying
MMP-13 or other molecules in SCC tissues for diagnostic
purposes has not been reported. It is known that
gene dysregulations caused by tumors are often reflected
by the changes of final gene products in blood which
can be applied for tumor diagnosis [40, 41]. In view of
this and the finding of MMP-13 up-regulation in SCC
tissues, we sought to explore serum MMP-13 as a diagnostic
marker for cSCC, and our results show that
serum MMP-13 has high sensitivity and specificity for
the differentiation of invasive cSCC and cSCC in situ
(Fig. 4 a), and prediction of cSCC lymph node metastasis
(Fig. 4 b).
Measurement of serum MMP levels in patients with
SCC of different anatomic sites, and comparison of the
results with those of healthy controls have been documented
[42–50]. Jiao et al. showed that patients with
esophageal SCC had significantly higher serum MMP-13
levels than healthy controls; furthermore, serum MMP-
13 levels were found to be associated with tumor progression
and survival [42]. Riedel et al. discovered the
elevation of serum MMP-9 levels in patients with head
and neck SCC [43], which is also observed by Stanciu
et al. [44]. Lotfi et al. reported that both serum MMP-2
and MMP-9 levels were significantly increased in laryngeal
SCC cases compared with healthy controls [45], and
similar results were depicted by Matulka et al. and
Grzelczyk et al. [46, 47]. Choudhry et al. revealed that
serum levels of MMP-1, − 8, − 10, − 12 and − 13 in oral
SCC patients were substantially elevated as compared
with healthy controls [48]. In contrast, Ghallab showed
the increase of serum MMP-9 in oral SCC patients compared
with subjects with oral premalignant lesions [49].
Among all these studies, only two groups examined the
diagnostic value of MMPs: using the ROC analysis,
Ghallab showed serum MMP-9 with an AUC of 0.6,
which failed to differentiate between oral SCC and oral
premalignant lesions [49]. Of note, serum MMP-12 was
shown to have an AUC of 0.84 for sensitivity and specificity
of 80 and 78.9%, respectively for a cut-off value of
16.13 pg/ml for the diagnosis of oral SCC [48]. These
data together with ours suggest that serum MMPs may
serve as potential biomarkers for SCC diagnosis.
We discovered that serum MMP-13 is a valuable biomarker
in prediction of cSCC lymph node metastasis
(Fig. 4 b). However, discrepancy in relationship between
serum MMP levels and lymph node involvement has
been presented [42, 44, 50]. While no significant correlations
were proven between serum MMP-1, − 2, and − 9
concentrations and lymph node status in head and neck
SCC [50], serum MMP-2 was found to be correlated
with lymph node involvement in laryngeal SCC [45], and
serum MMP-13 levels were associated with esophageal
SCC lymph node metastasis [42]. These disagreeing results
may be attributed to: 1) heterogeneity of SCC studied
and 2) small sample sizes explored.
MMP-13 elevation in SCC cell lines or tissues has
been described in several studies. Johansson et al.
showed that while MMP-13 mRNA was highly expressed
in head and neck SCC cell lines, it is undetectable in
normal skin tissues [30]. Elevated MMP-13 mRNA expression
was also observed in head and neck SCC tissues
[34]. In agreement with these mRNA data, increased
MMP-13 protein production in head and neck SCC tissues
was detected by IHC [33]. In the present study, we
found a significantly higher level of MMP-13 in cSCC
tissues compared with control tissues. Moreover, serum
MMP-13 substantially decreased after the resection of
cSCC. These results suggest tumor-derived MMP-13
contributes to the elevation of serum MMP-13 seen in
our patients.
In this study, the impact of sex and age on serum
MMP-13 levels was not observed in patients, which has
also been reported in SCC of different sites by other
studies [42, 50]. Serum MMP-13 levels were found to be
uncorrelated with age and gender in patients with
esophageal SCC [42]. A study that analyzed serum levels
of MMP-1, − 2, and − 9 in patients with head and neck
SCC did not show correlations between serum MMP
levels and sex or age [50].
Conclusions
Serum MMP-13 levels show high sensitivity and specificity
for the differentiation of invasive cSCC and cSCC in
situ, and the prediction of lymph node metastasis, suggesting
serum MMP-13 might serve as a valuable biomarker
for early detection of cSCC invasiveness and
monitoring of cSCC progression.