Background
The worldwide incidence of oropharyngeal cancer
(OPC) has increased in the past 40 years owing to the
rising rates of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection related
to sexual behavior [1]. Traditionally, China had a
lower burden of HPV-positive OPC compared to the rest
of the world. However, in the recent decade, changes in
sexual behavior brought by high-pressure lifestyle have
led to an upward trend in the occurrence of OPC in
China [2]. As reported, during the years 2003–2012, the
age-standardized rate of OPC incidence has increased
from 2.0/100,000 per year to 2.54/100,000 per year [3].
According to the latest treatment guidelines of OPC,
radiotherapy/concurrent chemoradiotherapy is recommended
as the mainstream treatment for patients with
early/locally advanced OPC [4, 5]. Owing to the need of
a high irradiation dose for potential cure, localized adverse
events such as irradiation-induced dysphagia and
xerostomia become the most common late toxicities in
OPC survivors. Even with the optimal photon irradiation
technique, intensity-modulated photon-radiation therapy
(IMRT), symptomatic dysphagia and xerostomia (grade
2–4) occur at incidences as high as 15–23% and 32–
48%; and have been identified as independent negative
factors impacting the long-term quality of life of OPC
patients [6–9].
Proton beam therapy (PBT) is a new-emerging particle
irradiation technique. Compared with conventional
photon-radiation therapy, it has superior energy absorption
distribution afforded by protons’ “Bragg peaks” to
better protect normal tissues from radiation injury. The
comparative dosimetric studies have confirmed that the
intensity-modulated proton radiation therapy (IMPT,
the advanced form of PBT) enabled to significantly reduce
the irradiation dose to parotid, larynx, oral cavity,
and pharyngeal constrictor muscle in OPC patients,
thereby having the potential to reduce the normal tissue
complication probability (NTCP) in long-term dysphagia
and xerostomia [10–13]. In previous PBT decisionmaking
studies, the ability of IMPT over IMRT in reducing
dysphagia and xerostomia has been applied as a pivotal
factor determining whether an OPC patient was
appropriate to undergo PBT [14, 15].
Nevertheless, the therapeutic benefits of PBT should
still be carefully weighed against its high treatment costs,
which can be 3.2 to 4.8 times higher than that of IMRT
[16]. On the mainland of China, there is currently only 1
operational proton center but the Chinese government
has planned to authorize another 16 licenses for operating
proton centers in the major cities by the year 2021
[17]. Meanwhile, the high treatment costs of this newemerging
cancer treatment are not yet covered by
Chinese public medical insurance. As such, costeffectiveness
analysis (CEA) is urgently needed to ensure
the proper use of PBT when this treatment would become
more available in the near future [18, 19]. Till present, no
CEA study has been conducted to evaluate the costeffectiveness
of PBT for Chinese OPC patients.
Herein, we designed a 7-state Markov model to track
the natural development of OPC and late toxicities, and
simultaneously evaluated the relevant cost and effectiveness
of IMPT versus IMRT in a long-term period;
aiming to identify cost-effective scenarios for optimal
PBT efficacy in Chinese OPC patients.
Methods
Model design
The TreeAge Pro 2018 software (Williamstown, MA)
was used for model building and analysis. A CEA model
(a decision tree combining two-arm Markov model) was
designed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of IMPT, in
comparison to that of IMRT, for newly diagnosed nonmetastatic
OPC patients. The CEA model was built
based on the following two assumptions: (1) compared
to IMRT, IMPT would be able to reduce symptomatic
dysphagia and xerostomia (Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group, RTOG grade 2–4), defined in this present study
as “NTCP-reduction”; per the equation: NTCP-reduction
(%) = [(NTCP after IMRT - NTCP after IMPT) / NTCP after
IMRT] *100%; (2) all the dysphagia and xerostomia would
occur within the first year after radiotherapy and the two
symptoms would be irreversible once occurred [20, 21].
Transition states of the Markov model are illustrated
in Fig. 1. Different states, namely “alive with cancer”, “no
cancer” (including 4 sub-states of “dysphagia”, “xerostomia”,
“dysphagia and xerostomia” and “no complication”)
and “death” (including “cancer death” or “other
death”), were used to simulate the natural process of disease
and late toxicities for OPC patients after radiotherapy.
A 1-year cycle length was used, and the Markov
models were cycled from 1 year after radiotherapy until
the estimated generalized Chinese life expectancy (77
years old) for the year 2020, to evaluate the costeffectiveness
over a lifetime horizon [22]. Half-cycle
corrections were performed to minimize discretization
errors in the continuous Markov process. The risk of
natural non-cancer deaths was calculated based on the
United States 2016 Life Tables [23].
Base-case set-ups
We assumed a 56-year-old (median age of OPC in
China) male patient who had a squamous OPC of stage
IVA (T2N2M0) as the base case to represent the
Chinese OPC patients at the average level [24]. Disease
probabilities in the model were calibrated according to
the data of overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival
(DFS), as reported by De Felice et al. [25]. The NTCPs
of dysphagia and xerostomia after IMRT were set according
to long-term follow-up results of OPC patients
after IMRT, reported by Bird et al. and Al-Mamgani
et al., in which the probabilities of dysphagia and xerostomia
(≥ grade 2) were 0.19 and 0.33, respectively [5, 6].
On the basis of published toxicities data, we initially assumed
that IMPT could provide a 25% NTCP-reduction
in dysphagia and xerostomia compared with IMRT for
the base case [12, 13]. Other clinical outcomes, including
the survival rates, were assumed to be identical between
the two strategies.
Cost and utilities
The treatment regimens of the 2 compared strategies
were similar except for the irradiation technique (IMPT
versus IMRT), and included radical radiotherapy (32-
fraction to a total dose of 70 Grays) and 3 cycles of concurrent
chemotherapy. The cost of IMPT was estimated
as being $50,000 based on the relevant charge standard
applied in Shanghai Proton and Heavy Ion Center
(Shanghai, China). Such treatment cost reflected both
the capital investment (i.e. the estimates for building and
infrastructure, hardware, dosimetry and engineering
equipment, planning and clinical management software,
and the working capital during the construction) and the
operating costs (i.e. the estimates for land, equipment
maintenance, electrical power, and the salaries for the
staff). Another 2 assumed IMPT costs levels ($40,000
and $30,000) were applied to evaluate the influence of
decrease in proton treatment costs on cost-effectiveness.
The costs of IMRT were estimated as being $12,000 to
reflect the similar treatment cost for photons irradiation
at the Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center (Guangzhou
China). The other costs for treatments and examinations
were estimated based on casual clinical prescriptions to
reflect similar costs as that of daily practice in a Chinese
hospital. The cost of concurrent chemotherapy was assumed
as $5000; simulating 3 cycles of 80–100 mg/m2
cisplatin bolus injection delivered on day-1, − 21, and −
42 of the radiotherapy. The follow-up cost per year was
assumed as $1000; simulating a set of examinations
including hematologic and biochemistry profiles, nasopharyngeal
fiberoptic endoscope examination, magnetic
resonance imaging of head and neck, chest radiography,
and abdominal ultrasonography. The cost of palliative
therapy per year was assumed as $5000; simulating 8
cycles of oral palliative chemotherapy based on 5-
fluorouracil. The treatment cost for dysphagia per year
was estimated as $3000; simulating the long-term
requirement of a nasal feeding tube or percutaneous
gastrostomy tube. The treatment cost for xerostomia
per year was estimated as $2000; simulating the use of
traditional Chinese medicine/artificial saliva and additional
intensive dental care. For patients in the “no
cancer” state, the annual cost included the follow-up cost
± the treatment cost for dysphagia and/or xerostomia. For
patients in the “alive with cancer” state (recurrence, metastasis,
or residue), the annual cost included the followup
cost and the cost of palliative chemotherapy. All costs
were adjusted to US dollars ($), using a Sino-US exchange
rate of $1 = 6.47 RMB (February 28, 2021).
The utilities were adjusted to QALY using health state
utility values (HSUV). On the basis of published data,
the HSUV of “alive with cancer” was assumed to be 0.57,
representing a progressive disease with the disutility
caused by anticancer treatment [26]. The HSUVs for the
states of “dysphagia”, “xerostomia” and “dysphagia and
xerostomia” (≥ grade 2) were standardized as being
0.803, 0.846, and 0.763 [9]. The HSUVs for the states of
“no complication” and “death” were set as 1 and 0. Costs
and quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) were discounted
at an annual rate of 3% [27].
Sensitivity analysis and Monte Carlo simulation
Probabilistic sensitivity analysis was applied to illustrate
the robustness of the model in light of a joint uncertainty
for model parameters by running over 50,000
iteration trials, and the 90% confidence interval of the
model parameters were identified. Tornado diagram
was used to evaluate the influences of the parameters
on the ICER over the variation of their 90% confidence
interval. One-way sensitivity analyses were performed
to identify cost-effective threshold values for
the parameters. Monte Carlo simulation (50,000 trials)
was applied to show the trials distributions of the two
strategies and to determine the recommended strategy
from the perspective of net benefit.
Outcome measurement
OS was defined as the time interval between the end
of the radiotherapy and death from any cause. DFS
was defined as the time interval between the end of
the radiotherapy and first cancer progression or death
from any cause. The outcome measure of the model
was the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER)
which represented the ratio of the difference in costs
to the difference in effectiveness (incremental cost /
incremental effectiveness) between IMPT and IMRT.
A strategy was deemed cost-effective by comparing
the ICER of the strategy with an established societal
willingness-to-pay (WTP). According to the World
Health Organization guidelines, a strategy is defined
as cost-effective if the ICER value is below 3 times
the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita [28]. In
this study, $33,558 / QALY (3 times the Chinese
GDP per capita in 2020) was applied as the current
WTP level of China; and 2 common WTP thresholds
($50,000/QALY and $100,000/QALY) were applied to
evaluate future trends [29].
Results
Model robustness verification
The input information and probabilistic sensitivity
analyses for the model parameters are summarized in
Table 1. The model robustness verification was performed
using the base-case set-ups. Markov cohort
analyses for both IMPT and IMRT strategy are shown
in Additional file 1: Fig. S1. The CEA model for the
base case predicted a 1-,3-, 5- and 10-year OS rates
of 90.0, 85.5, 80.0 and 68.7%, and the 1-,3-, 5- and
10-year DFS rates of 85.0, 78.8, 72.9 and 67.1%,
respectively (detailed in Additional file 2: Fig. S2).
The tornado diagram identified the NTCP of dysphagia
after IMPT, the NTCP of xerostomia after IMPT
and the cost of IMPT as the top 3 parameters influencing
the ICER. The other parameters had only a
minor impact on the ICER (Fig. 2).
Cost-effectiveness of the base case
By model calculation, IMPT (compared with IMRT)
provided the base case an additional 0.205 QALY at an
additional cost of $34,926.6, and the ICER was
$170,082.4/QALY. Thus, IMPT was not cost-effective
for the base case at the current WTP of China
($33,558/QALY). In the Monte Carlo simulations,
IMPT was the recommended strategy in 32.7% of trials
from the perspective of net benefit (Additional file 3:
Fig. S3). One-way sensitivity analyses with base-case
set-ups identified cost-effective threshold values for
the parameters using 3 different WTP thresholds
($33,558 / QALY, $50,000 / QALY, and $100,000 /
QALY) (Additional file 4: Table S1). IMPT could be
cost-effective for the base case if IMPT treatment costs
($50,000) reduced to ≤ $ 21,964.6, ≤ 25,341.0 and ≤
35,608.5 at the WTP thresholds of $33,558 / QALY,
$50,000 / QALY and $100,000 / QALY, respectively.
Stratified analyses
Stratified analyses were conducted for NTCP-reduction
levels and age levels. The ICERs under different NTCPreduction
levels and different age levels are listed in Table 2.
For OPC patients at median age level (56-year-old), the corresponding
ICERs were $454,083.8 / QALY, $217,370.3 /
QALY, $138,587.0 / QALY, $99,283.6 / QALY, $75,770.2 /
QALY, $65,150.4 / QALY, $49,049.7 / QALY and
$40,746.3 / QALY under the NTCP-reduction levels of 10,
20, 30, 40, 50, 60,70 and 80%, respectively.
Cost-effective scenarios and trends
With different set-ups for WTP levels ($33,558 / QALY,
$50,000 / QALY and $100,000 / QALY) and proton
treatment cost levels ($50,000, $40,000 and $30,000),
one-way sensitivity analyses identified the minimum
NTCP-reduction threshold, above which IMPT could be
cost-effective, for different patients age levels, as shown
in Additional file 5: Table S2. At the current WTP of
China ($33,558 / QALY) and a IMPT treatment costs
level of $50,000, IMPT should provide a minimum
NTCP-reduction of 47.5, 50.8, 55.6, 63.3 and 77.2% to
be considered cost-effective for patient age levels of 10,
20, 30, 40 and 50-year-old, respectively. The costeffective
thresholds of NTCP-reduction decreased significantly
with the growth of WTP level and the reduction
of proton treatment costs (Fig. 3). For OPC patients
at median age level (56-year-old), reducing the current
IMPT costs ($50,000) to a $30,000 level would make the
minimum NTCP-reduction threshold for “cost-effective”
decrease from 91.4 to 44.6%, at the current WTP of
China (decrease from 69.0 to 33.5%, at a WTP of
$50,000 / QALY; and decrease from 39.7 to 19.1%, at a
WTP of $100,000 / QALY).
Discussion
In this study, a reliable and robust 7-state Markov model
was designed to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of IMPT
versus IMRT for OPC, whose incidence is fast-growing
in China. Base-case evaluation was performed to examine
the model robustness and evaluate cost-effectiveness
at median age level, the minimum NTCP-reduction
threshold for “cost-effective” were identified to evaluate
the cost-effective scenarios. Our analyses demonstrated
that the cost-effective scenarios of PBT currently exist
in Chinese OPC younger patients who could obtain
profound NTCP-reduction from PBT; such costeffective
scenarios largely expanded with the improvement
of the WTP level and the decrease of proton
treatment costs.
The cost-effectiveness of PBT has been poorly evaluated
worldwide and has been referred to as the proton’s
“economic controversy” [18, 30]. The only documented
CEA study on PBT for OPC patients was reported by
Sher et al. [31], who designed a 6-state Markov model
using the base case of a 65-year-old OPC patient with
American hospital settings, on the assumption that
IMPT could provide a 25% reduction in xerostomia, dysgeusia
and the need for a gastrostomy tube. However,
the established 6-state Markov model by Sher et al. [31]
was found inapplicable for Chinese OPC patients in
regards to the preferential use of nasal feeding tube, rather
than percutaneous gastrostomy tube, for treating
eating difficulty, and the use of traditional Chinese medicine
when dealing with xerostomia by Chinese patients.
The Markov model design is a key step of CEA modeling
for PBT. In our previous CEA modeling for paranasal
sinus and nasal cavity cancer, a reliable 3-state
Markov model was designed to simulate the tumor development
and evaluate the cost-effectiveness of IMPT
in comparison to IMRT in terms of tumor control improvement
[32]. Unlike paranasal sinus and nasal cavity
cancer, the advantages of IMPT over IMRT for OPC patients
was the reduction of late toxicities whilst no improvement
in tumor control or survival rates [33, 34]. In
this CEA modeling for OPC, we similarly used 3 main
states including “alive with cancer”, “no cancer” and
“death” to simulate the tumor development of OPC, but
the survival probabilities were set identical between
IMPT and IMRT strategy. The model-predicted OS and
DFS were found to correspond to the previous longterm
survival outcomes reported by De Felice et al. [25],
which demonstrated that the CEA modeling indeed
followed the natural disease process of OPC.
To evaluate the long-term differences in effectiveness
and cost between the two treatment strategies, the state
of “no cancer”, which refers to OPC survivor after radiotherapy,
was further divided into 4 sub-states (“dysphagia”,
“xerostomia”, “dysphagia and xerostomia” and “no
complication”). The initial state probabilities of the 4
sub-states were set according to the NTCPs of dysphagia
and xerostomia. The observed HSUVs for the “dysphagia”,
“xerostomia”, “dysphagia and xerostomia” and “no
complication” sub-states were set as 0.803, 0.846, 0.763,
and 1, respectively, and the annual treatment costs for
these late toxicities were added as the accumulated incremental
costs. Therefore, NTCP-reduction (superiority
of IMPT over IMRT in reducing dysphagia and xerostomia)
became the motivating force to examine the
differences of cost and effectiveness between the two
strategies. The robustness of this model design was confirmed
using tornado diagram analysis, which demonstrated
that only the NTCPs after IMPT and the cost of
IMPT had major impacts on ICER value.
NTCP-reductions and patient’s age level were two
pivotal factors determining whether IMPT was costeffective
to an OPC patient in our CEA modeling. Thus,
we conducted stratified analyses for NTCP-reduction
levels and age levels, based on which the cost-effective
threshold for NTCP-reduction was more readily identified
for different patients age levels. With the current
WTP of China ($33,558 / QALY) and a proton treatment
costs of $50,000, PBT was found more favorable to
the younger OPC patients who could obtain a profound
NTCP-reduction. These findings could provide clinical
insight in terms of guiding the most cost-effective use of
this limited and expensive irradiation technique in
Chinese OPC patients setting. But it should be noted
that the cost-effectiveness of PBT would likely change
with the potential upcoming growth of PBT use in
China. In our analyses using different set-ups for WTP
levels and proton treatment cost levels, the cost-effective
thresholds of NTCP-reduction were found decreased
significantly with the growth of WTP level and the reduction
of proton treatment costs. With more proton
centers opening in China in the near future, technology
upgrades and market competition would likely promote
size reduction in proton facility layout and increase in
patient throughput efficiency, thereby contributing to a
gradual decrease of proton treatment costs. A 20% or
40% reduction to the current high costs ($50,000), the
hypothetical scenarios in our analyses, may occur [35, 36].
Meanwhile, the WTP level might increase with gradual increment
of medical insurance coverage (public or private)
and economic growth. As such, we estimated that the
cost-effective scenarios of PBT for OPC patients would
expand along with these future changes.
There were two limitations to this study worth mentioning.
First, our CEA modeling was assumption-based.
We assumed that all the symptomatic dysphagia and
xerostomia would occur within the first year after radiotherapy
and late toxicities would be irreversible once
occurred. This assumption was made based on the previously
observed studies, which showed that the risk of
these two late toxicities would be high in the first year
but negligible thereafter [37, 38]. Besides, the potential
occurrence of dysphagia or xerostomia were not evaluated
for a small part of patients in the state of “alive with
cancer”, for whom we assumed that the main suffering
should be their progressive cancer and anticancer treatment.
Hence, these assumption-related problems may
hamper the interpretation of the results to a certain
extent. Second, the CEA modeling in this study was
performed on a series of assumed set-ups. However, the
clinical decision making of using PBT to a specific OPC
patient should be based on CEA modeling with an individualized
set-up, which enables to take the patient’s age
and the specific therapeutic benefits from IMPT into
account. Thus, we plan to create an individualized CEA
modeling to guide treatment decisions for real OPC
patients.
Conclusions
On the basis of published data and assumption-based
CEA modeling, the analyses of this study demonstrated
that cost-effective scenarios of PBT do exist in Chinese
OPC patients at the current WTP of China. At current
stage, PBT is more favorable to the younger OPC patients
who could obtain a profound NTCP-reduction.
With emerging novel proton technologies optimizing
therapeutic benefits, gradual increment of medical insurance
coverage, economic growth, and proton treatment
costs reduction due to the opening of more proton centers
in China, PBT could become more cost-effective.