Background
Glioma is a common tumour originating in brain [1].
Glioblastoma is the most aggressive subtype and the most
common in adult glioma [1]. Other than glioblastoma, diffuse
gliomas include astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas.
and anaplastic astrocytomas and anaplastic oligodendrogliomas
show poor prognosis compared in each subtype [1].
These subtypes had been classified mainly by histological
diagnosis [2]. Recent intensive genomic and molecular biological
analyses of gliomas have identified several significant
driver gene mutations in IDH, BRAF, or H3F3 [3, 4]. Dysregulations
in the p53, RB1, and MAPK / PI3K pathways have
also been suggested to be involved in the molecular pathogenesis
of glioblastoma [5, 6]. The importance of the molecular
information to an understand the biological
properties and pathogenesis of glioma is well recognized.
The new 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) classification
for central nervous system tumours has introduced
the concept of multi-layered integrated diagnosis using a
combination of traditional histopathological classification
and information obtained from modern molecular analytical
methods; therefore, the necessity for molecular information
will increase in the neuro-oncological field [7].
RAS genes including KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS are wellknown
oncogenic genes, and are involved in the ERK
pathway, a subgroup of the MAPK pathway. Ligandmediated
activation of receptor tyrosine kinases, such as
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), activate RAS
proteins and initiate the cascade of the ERK signalling
pathway. Activated RAS proteins activate the RAF,
which can activate MEK just upstream of ERK [8, 9]. In
addition, RAS genes also activate PI3K [10]. Through
these several pathways, RAS genes promote cell proliferation,
survival, and growth.
Mutations in RAS genes have been found in various
cancer cells and lead to dysregulation of cell proliferation
to promote oncogenesis [11, 12]. RAS proteins
are bound to GDP in a stable state, and switch to an
activated state when bound to GTP [12, 13]. GTPase
switches GTP-bound RAS back to GDP-bound RAS
[13]. RAS mutations have an impaired intrinsic
GTPase and are insensitive to GTPase-activating proteins;
therefore, inhibiting the conversion of GTP to
GDP resulting in dysregulated cell proliferation and
oncogenesis [11–13]. RAS mutations are mainly observed
in codons 12, 13 and 61, and often in pancreatic,
colorectal, lung and thyroid cancers [14, 15].
KRAS-activating mutations are widely effective as predictors
of resistance to anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies
in colorectal and lung cancer patients [15–18].
Anti-KRAS drugs have been under development [19,
20], and some clinical trials are ongoing [21]. RAS
mutation is now an important biomarker and therapeutic
target in these solid cancers.
In terms of central nervous system diseases, a recent
study showed an important relationship between RAS
mutations and cerebral arterio-venous malformations as
a non-neoplastic pathology [22]. Although several reports
have found a small number of cases bearing RAS
mutations in various gliomas, the clinicopathological
properties of these mutations have not been fully addressed
[23–26]. This study analysed RAS mutations and
their clinical significance in gliomas.
Methods
Patients and samples
Inclusion criteria for the present study were the local
initial diagnosis of gliomas according to the 2007 WHO
classification of central nervous system tumours, and
frozen or fresh tumour tissues available for genetic analysis.
The exclusion criteria were insufficient quality of
results of genetic analysis, or clinical data, but no case
was excluded. A total of 242 cases were enrolled, including
167 tumours operated on from July 2008 to October
2017 in Kyoto University Hospital, and 75 tumours operated
on from May 2006 to March 2017 in Osaka National
Hospital. Clinical data collected from each
institution included age, sex, tumour location, extent of
resection, clinical course including treatment protocol
and dates of surgery, recurrence or progression, and
death. Ki-67 index were analysed in 167 tumours which
was operated in Kyoto University Hospital.
Sanger sequencing
Tumour DNA was extracted from tumour specimens
with NucleoSpin® Tissue (MACHEREY-NAGEL, Düren,
Germany). Regions of interest for driver genes [23, 27–30]
were amplified by PCR with gene-specific primers (Supplementary
Table 1) and TaKaRa Ex Taq® (TAKARA BIO,
Shiga, Japan) (IDH1/2, H3F3A, and HIST1H3B) or Ampli-
Taq Gold 360 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)
(TERTp, KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS) using Applied Biosystems
GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
PCR products were purified by ExoSAP-IT
(Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA), then sequenced with sequencing
primer (IDH1) or PCR forward primer as a sequencing
primer (IDH2, H3F3A, HIST1H3B, TERTp, and
exons 2 and 3 of KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS) and BigDye®
Terminator V1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) using the ABI 3130xL Genetic Analyzer
(Thermo Fisher Scientific).
MGMT promoter methylation analysis
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter
methylation was assessed by quantitative methylationspecific
PCR (qMSP), in accordance with previous reports
[31, 32]. Genomic DNA samples were processed using
the EZ DNA Methylation Gold Kit (Zymo Research
Corporation, Irvine, CA). The methylation status of
samples was analysed by qMSP using the QuantStudio
12 K Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) with POWER SYBR® Green PCR Master
Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and specific primers
(Supplementary Table 1) [33] by the standard curve
method. The cut-off for determining a hypermethylated
state was set as > 1% [32].
1p/19q co-deletion
1p/19q copy number analyses were performed with multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) according
to the instructions from the manufacturer
(SALSA MLPA KIT probemix P088; MRC-Holland,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands [32, 34]. Raw data were analysed
by Coffalyser.NET software (MLC-Holland).
Integrated diagnosis
Using all molecular pathological information, all cases
received integrated diagnoses according to the 2016
WHO classification for central nervous system tumours.
DNA methylation array
DNA methylation profiles were examined by Filgen, Inc.
(Aichi, Japan) using the Infinium® MethylationEPIC
BeadChip system (illumina, San Diego, CA). Raw methylation
data (idat files) were uploaded onto the
MolecularNeuropathology.org website and compared to
a reference cohort to then be classified into subgroups
of the highest calibrated score for each sample [35].
Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using JMP version
15 software (SAS institute INC). The continuous
variates were analyses by Student’s t-test. For survival
analysis, overall survival (OS) was defined as the interval
between the initial operative day and the date of death
or last follow-up date on which the patient was known
to be alive. Survival data were analysed using the logrank
test and Cox regression analyses. Differences were
considered significant for values of p < 0.05.
Results
All 242 cases were classified by the 2016 WHO classification,
and mutation status is shown in Table 1. The
average age of all patients was 51.3 years (range, 4–85
years; standard deviation, 19.2 years), with 153 men and
89 women. RAS mutations were detected in four gliomas
(1.65% of total cases).
Mutations in KRAS were revealed in three tumours: an
anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype; an anaplastic
oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant with a 1p/19q codeletion;
and a ganglioglioma. Another anaplastic astrocytoma,
IDH-wildtype, showed NRAS mutation. No HRAS
mutations were found in the present study. The clinical
courses of four cases with RAS mutation are presented
below, and summarized in Table 2. All four gliomas occurred
in patients under 55 years old (average age, 41.5
years; range, 31–54 years) and were in the supratentorial
area. RAS-mutant gliomas accounted for 6.25% of cases
of anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype (2 of 32), 6.67%
of anaplastic oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant with 1p/
19q codeletion (1 of 15), and all gangliogliomas (1 of 1).
Ki-67 labelling index of 3 WHO grade III tumours with
RAS mutation was higher than that of other grade III tumours
(average 29.2% (12.5–40%) vs 15.7% (3.6–50%),
p = 0.04), and that of 2 anaplastic astrocytomas was
higher than that of other anaplastic astrocytomas (average
37.5% (35–40%) vs 13.9% (3.6–30%), p = 0.0003). Ki-
67 labelling index (5%) of the one ganglioglioma with
RAS mutation was similar to that (average 3.38% (0.4–
10%)) of other WHO grade I tumours.
The clinical courses for each case were not uncommon.
But the meaning of RAS mutations in glioma for
survival were difficult to be discussed in the present
study due to the small number of patients, and the
Kaplan-Meyer curve showed no difference in overall survival
between anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-wild type,
with and without RAS mutation (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Case presentations
Case 1
A 26-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint
of dizziness, and MRI showed left frontal lobe tumour
with hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging without
gadolinium enhancement. She elected to follow a “wait
and scan” approach (Fig. 1a, b). Five years later, the
slowly growing tumour was removed under awake craniotomy.
Post-operative MRI showed total resection of the
T2-hyperintense lesion. Histopathological examinations
detected atypical glia-like cells proliferating densely, cells
with round nuclei and clear cytoplasm resembling fried
eggs, as well as astrocytic cells, in a substantial area of
the tumour. No necrosis or microvascular proliferation
was identified (Fig. 1c). FISH detected 1p/19q codeletion,
and Ki-67 labelling index of the tumour was 12.5%.
The pathological diagnosis was anaplastic oligoastrocytoma,
and the patient was followed without post-surgical
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. At 45 months after the
first surgery, the tumour recurred, and a second surgery
was performed to achieve total resection. No rerecurrence
was seen until this presentation, 69 months
after the first surgery. No anti-tumour treatment had
been performed after the second surgery. Genetic analysis
of primary tumour showed IDH1 R132H, TERT
C250T, and KRAS G12A (Supplementary Fig. 2), and no
mutations in IDH2, H3F3A, or HIST1H3B. MGMT promoter
was hypomethylated. MLPA analysis showed 1p/
19q codeletion and no CDKN2A/B deletion (Fig. 1d).
The integrated diagnosis from Sanger sequencing,
MLPA, and pathological findings was anaplastic oligodendroglioma,
IDH-mutant and 1p/19q codeleted. Interestingly,
genetic analysis of recurrent tumour showed
the same result about IDH1/2, TERTp, H3F3A and
HIST1H3B, but KRAS mutation was not detected.
Case 2
A 54-year-old woman presented with a 3-month history
of increasing headache and dizziness. MRI showed a
gadolinium-enhanced lesion in the genu of the corpus
callosum and a T2 hyperintensity lesion spreading to bilateral
frontal lobes (Fig. 2a, b). Emergent endoscopic
surgery was performed because of progressing hydrocephalus
and achieved partial removal of the tumour.
Histopathological examinations showed increased atypical
glial cells and numerous mitoses, but no microvascular
proliferation or palisading necrosis in the
specimen (Fig. 2c). Ki-67 labelling index was 40%. The
pathological diagnosis was high-grade glioma, and postoperative
treatment was radiotherapy concomitant with
temozolomide [36]. After discharge, she received maintenance
therapy with temozolomide and bevacizumab.
However, she showed progressive disease 29 months
after the first surgery and received bevacizumab in combination
with ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide
(ICE) [37]. The tumour kept growing slowly, and she
died 49 months after the first surgery. Genetic analysis
revealed no mutations in IDH1/2, H3F3A, HIST1H3B or
TERT promoter, and MGMT promoter was hypermethylated.
In addition, KRAS E76D was detected (Supplementary
Fig. 2). A DNA methylation array showed
MGMT promoter hypermethylation, matching the qMSP
result, but did not identify any matching methylation
classes with high calibrated scores. The copy number
profile showed no special characteristics (Fig. 2d). The
final diagnosis was anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype.
To support this diagnosis, additional Sanger sequencing
was performed and TP53 P72R was revealed.
Case 3
A 45-year-old man presented with simple partial seizures
involving the right side of the face. MRI showed a
T2-hyperintense lesion without gadolinium enhancement
in the left frontoparietal lobe. Histopathological
examinations of stereotactic biopsy revealed tumour
cells with semiround or round nuclei (Fig. 3a) of various
sizes, and areas of mitoses, with a Ki-67 labelling index
of 35%. No necrosis or vascular proliferation was seen,
and FISH revealed no 1p/19q codeletion. The diagnosis
was anaplastic glioma. He received chemoradiotherapy
comprising 60 Gy with temozolomide, but MRI showed
tumour progression 3 months later (Fig. 3b, c). He was
treated with additional radiotherapy and bevacizumab
with ICE but died 24 months after the first surgery. Genetic
analysis revealed NRAS Q61R (Supplementary Fig.
2), but no mutations in IDH1/2, H3F3A, HIST1H3B or
TERT promoter, and MGMT promoter was not hypermethylated.
Methylation-based profiling by the DNA
methylation array classified this tumour as “methylation
class family Glioblastoma, IDH wildtype” with a calibrated
score of 0.55. This low score could be a result of
low tumour content or low DNA quality in the analysed
material, but the classification matched well with the
clinical course and pathological findings. The copy
number profile showed amplification of PDGFRA and
loss of CDKN2A/B and TP53, gain of chromosomes 7,
9q, and 12, and loss of chromosomes 11 and 13 (Fig.
3d). Because there was no evidence of grade 4 histology,
the integrated diagnosis was determined as anaplastic
astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype.
Case 4
A 36-year-old man was referred after a brain tumour was
coincidentally identified on screening CT after a traffic accident.
MRI revealed a left medial occipitotemporal
tumour with gadolinium enhancement (Fig. 4a, b). Histopathological
examination of stereotactic biopsy (Fig. 4c)
revealed a dense, invasive proliferation of various-sized
glial cells with some mitoses, and a Ki-67 labelling index
of 5%. No necrosis or microvascular proliferation was
identified. Immunohistochemistry showed positive results
for olig2, GFAP, and p53, while FISH showed no 1p/19q
codeletion. Based on these findings, the first diagnosis was
anaplastic astrocytoma. The patient received chemoradiation
and maintenance chemotherapy with temozolomide.
As tumour progression was detected 18months after biopsy,
he underwent gross total resection of the tumour.
No tumour recurrence was identified after the second surgery,
and no additional treatment was performed for 24
months. Genetic analysis of primary tumour revealed
KRAS Q61K (Supplementary Fig. 2), wild-type IDH1/2,
H3F3A, HIST1H3B and TERT promoter, and no MGMT
promoter hypermethylation. The DNA methylation array
classified “methylation class family pilocytic astrocytoma”
as the methylation class and “methylation class of lowgrade
glioma, subclass hemispheric pilocytic astrocytoma
and ganglioglioma” as the methylation class family mem
The copy number profile showed gain of chromosomes 7,
9, 11 and 12 (Fig. 4d). Histopathological re-examination
revealed many large ganglion cells with anisonucleosis and
some double nuclei (Fig. 4e), Nissl bodies and eosinophilic
granular bodies (Fig. 4f) in specimens from the second
surgery. Given these genetic results and histopathological
findings, the final diagnosis was ganglioglioma. Like as
case 1, KRAS mutation was not detected in the recurrent
tumour.
Review of the previous reported cases
Previous 17 studies presented 44 gliomas with RAS mutations
(Table 3). They were 17 glioblastomas (2 were
glioblastomas with oligodendroglial component), 1 astrocytoma,
4 oligodendrogliomas, 3 anaplastic oligodendrogliomas,
1 oligoastrocytoma, 9 pilocytic astrocytomas, 2
anaplastic pilocytic astrocytomas, 2 fibrillary
astrocytomas, 2 gangliogliomas, 2 pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytomas, and 1 gliosarcoma. And they included
14 men and 13 women, and ages at diagnosis
were described in 28 patients and they were 1–64 years
(average, 33.3 years; standard deviation, 17.1 years). The
co-existing mutations were various and IDH1 R132H
was the major mutation which detected in 11 cases.
Discussion
Various reports have described RAS mutations in glioma.
Chi et al. analysed 214 gliomas, and they found
3 KRAS mutation cases among 164 glioblastomas
[24]. Wakimoto et al. found 4 KRAS-mutant IDH-mutant
gliomas, comprising 2 oligodendrogliomas, a
grade 2 astrocytoma, and a glioblastoma with an
oligodendroglial component. These 4 tumours all
showed 1p/19q codeletions, and were thus considered
to represent grade 2 or 3 oligodendrogliomas based
on the 2016 WHO brain tumour classifications [26].
Ballester et al. showed the results of next-generation
sequencing of 381 diffuse gliomas [47]. They found a
NRAS mutation in 11 oligodendrogliomas, 2 KRAS
mutations in 16 anaplastic oligodendrogliomas, and 2
KRAS mutations and 2 NRAS mutations in 226 glioblastomas.
Pekmezci et al. detected KRAS mutation in
2 of 40 gangliogliomas [25]. Literature review of RASmutant
gliomas showed that RAS-mutant gliomas
have various histologies and that RAS mutation coexisted
with other genetic alterations. They were often
reported in young cases. The larger database made by
the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research Network
showed 2 KRAS mutation and 2 NRAS mutation in
590 glioblastomas, and 1 KRAS mutation and 1 NRAS
mutation in low grade gliomas with IDH-mutant and
1p/19q codeletion, and 1 KRAS mutation and 2 NRAS
mutation in those with IDH-mutant and no 1p/19q
codeletion [52]. Summarizing by age group, RAS mutations
were found in 1 out of all 93 gliomas under
30 years old, 6 out of 631 cases from 30 to 60 years
old, and 1 out of 363 cases in over 60 years old, and
there was no significant difference in frequency of
RAS mutations [52]. Similar to these studies, we report
RAS mutation as a rare occurrence with no association
to a particular histological phenotype of
glioma. Additionally, copy number analysis in the
present study revealed no chromosomal gain or loss.
In this study, RAS-mutant gliomas showed various
histology, but all cases were in relatively young adults.
RAS mutation was found in an anaplastic oligodendroglioma,
two IDH-wildtype anaplastic astrocytomas, and a
ganglioglioma. Among the 20- to 60-year-old patients of
our present cohort, 14 tumours were anaplastic oligodendrogliomas,
23 were anaplastic astrocytomas (14
were IDH-wildtype), and one was ganglioglioma. Excluding
the single ganglioglioma case present in our cohort,
IDH-wildtype anaplastic astrocytomas in patients under
60 years old showed RAS mutation the most frequently
(14.3%). Genetically, no other major driver mutations
were identified in the anaplastic astrocytomas or the
ganglioglioma, which had RAS mutations. The case of
RAS-mutant anaplastic oligodendroglioma showed IDH1
and TERT promoter mutations, which are known to be
detected in almost all oligodendrogliomas [27]. Because
of the small number of RAS mutant tumours, clarifying
the genetic properties of RAS mutant tumours and discussing
associations between RAS mutations and other
driver genes is difficult, however, some studies reported
the co-existing other genetic alterations in RAS-mutant
gliomas. Clinically, the two cases of anaplastic astrocytoma
with RAS mutation showed aggressive infiltration
during the clinical course with high Ki-67 labelling
index, but clinical outcomes did not differ from those of
other IDH-wildtype anaplastic astrocytomas (Supplementary
Fig. 1). The other two cases of anaplastic oligodendroglioma
and ganglioglioma showed benign clinical
courses. Some studies have reported RAS mutation as a
prognostic factor in some non-neuroepithelial solid cancers
[53, 54]. However, we could not explain the clinical
significance of RAS mutation occurring in gliomas. The
limitation of the present study was the rarity of RAS mutant
gliomas due to the infrequency of RAS mutation in
glioma. This was why the survival analysis was difficult
in our cases, but it was also the same in another previous
cohort. These issues should be addressed using larger
cohorts in the future.
KRAS mutation has been reported to increase vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and to promote
the construction of a tumour vascular network
[55]. However, the present study found no evidence of
an aggressive vascular network such as widespread gadolinium
enhancement or intra-tumoral arteriovenous
shunt. KRAS G12D is reportedly associated with gliosis
[56]. Another report suggested that KRAS signalling is
essential for the maintenance of glioblastoma in mice,
and inhibition of KRAS expression result in tumour
apoptosis [57]. These facts proposed that RAS mutation
has some effect on glioma maintenance and proliferation,
and MAPK / PI3K pathways, which are activated
by RAS mutation, have been suggested to be involved in
the molecular pathogenesis of glioblastoma [5, 6]. Although
the higher Ki-67 labelling index in the RAS-mutant
gliomas had not been discussed previously, this may
reflect the tumour proliferation activities. Some anti-
RAS drugs are currently under development [19, 20],
and these drugs are expected to make contributions to
improving the prognosis of RAS-mutant glioma in the
near future.
In the presented case series, recurrent tumours of case
1 (AO) and case 4 (ganglioglioma) showed no RAS mutations
which were shown in their primary tumour. This
fact may imply that tumour with RAS mutation was disappeared
by treatment. Through direct comparison of
the genomic landscape of gliomas at initial diagnosis and
recurrence, a previous study showed that full set of mutations
found in the initial tumour do not maintain in
the recurrences and suggested that recurrent tumours
are originate from cells derived at a very early stage of
the evolution of tumours [58]. While IDH1 and TERTp
mutations, and 1p/19q codeletion assigned as the truncal
events during tumour evolution [3], RAS mutations in
glioma may be an additional alterations to development.
About the primary tumours, Sanger sequencing revealed
TP53 mutation in one of these AAs, and methylation
assay showed amplification of PDGFRA and loss of
CDKN2A/B and TP53 in the other. This fact proposed
that RAS mutation have a potential to be a driver gene
of glioma development, but its effect may be supportive
compared with major truncal driver mutations like as
IDH mutation, TERTp mutation and 1p/19q codeletion.
Because RAS mutation could switch at glioma recurrence,
the molecular analysis is thought to be essential
for recurrent as well as primary tumours when anti-RAS
treatment are conducted.
0.07% of cases in the Project Genomics Evidence Neoplasia
Information Exchange (AACR GENIE) launched
by the American Association for Cancer Research [59].
KRAS G12A has been identified in lung, colon, colorectal
and rectal adenocarcinoma, and uterine endometrioid
carcinoma, while KRAS Q61K has been found in colon,
colorectal and pancreatic adenocarcinoma. KRAS G12A
and KRAS Q61K are predictive biomarkers for the use of
erlotinib, gefitinib, cetuximab, and panitumumab in patients
[16–18, 60, 61]. Non-small cell lung carcinoma
and colorectal carcinoma have the greatest number of
therapies targeting KRAS G12A and KRAS Q61K or related
pathways. KRAS E76D has not been reported in
other types of cancer, and further study was needed
whether if it has a role of an activating mutation. NRAS
Q61R is present in 0.73% of AACR GENIE cases [59],
and has been identified in cutaneous melanoma, melanoma,
papillary thyroid cancer, poorly differentiated thyroid
gland cancer, and colon adenocarcinoma [59].
NRAS Q61R is a predictive biomarker for the uses of
cetuximab and panitumumab in patients [60, 61]. Further,
for NRAS-mutant melanoma, binimetinib reportedly
improves progression-free survival compared with
dacarbazine [62].
Lower grade astrocytomas in our cohort contained a
large number of IDH-wild type tumours. This fact partially
results from high frequency of TERTp mutation. In
our IDH-wild type tumours, 8 out of 18 DAs and 15 out
of 32 AAs showed TERTp mutation. Nowadays, IDHwild
type astrocytomas with TERTp mutations are
known as a group of astrocytomas with poor prognosis,
and these tumours are supposed to be a different group
from the group of common lower grade astrocytomas
[63]. The diagnosis of lower grade astrocytoma without
IDH mutation needs further discussion.
Conclusions
We found 4 RAS mutations in various types of 242 gliomas.
All cases involved younger adults. No clear association
was identified between RAS mutations and clinical
or genetic characteristics of tumours. Clarification of the
effectiveness of anti-RAS treatments for gliomas requires
further investigations in larger cohorts.