Background
Lung cancer still is the leading malignancy in the global
cancer spectrum of morbidity and mortality [1].
Lung cancer mainly comprises non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC),
with more than 83% of all cases being NSCLC [2].
Because of late diagnosis and tumor recurrence, the
5-year overall survival rate of patients with NSCLC
and SCLC remains low (approximately 23 and 6%, respectively)
[2, 3]. Tumor proven by the presence of
malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but
not visualized by imaging or bronchoscopy is considered
as occult lung cancer [4, 5]. Previous studies on
the incidence of occult lung cancer have only
analyzed groups of stroke patients, or incidental case
reports of other diseases [6–9]. Therefore, for lung
cancer patients, the incidence information of occult
lung cancer remains insufficient.
In addition, accurate tumor-lymph node-metastasis
(TNM) staging means that the prognosis of the patients
is accurate [10, 11]. Patients with stage IA
(classification T1N0M0) have the best long-term survival
outcomes in all lung cancers [10]. In the guidelines
of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network,
occult lung cancers are classified as TxN0M0 [12].
Thus, the prognosis of occult lung cancer patients remains
unclear because of the unclear TNM classification.
The prognoses of diseases have an effect on
treatment selection and patients’ management. However,
there was no data about the incidence rate and
survival analyses of occult lung cancer in the previous
studies. Thus, we aimed to investigate the incidence
rate and prognostic level of those patients with occult
lung cancer.
Methods
Patients
The Ethics Committee of Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital
approved this study and considered this study exempt
from ethical review because existing data without patient
identifiers were used. This study majorly included two
parts, incidence-rate analysis (step 1) and survival analysis
(step 2). We retrospectively recruited patients who
were histologically diagnosed with malignant tumor in
the lungs as their first primary malignancy from 2004 to
2015 in Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) database, which contains clinicopathological and
survival data of cancer patients from 18 registries.
Therefore, the present study could be considered as a
multi-center analysis. The selection criteria of patients
were shown in Fig. 1. A total of 305,054 patients (including
2958 occult lung cancers) were used to perform incidence
analysis after step-one case selection. Next, we
processed step-two case selection. There were 52,472
eligible patients (including 2353 occult lung cancers) for
survival analysis. The detailed information was presented
as Fig. 1. All patient records were anonymized before
analysis. Information collected from the SEER database
included sex, race/ ethnicity, survival time, cause on disease,
age at diagnosis, tumor size, approach of treatment
(including surgical treatment, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy),
tumor differentiation, histological subtype,
tumor location, TNM stage, and marital status.
Follow-up
Cancer-specific survival, which was the duration from
the date of diagnosis to death caused by lung cancer,
was regarded as our observational endpoint. For survival
analysis, follow-up duration ranged from 1.0 to 155.0
months, with a median of 27.0 months. Those patients
who entered the survival analysis had definitive survival
status, death or alive.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS statistics
25.0 software (IBM SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA),
and GraphPad Prism 8 (https://www.graphpad.com/
scientific-software/prism/). Risk ratios (RRs), hazard ratios
(HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated
using multivariable Logistic regression analysis
and Cox regression analysis, respectively (regression
method was Enter selection). The average value of each
covariate was calculated by the multivariable Cox regression
model, and estimated the adjusted survival curves
of T classification. Statistical tests were considered statistically
significant with two-sided p value < 0.05.
Results
Patient characteristics
In the step-one case selection, there were 305,054 patients
(including 2958 occult lung cancers) for calculating
incidence. Majority of the patients were male (N =
162,448, 53.3%), and 248,125 (81.3%) were non-Hispanic
whites. The median age was 68 years old (range from 18
years to 104 years). The detailed information of patient
characteristics was shown in Table 1.
After step-two case selection, eligible 52,472 patients
(including 2353 occult lung cancers) entered into processing
of survival analysis. Male patients accounted for
51.2% (N = 26,858). Age at diagnosis ranged from 18
years old to 100 years old (median 70 years). The major
part of histological subtypes belonged to adenocarcinoma
(N = 23,406, 44.6%) as shown in Table 2.
Incidence-rate analysis
In the all 305,054 patients, the crude incidence rate was
1.00 per 100 patients, and it was reduced between 2004
and 2015 [Fig. 2, 1.4 (95% CI 1.22–1.52) per 100 persons
in 2004; 0.6 (95% CI 0.53–0.72) per 100 persons in 2015;
Table 3, adjusted RR = 0.437, 95% CI 0.363–0.527]. The
results of Linear regression revealed that trends about
crude incidence rate of occult lung cancer was decreased
over time (R = 0.023, p < 0.001).
Survival analysis of T classification
The median survival time of all 52,472 patients was 27
months (range from 1 month to 155 months). Besides,
the 1-year, 3-year and 5-year cancer-specific survival rate
of this cohort were 62, 49, and 44%, respectively. The
unadjusted 5-year cancer-specific survival rate was the
best in the patients with T1a (75%) and the worst in the
patients with Tx (15%). The median survival time was
13 months (95% CI 12.10–13.90 months) in the patients
with Tx, which indicated the rate of death events had
exceeded 50%. We also found that the classification of
Tx was the riskiest factor for the prognoses (Table 4, unadjusted
HR =6.339, p < 0.001). However, the results
were not inconsistent after multivariable Cox regression
analysis. We used multivariable Cox regression analysis
to identify the prognostic role of Tx (occult lung cancer)
in the different T classifications (Table 4). After adjusting
for other confounders, patients with Tx had a poorer
prognosis than patients of T2b (adjusted HR 1.186, p <
0.001), nevertheless better long-term survival outcomes
than patients with T4 (adjusted HR 0.845, p < 0.001). Besides,
the prognosis for patients of Tx was not statistically
different from that of T3 patients (p = 0.121). The
adjusted survival curves also presented similar results
(Fig. 3).
Prognostic analysis for occult lung cancer
There were 2353 occult lung cancer patients for survival
analyses, of which baseline characteristics were shown in
Table 5. In this cohort, there were 2206 death events in
the 2353 occult lung cancers. Female patients showed a
better survival than male patients (Table 6, adjusted
HR = 0.796, 95%CI 0.726–0.876, p < 0.001). Besides, the
prognosis in patients with age > 72 years was poorer than
younger patients (adjusted HR = 1.183, 95%CI 1.063–
1.295). The number of adenocarcinomas was the most,
which accounted for 33.0% (N = 776). Its long-term survival
outcomes were better than squamous cell carcinomas
(adjusted HR = 0.878, p = 0.042). Of note, 1162
patients didn’t receive any treatment. However, patients
who underwent surgical resection or radiotherapy had
improved survival benefits (Table 6). One-hundred and
twenty-six patients underwent lobectomy, whose 5-year
cancer-specific survival rate reached 47%. After adjusting
for other confounders, we identified sex, tumor differentiation,
tumor location, age, histological subtypes, radiotherapy,
and surgical treatment as independent
prognostic factors.
Discussion
In the present study, we used the data of 305,054 patients
(including 2958occult lung cancer patients) to perform
incidence-rate analysis. The results revealed that
the crude incidence rate of occult lung cancer was 1.00
per 100 patients, and the incidence-rate trend over time
was likely to be reduced between 2004 and 2015. Next,
data on 52,472 eligible patients were analyzed by Cox regression
analysis including univariable and multivariable
analyses. Those patients included 2353 cases of occult
lung cancer. According to the results, we found that occult
lung cancer patients didn’t have satisfactory survival
outcomes. The prognosis of occult lung cancer was between
T2b’s and T4’s. Besides, there was no significant
difference in the prognosis of patients with T3 classification
or occult lung cancer. After adjusting for other confounders,
the female, age ≤ 72, well differentiation,
adenocarcinoma, radiotherapy, and surgical resection
were considered as independent protective prognostic
factors for 2353 occult lung cancer patients. Therefore,
we suggested that surgery might be an appropriate option
for occult lung cancer.
The incidence rate of occult lung cancer varied to a
certain extent in the different populations. Previous
studies and case reports found that occult lung cancer
was usually accompanied by symptoms, metastatic diseases
or other internal-medicine diseases when it was
detected [6, 13–16]. Yoel Siegel et al. described a case report
that occult lung cancer could mimic pneumonia
and a pulmonary embolus by occluding a pulmonary
vein [7]. A case by William Carrera et al. presented that
occult small cell lung cancer might have a relation with
occurring of retinopathy with chorioretinitis and optic
neuritis [8]. Besides, Hui Mai et al. performed a study
about characteristics of occult lung cancer-associated ischemic
stroke, and suggested that occult cancer should
be considered in the setting of multiple and recurrent
embolic strokes within the short term in the absence of
conventional stroke etiologies [9]. The above cases and
study showed that occult lung cancer might be accompanied
by different clinical symptoms. However, clinicians
tend to pay more attention to their specialties,
thus the diagnosis of the occult lung cancer becomes
more complicated. Therefore, the research on the incidence
rate of this disease may provide clinicians with
some references for disease diagnosis and treatment.
Because malignant tumors may cause the blood to hypercoagulable
state, which leads to the occurrence of
thrombosis [17], the previous researchers began to investigate
the incidence of occult lung cancer in stroke
patients. Alejandro Daniel Babore et al. analyzed data of
over 800,000 patients, and uncovered that the prevalence
of occult lung cancer was 5.3 per 1000 patients in the
stroke patients, and 2.6 per 1000 patients in the control
group [6]. The sample size of their study was large,
therefore, the results had clinical reference value. However,
the results of the present study revealed that crude
incidence rate of occult lung cancer was 10.0 per 1000
patients, which was much higher than the findings from
above study. This difference in the incidence-rate results
between above two studies was likely to be due to different
selected cohorts. Our study cohort focused on lung
cancer, which led to a higher incidence rate of occult
lung cancer in the present study. However, the study by
Alejandro Daniel Babore et al. majorly compared the incidence
rate of occult lung cancer in stoke patients with
that in general patients. Besides, they tried to explore
the factors which might have effect on incidence rate.
Though, this present study paid more attention to the
incidence rate of occult lung cancer in entire lung cancer
cohort, and illustrated that the incidence rate over
time was reduced between 2004 and 2015. The reason
why general trend over time was declined might be the
popularization of computed tomography screening and
the promotion of bronchoscopy [4, 18, 19].
The present study found that the prognosis of occult
lung cancer patients was poorer than that in patients
with T2 disease. Those patients might have occult metastasis
of lymph node or another organ, which leads to
a poor prognosis. Of note, timely therapy could improve
the long-term survival in the occult lung cancer. Patients
who underwent surgical resection had better cancerspecific
survival than patients who didn’t receive surgical
treatment. And, the best survival benefit was derived
from lobectomy. Joel J. Bechtel et al. and Cortese DA
et al. had similar findings in their research [20, 21]. They
suggested that 5-year survival rate was 74 and 90% in
patients with cure resection, respectively. However, the
sample size was relatively small in their research [20,
21]. For example, in the study by Joel J. Bechtel et al.,
only 27 of the 51 patients they enrolled underwent surgical
resection. Similarly, there were only 54 patients
underwent operation in the study by Cortese DA et al.
The sample size of the present study was different from
above mentioned studies causing the difference of 5-year
survival rate followed surgical resection. Besides, radiotherapy
was proven to have survival benefit in the 71-
case study by M Saito et al [22]. In the present study,
compared with patients who didn’t receive radiotherapy,
cases with radiotherapy had a better survival. These findings
confirmed the results from previous study.
This study has several limitations. First, some important
information (such as the invasion depth of tumor in
the endobronchial wall) wasn’t detailed, as we couldn’t
obtain the results of bronchoscopy and radiology in the
SEER database. Thus, we did not further categorize the
Tx classification. Second, cases with second primary
lung cancer were excluded from the study. However, the
incidence rate of occult lung cancer might be much
higher in the cohort of second primary lung cancer.
Therefore, the use of those findings was limited to patients
with primary lung cancer. Third, because the data
on histological subtypes were not detailed enough, unknown
non-sarcoma cancer and unknown non-small cell
carcinoma couldn’t be subdivided. Finally, this study
belonged to retrospective study. Therefore, more studies
are necessary to further explore the incidence rate and
prognosis in patients with occult lung cancer.
Fig. 3 The adjusted survival curves of different T classifications
Conclusions
Occult lung cancer was uncommon. However, the
cancer-specific survival of occult lung cancer was poor,
therefore, we should put the assessment of its prognoses
on the agenda. Timely surgical treatment and radiotherapy
could improve survival outcomes. Besides, we still
need more research to confirm those findings.