Background
In kidney cancer, renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the
leading histological type and has the highest death
rate of all solid urological tumors [1]. Advances in
imaging technology and an increase in physical
check-ups have led to a higher incidence of RCC detection,
which enables early clinical intervention [2].
Despite new approaches to RCC treatment, including
new pharmacological inhibitors, RCC remains
chemotherapy-resistant, and patient survival largely
depends on surgical treatment at early stages [3]. Discovery
of a novel therapeutic target to improve prognosis
in RCC patients is an urgent clinical need.
Clarification of the molecular mechanisms underlying
RCC will provide evidence to improve clinical
strategies.
Tripartite motif (TRIM) family proteins contribute to
cancer development by mediating cell growth, metastasis,
and oncogenesis [4]. TRIM27 was first identified as a
regulator in oncogenic rearrangements, and contains

several domains: a Really Interesting New Gene (RING)
finger, two B-boxes (type I and type II), and the RBCC
motif [5]. The RING finger domain, which is responsible
for E3 ubiquitin activity, is directly responsible for ubiquitination
[6]. As an oncogene, TRIM27 promotes cancer
cell growth in various cancers, including esophageal,
lung, and colorectal cancers [7, 8]. TRIM44 is another
TRIM member that exhibits oncogenic roles in RCC,
and higher TRIM44 levels are associated with poor prognosis
[9]. However, the role of TRIM27 in RCC has not
yet been investigated.
Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) is an essential signaling
transcription factor that regulates diverse cellular processes.
NF-κB promotes proliferation, regulates cell death,
stimulates migration, and mediates inflammatory processes
depending on the cell type, developmental stage,
and pathological state [10, 11]. The NF-κB complex is inactivate
in the cytoplasm, and upon stimulation, the NF-
κB dimer moves to the nucleus, where it binds to various
target genes [12]. Iκbα is a well-characterized NF-κB inhibitor,
which acts by removing NF-κB from DNA in the
nucleus and relocating it to the cytosol [13, 14]. The activation/
translocation of NF-κB requires the removal of
Iκbα by ubiquitination and degradation. In lung carcinoma,
NF-κB and Iκbα signaling is regulated by TRIM family
members [15, 16]. Since the interaction between NF-
κB/Iκbα and TRIM27 has been previously reported in
other systems [17], we hypothesize that TRIM27 promotes
RCC development through its effect on NF-κB/Iκbα
pathways.
Methods
Cell culture
HK-2, 786–0, A498, ACHN, CaKi-1, and CaKi-2 cells
were purchased from Shanghai Biology Institute (Shanghai,
P.R. China). Cells were maintained in DMEM media
(Trueline, Kaukauna, WI, USA) containing 10% FBS
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), Lglutamine
(2 mM) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin
(Solarbio; Beijing, P.R. China). Cells were placed in a
37 °C incubator with 95% air and 5% CO2. The NF-κB
inhibitor was dissolved in DMSO (D2605, Sigma, USA).
qRT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen,
Waltham, MA, USA). cDNA was generated using a
cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA). Real-time PCR was conducted with following
cycling scheme: 95 °C for 10 min, 40 cycles of 95 °C for
15 s, and 60 °C for 45 s on the real-time PCR equipment
(ABI-7300, ABI, USA). GAPDH was the internal control.
The 2−ΔΔCt method was used for gene expression analysis
as mentioned in a previous report [18]. All experiments
were performed using three replicates. The
primer sequences were as follows: F: 5′-GAGCAAATCC
AGAACCAG-3′, R 5′-TCAAACTCCCAAACAATC-3′;
GAPDH: F 5′-AATCCCATCACCATCTTC-3′, R 5′-
AGGCTGTTGTCATACTTC-3′; nuclear factor kappa B
subunit 1 (NF-κB), F 5′-CGGGGACGGTCTGAATGC-
3′, R 5′-CTGCCAATGAGATGTTGTCGTG-3′.
Bioinformatics
The gene expression of TRIM27 and Kaplan–Meier analysis
were downloaded from TCGA dataset (http://
ualcan.path.uab.edu/analysis.html) to analyze the effect
of TRIM27 on overall survival of RCC patient. KEGG,
REACTOME, and DUTTA analysis indicated that cell
apoptosis was positively correlated with elevated
TRIM27 expression in RCC from the database
GSE53757. Western blotting.
Proteins were extracted in RIPA lysis buffer (JRDUN,
Shanghai, P.R. China), in the presence of Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail (EDTA-free; Roche, Heidelberg,
Germany). The concentration was calculated by a BCA
protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,
MA, USA). A total of 25 μg of proteins were separated
by 10% SDS-PAGE gels before being transferred to
nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore, Billerica, MA,
USA) overnight. The membranes were blocked with 5%
non-fat dry milk (1 h at room temperature). Primary
antibodies were incubated at 4 °C overnight, followed by
incubation of secondary antibody anti-mouse IgG (1:
1000; Beyotime, Shanghai, P.R. China) for 1 h at 37 °C.
The bands were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence
system (Tanon, Shanghai, P.R. China). The
primary antibodies that used in this study were listed as
follows: TRIM27 (#15099; CST, USA), NF-kB (#8242;
CST, USA), cleaved caspase 3 (Ab32042; Abcam, UK),
H3 (#4499; CST, USA), GAPDH (#5174; CST, USA).
IkBa (ab32518, abcam, USA). Protein expression was
quantified according to the gray value after normalized
to GAPDH, nuclear extract was normalized against that
of histone H3.
Knockdown and overexpression of TRIM27
Lentiviral plasmids (pLKO.1) with three siRNAs targeting
human TRIM27 (NM_006510.5) and a control
siRNA (siNC) were designed and generated (Major,
Shanghai, People’s Republic of China). Lentiviral plasmids
(pLVX-puro) with full length human TRIM27 or a
mock plasmid (negative control) were generated and
transiently transfected into Caki-1, Caki-2, and 786–0
cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Cells were harvested 48
h post-transfection. The TRIM27 siRNAs were as follows:
siTRIM27–1: 941–959, CCCAGTTCTCTTGCAA
CAT); siTRIM27–2: 1052–1070, GGGCTGAAAG
AATCAGGAT; and siTRIM27–3: 1495–1513, GGATTC
TGGGCAGTGTCTT.
Cell proliferation
Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay kits (SAB, College
Park, MD, USA) were purchased for the cell proliferation
assay. Briefly, cells were transfected and seeded in
96-well plates for various time points. CCK-8 solution
(1: 10) was incubated for 1 h before harvest. The optical
densities were measured using a microplate reader
(Pulangxin, Beijing, P.R. China) at 450 nm.
Cell apoptosis
Caki-1, Caki-2, and 786–0 cells were collected and examined
using an Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate’
apoptosis kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, P.R. China) 48 h post
viral infection. Cells were examined by flow cytometry
(BD, San Diego, CA, USA).
Co-immunoprecipitation (CO-IP)
Cell extracts were incubated with different antibodies in
the presence of Protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Dallas, TX, USA) overnight. The beads were
washed thoroughly and the elutes were examined using
SDS-PAGE and Western blot.
Ubiquitination
siNC or siTRIM27 was transfected. Cells were lysed in
RIPA buffer (1% SDS) by sonication. Lysates were incubated
with Protein A/G PLUS-agarose (sc-2003; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, USA) for 1 h. IgG (sc-2027; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, USA) was added to all samples and
incubated overnight at 4 °C. Nuclear pellets were collected
following centrifugation at 3000 rpm at 4 °C,
followed by washing with Protein A/G Plus-Agarose
beads four times. Proteins were loaded onto 4–20% gradient
SDS-PAGE gels. Signals were detected by anti-
IκBα antibody (#4812; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers,
MA, USA) and anti-ubiquitin antibody (ab7780;
Abcam, UK).
Xenograft model
All animal procedures were performed according to the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Experiments
were approved by the independent ethics committee
of the Changhai Hospital, Naval Medical
University, Shanghai. siNC- or siTRIM27-transfected
Caki-2 cells (n = 2 × 106), and oeNC or oeTRIM27-
transfected Caki-1 cells (n = 2 × 106) were injected into
the right flank of nude mice (4–6 weeks old, n = 6 in
each group; Shanghai Laboratory Animal Company,
Shanghai, PR China). Mice were sacrificed by cervical
dislocation after 6 weeks. Mouse tissues were collected
in 4% formalin.
TUNEL
TUNEL assays were performed on sections using an
ApopTag kit (11,684,817,910; Roche, Switzerland) principally
according to the supplier’s instructions. Three independent
biological replicates were required for each
sample.
Histopathology
Tissues were fixed in 10% formalin for 48 h before embedding
in paraffin. Tissues were processed into slices
using a microtome (Leike, China). A series of xylene and
alcohol incubations were performed. Tissues were observed
by hematoxylin and eosin staining.
Immunohistochemistry
Tissues were embedded in paraffin. Slices (5 μm) were
treated in H2O2 (3%) dissolved in methanol and 5% normal
horse serum before staining. Sections were incubated
with the following primary antibodies overnight at
4 °C: anti-TRIM27 antibody (ab137638; Abcam, UK) and
anti-NF-KB antibody (ab16502; Abcam, UK). The sections
were then incubated with secondary goat antirabbit
IgG (1:100; ab64256; Abcam) for 30 min at room
temperature. The sections were visualized with diaminobenzidine
and hematoxylin. Cells with > 25% positive
staining were defined as having “high expression.”
Statistical analysis
Analysis was performed by GraphPad Prism Version 7.0
(La Jolla, CA, USA). Data are shown as mean ± SD. Oneway
ANOVA was performed, and P-values < 0.05 indicated
statistical significance.
Results
Increased expression of TRIM27 in RCC correlates with
poor prognosis
To define TRIM27 expression in RCC, we first compared
the TRIM27 mRNA from RCC tissues (n = 535)
and normal renal tissues (n = 72) from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA). Our results showed that TRIM27
mRNA was significantly elevated in RCC tissues
(Fig. 1A). Consistent with RCC patient data, TRIM27
was selectively upregulated in human RCC cell lines
(Fig. S1A). Western blots showed that TRIM27 was increased
in 786–0 and Caki-1 cells at translational levels
(Fig. S1B). We conducted a chi-square test to investigate
any correlation between TRIM27 and RCC clinical characteristics.
High levels TRIM27 were associated with
several clinical characteristics, including tumor size, T
stage, Fuhrman grade, and metastasis (Table 1).
Kaplan–Meier analysis of TCGA datasets demonstrated
that the survival time of patients with high
mRNA levels of TRIM27 was significantly shorter than
that of patients with lower levels (Fig. 1B). These results
suggest that up-regulation of TRIM27 expression in
RCC links to a shorter survival duration. To confirm the
TCGA data analysis, we measured TRIM27 mRNA
levels in 20 RCC patients, and adjacent normal tissues
from the same patient were also collected as the negative
control. TRIM27 was notably elevated in tumor tissues
(Fig. 1C). To identify pathways affected by TRIM27, we
performed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using
a TCGA dataset. Our data illustrated that TRIM27 expression
was positively associated with apoptosis pathways
(Fig. 1D–F). Since disrupted apoptosis pathways
play essential roles in neoplastic progression, TRIM27
might be a future biomarker to predict RCC prognosis.
To gain a better understanding of the clinical significance
of TRIM27, we studied the biological actions of
TRIM27 using RCC cell lines, and by altering TRIM27
expression in vivo.
Suppression of TRIM27 inhibits cell proliferation and
promotes apoptosis
We designed three small interference RNAs (siRNAs)
targeting TRIM27 and examined the effects on Caki-2
and 786–0 cells with a relatively higher level of TRIM27.
All three siRNAs effectively inhibited the mRNA and
protein expression of TRIM27 (Fig. 2A, B). siRNA-1 and
siRNA-2 exhibited a higher knockdown efficiency than
siRNA-3, and these were selected for subsequent assays.
We used CCK-8 to determine the effects of TRIM27 on
cell proliferation and found that cell growth was dramatically
suppressed in TRIM27-suppressed groups in both
Caki-2 (Fig. 2C) and 786–0 cells (Fig. 2D).
We next used Annexin V-FITC/PI staining to evaluate
the effects of TRIM27 on apoptosisand found that suppression
of TRIM27 in RCCs promoted cell apoptosis
(Fig. 2E). We then measured apoptotic promoting protein
(caspase-3) and found an elevation in caspase-3 in
TRIM27 suppressed Caki-2 and 786–0 cells (Fig. 2F, G).
The role of NF-κB translocation to the nucleus in inhibition
of apoptosis is well defined [10]; therefore, we examined
the subcellular location of NF-κB as another
indicator of apoptosis. Our results demonstrated that
NF-κB was less active in the presence of TRIM27 siRNAs
(Fig. 2F, G), confirming that apoptosis was increased.
Moreover, our results suggested that
knockdown of TRIM27 promoted the expression of IkBa
in Caki-2 and 786–0 cells respectively.
OeTRIM27 rescue the function of TRIM27 in siTRIM27-
transfected cells
To further verify our results, oeTRIM27 was used to rescue
the function of TRIM27 in siTRIM27-transfected
cells. As shown in Fig. 3A and B, TRIM27 overexpression
significantly increased the proliferation rate of Caki-
2 and 786–0 cells compared to control cells. Importantly,
the proliferation of siTRIM27 cells were also increased
after transfection with oeTRIM27, but showed
no significant difference compared to control cells.
Moreover, transfecting siTRIM27-transfected Caki-2 and
786–0 cells with oeTRIM27 led to an increase in apoptosis
(Fig. 3C). Furthermore, the protein level of TRIM27
was significantly recovered by oeTRIM27 in siTRIM27-
transfeced cells. More importantly, the protein levels of
cleaved caspase-3, NF-κB (cytoplasm), and NF-κB (nuclear)
in siTRIM27-transfected cells were similar following
transfection with oeTRIM27 (Fig. 3D, E). Taken
together, these results suggest that the function of
TRIM27 is rescued by oeTRIM27 in siTRIM27-
transfected cells.
Suppression of TRIM27 reduces tumor growth in vivo
Next, we examined whether TRIM27 siRNAs reduce
tumor development in vivo. Caki-2 cells transfected with
siNC or siTRIM27 were injected into nude mice and the
tumor tissues were measured on day 33. TRIM27-
suppressed tissues exhibited a slower growth rate than
the controls (Fig. 4A), while the tumor weight was reduced
in the siTRIM27 group (Fig. 4B). We next
performed a TUNEL assay to establish whether the decreased
tumor growth was due to apoptosis. Our results
illustrated that apoptosis was increased in the siTRIM27
group compared to the control group. These findings
suggest that suppression of TRIM27 prevents tumor
growth in vivo, partially due to increased tumor cell
apoptosis (Fig. 4C-D).
To further determine the function of TRIM27 in vivo,
the oeNC or oeTRIM27 transfected Caki-1 cells were
used to construct a xenograft model. As showed in
Fig. 5A and B, both the oeNC and oeTRIM27 transfected
cells were able to develop into tumors. Moreover,
both the tumor volume and weight were increased in
oeTRIM27 tumors. TUNEL staining was performed to
examine apoptosis in oeNC and oeTRIM27 tumors, and
we found that overexpression of TRIM27 significantly
suppressed the apoptosis of Caki-1 cells in vivo (Fig. 5CD).
Taken together, our data illustrate that TRIM27 promotes
RCC tumorigenesis and exhibits anti-apoptotic effects
in vivo.
NF-κB signaling is essential for overexpressing TRIM27
signaling
Virus-mediated TRIM27 overexpression (oeTRIM27)
significantly enhanced TRIM27 expression in Caki-1
cells, both at the transcriptional (Fig. 6A) and translational
(Fig. 6B) levels., oeTRIM27 promoted cell proliferation
at 48 h (Fig. 6C) and inhibited apoptosis (Fig. 6D).
Since we know that NF-κB activation is altered by
TRIM27 (Fig. 2F), we sought to determine whether NF-
κB mediates the actions of TRIM27. To address this
question, we induced chemical inhibition of NF-κB signaling
using ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate
(PDTC); our results showed that cell proliferation was
blocked at 24 h and 48 h as a result, and the
oeTRIM27 group did not differ from the control
group in the presence of PDTC (Fig. 6C). These findings
suggest that NF-κB is involved in TRIM27 signaling.
The application of PDTC induced apoptosis,
which was attenuated by oeTRIM27 (Fig. 6D).
oeTRIM27 activated NF-κB, which was suppressed by
PDTC administration (Fig. 6E). Importantly, the inhibitor
PDTC also suppressed the protein level of
TRIM27 in oeTRIM27 transfected cells, while promoted
the expression of IkBa.
We also analyzed the correlation between TRIM27
and NF-κB using human renal cancer tissues. We found
there was a linear correlation between levels of TRIM27
and NF-κB (Fig. 6F). These data suggest that NF-κB is a
potential upstream regulator of TRIM27 in RCC. We induced
siRNA-mediated knockdown of NF-κB to further
explore this connection, and qRT-PCR and Western blot
were used to examine the relative mRNA and protein
levels of NF-κB and TRIM27 in Caki-1 cells. As shown
in Fig. S2A, B, both the relative mRNA and protein
levels of NF-κB and TRIM27 were suppressed by NF-κB
siRNAs.
TRIM27 interacts with Iκbα and is positively associated
with Iκbα ubiquitination
Iκbα has been identified as the major regulator of the
NF-κB pathway [19], and dissociation of NF-κB from
Iκbα is a critical step in translocation to the nucleus. In
the current study, we found that oeTRIM27 significantly
decreased Iκbα levels, and that this change was blunted
in the presence of MG132, an inducer of apoptosis in
cancer cells (Fig. 7A). We used co-immunoprecipitation
(Co-IP) to examine whether TRIM27 interacts with Iκbα
(Fig. 7B), and our results showed a direct interaction.
Ubiquitination is essential for the stability of Iκbα, as
well as its location in the nucleus. Moreover, increasing
Iκbα ubiquitination improves NF-κB activation
[20]. We demonstrated that Iκbα ubiquitination was
remarkably attenuated by siTRIM27 (Fig. 7C), suggesting
that TRIM27 promotes Iκbα ubiquitination in
RCC.
Discussion
RCC is the most common type of kidney cancer and remains
the deadliest of all urologic cancers. Although numerous
approaches have been developed to improve
understanding of the molecular signaling pathways and
underling mechanisms, the use of molecular-targeted
therapy in RCC is limited due to the lack of therapeutic
candidates. In the current study, we identified TRIM27
as a novel molecular target of RCC and examined the
potential uses of TRIM27 as a candidate target for
effective molecular-targeted therapeutics for RCC.
Present findings reveal a novel underling mechanism between
TRIM27 and Iκbα in oncogenesis, which we believe
will assist with future therapeutic approaches
toward RCC treatment.
TRIM superfamily proteins have been proven to
regulate diverse cellular processes in cancer biology.
As a diverse family, members of the TRIM superfamily
exhibit a variety of roles in oncogenesis. TRIM44
and TRIM59, identified as oncogenes, are enriched in
cancers and involved ininvasion stimulus, which
predicts poor prognosis [9, 21]. In sharp contrast,
TRIM2 and TRIM13, are dramatically decreased in
RCC and act as antioncogenes by inhibiting migration,
cell proliferation, and metastasis [22, 23]. The
results of our study provide novel evidence that
TRIM27 is another example of a TRIM superfamily
member that has an oncogenic role in cancer. Similar
to the other oncogenic TRIM proteins, TRIM27 overexpression
in RCC significantly inhibited apoptosis
and predicted poor survival. Our results confirmed
the hypothesis that TRIM proteins possess the
potential to serve as new therapeutic targets for
cancer therapy.
Although the majority of TRIM superfamily members
share a TRIM motif, this protein domain is seen in isolation
or in combination with a variety of C-terminal domains.
For diverse functions, the TRIM superfamily
encodes proteins that are divided into 11 distinct subfamilies.
The distinctly different actions of TRIM27 as compared
to other TRIM superfamily members are likely due
to the diversity of protein structures. TRIM27 belongs to
the RET/PTC (Rearranged in Transformation/Papillary
Thyroid Carcinomas) fusion protein subfamily that is involved
in oncogenic actions, and the RET proto-oncogene
domain of this subfamily is considered essential for its
oncogenic potential [24, 25]. Moreover, two other TRIM
proteins (TRIM33 and TRIM24) have been reported as
oncogene or oncogenic transcriptional activators in B-cell
leukemias and prostate cancer, respectively [26, 27]. Thus,
the results of our study are consistent with those of previously
published findings, in that they suggest that RET/
PTC subfamily proteins from the TRIM superfamily are
likely to have oncogenic roles in cancer.
TRIM27 expression is a known oncogene and disease
progression in various cancers, such as lung, ovarian,
colon, and esophageal cancer [5, 7, 28, 29]. Indeed,
TRIM27 has been shown to promote tumor invasion
and growth in colon cancer through its promotion of
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and activation of
the AKT pathway [5]. Similarly, the TRIM27 transcript
level was found to be correlated with ovarian cancer metastasis,
and it has been shown that TRIM27 knockdown
induces cell cycle arrest by activating the p38 pathway
[29]. Unlike other cancer types, the exact molecular
mechanisms underlying the oncogenic action of TRIM
proteins in RCC remain unclear. However, similar to the
molecular biological features of TRIM27 in esophageal
and colon cancer [5, 7], we identified similar biological
functions of TRIM27 in that it is significantly elevated in
RCC tissues, accelerates the pathogenesis of RCC, and
predicts RCC progression and poorer survival. In
addition to its previously identified roles in other cancers,
the present study indicates that TRIM27 has oncogenic
roles in RCC and could serve as a predictive
marker and therapeutic target for a variety types of cancers,
including, but not limited to RCC.
Many downstream signaling pathways of TRIM27 have
been identified in cancer, including PTEN/AKT, p38,
and STAT3 [7, 8, 29]. Constitutive activation of NF-κB
signaling mediates tumorigenesis and poor prognosis in
RCC. Our study demonstrated that TRIM27 positively
mediates NF-κB signaling pathway by degradation of the
NF-κB inhibitor Iκbα. In contrast to our findings, two
previous studies found that TRIM13, another TRIM protein,
inactivated NF-κB in both RCC and non-small-cell
lung carcinoma [22, 30]. The opposing regulation of
these TRIM family members in NF-κB activity again indicates
that different subfamily proteins of the TRIM
superfamily may utilize different mechanisms and pathways
in cancer development. It is important to note that
the previous study of TRIM13 in RCC only examined
one cell line (786–0), while the present study examined
more than three cell lines, all of which showed consistent
results. The molecular interactions between TRIM27
and Iκbα are also supported by a study of TRIM8 that
found that NF-κB signaling was enhanced by TRIM8
through polyubiquitination of serine/threonine kinases
[31]. Whether other proinflammatory cytokines are involved
in TRIM27 and Iκbα interactions is not clear at
this time; nevertheless, the present study provides further
evidence that TRIM superfamily proteins could play
either positive or negative roles in NF-κB-induced cancer
immunity. Further investigation is required to clarify
the actions of TRIM27 through other pathways in RCC.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to
demonstrate that TRIM27 is increased in human patients
with RCC and may serve as an effective novel
prognosis marker for RCC.