Background
The world over, cases of thyroid carcinoma have been
continuously increasing in recent decades [1–3]. Differentiated
thyroid carcinoma (DTC), arising from thyroid
follicular epithelial cells, accounts for 90% of these cases
[4]. With treatments of surgery, suppression of thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH) and selective treatment of
radioactive iodine-131 (RAI-131), the vast majority of
DTC patients have an excellent prognosis, as reflected
by 5-year relative survival rates of approximately 95% [1,
5]. However, local recurrence and/or distant metastases
may occur in 15–30% of patients, and two-thirds of
them will become radioiodine refractory (RR) during
long-term follow-up [6–10]. RAI-131 therapy is the firstline
systemic treatment in postoperative patients with
progressive DTC, therefore, treatment options for radioiodine
refractory differentiated thyroid carcinoma (RRDTC)
have been hampered, leading to a poor overall
prognosis [11]. As an emerging systemic therapy, tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have recently shown activity
in RR-DTC, however, the lack of long-term survival
data and the relatively indolent nature of DTC, it is difficult
to determine the appropriate time to initiate TKI
therapy [12]. Therefore, localized treatment plays an important
role in local recurrence and/or metastases from
RR-DTC. Historically, surgery has been the mainstay
treatment for locoregional metastases from DTC, however,
repetitive neck excision poses a high risk of complications
[13, 14]. Therefore, it is desirable to develop
alternatives that are less invasive than repeated surgery
as part of a multimodal treatment for DTC.
125I-seed implantation has been proposed as an excellent
treatment for head and neck unmanageable recurrent
carcinoma [15–19]. However, the use of this
method for the local control of foci from DTC has rarely
been reported. In this retrospective study, the efficacy
and feasibility of ultrasound (US)-guided 125I-seed implantation
for cervical metastatic lymph nodes (CMLNs)
from RR-DTC were evaluated.
Methods
Study subjects
Inclusion criteria: (a) patients were required to be
aged≥18 years; (b) patients who underwent thyroidectomy
for DTC; (c) patients with measurable, pathological
and/or cytologically confirmed CMLN from DTC, and
evidence of RR according to at least one criterion used
in recent clinical trials as follows (i) at least one lesion
that never concentrated iodine-131; (ii) at least one lesion
that progressed within 12 months after RAI therapy
despite iodine-131 avidity, or persistent disease after a
cumulative dose of iodine-131 ≥ 600 mCi; (iii) partial thyroidectomy
leading to thyroid tissue residue, which affects
the efficacy of RAI-131;and (d) patients who had
inoperable CMLN or refused to undergo repeated neck
surgical dissection.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (a) cognitive
impairment due to neuropathy or psychosis, (b) severe
coagulation disorders; (c) patients with severe heart, respiratory,
liver, or renal failures, and (d) pregnant or
breastfeeding patients.
We performed a retrospective analysis of 18 patients
(11 men and 7 women) with 36 CMLNs who underwent
US-guided 125I seed implantation in our hospital between
June 2016 and November 2018. Of all patients, 17
underwent total thyroidectomy, whereas1 underwent
partial thyroidectomy. BRAFV600E mutations were detected
in 17 patients. CMLNs were situated at levels I (0
case), II (6 cases), III (12 cases), IV (10 cases), V (1 cases)
and VI (7 cases) respectively. The median volume of the
initial CMLNs was 523mm3 (148, 2010mm3). Three
cases exhibited clear symptoms of neck compression due
to tumor volumes > 10,000mm3, whereas two cases had
dysphagia due to esophageal narrowing under tumor
compression. Two patients underwent tracheotomy.
One patient had bilateral vocal cord paralysis. One patient
had a skin ulceration on the surface of the lesion.
Detailed clinical characteristics before implantation of
125I-seeds are listed in Table 1.
Equipment
A Siemens Acuson Sequoia 512 Ultrasound System (Siemens,
Mountain View, CA, USA) with a 6 L3 linear
array transducer was used to guide core needle biopsy
(CNB) and 125I-seed implantation. A Siemens Acuson
Sequoia 512 ultrasound system with a 15L8W linear
array transducer or a Philips iU22 Ultrasound System
(Philips Healthcare, Bothell, WA) with anL12–5 linear
array transducer or a Mindray M9 Ultrasound System
(Mindray, Shenzhen, China) with an L12–4 linear array
transducer was used for image collection before implantation,
as well as during follow-up. 125I seeds (radioactivity:
0.4 mCi, average energy: 27–35 keV, half-life: 60.1
days, antitumor activity: 2.0 cm) in this study were provided
by Shanghai Xinke Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
Pre-implantation assessment
Before 125I seed implantation, all CMLNs were evaluated
using conventional US combined with contrast-enhanced
ultrasound (CEUS). For each CMLN, three orthogonal diameters
(the largest diameter and two perpendicular diameters)
were measured using US. Volume was calculated
using the eq. V = πabc/6 (where V represents volume, a
the largest diameter, and b and c the other two perpendicular
diameters). CEUS provided visualization of the
blood supply region and enhancement pattern of the lesion.
The US contrast agent used was Sulphur hexafluoride
(SonoVueR, Bracco. International, Milan, Italy). Bolus
injection of SonoVue (2.4 ml) through the elbow vein was
performed for a single CEUS and each imaging acquisition
lasted for at least 3 min. Thereafter, the situated level, adjacent
structures, volume and flow perfusion of each
CMLN were recorded in detail. The thyroglobulin (Tg)
test and routine blood analysis were also performed before
implantation. Tg tests were performed at the Endocrinology
Laboratory, First Medical Center, PLA General Hospital.
Routine blood analysis was performed at the
Laboratory Department, First Medical Center, PLA General
Hospital.
Implantation procedure
The procedure was performed by an experienced US
physician with more than 20 years of experience in interventional
US. Patients were placed in the supine position
with their neck extended. Local infiltration anesthesia
with 1% lidocaine was injected at the subcutaneous
puncture site and at the periphery of the lesion. The
number and distribution of 125I seeds to be implanted
were determined according to the volume and location
of each CMLN. An interstitial needle (18 gauge) was
gradually inserted into the lesion, and the seeds were implanted
using a turntable implantation gun guided by
US. Each seed was placed at intervals ranging 0.5–1.0
cm. According to the principles of the Paris system, the
distribution of seeds should be arranged in a straight line
and parallel to each other. The seeds should be approximately
ranging 0.3 cm–0.5 cm away from the edge of the
lesion and at least 1 cm away from cervical vital structures
such as vessels, esophagus, trachea, and recurrent
laryngeal nerves. According to the Halarism’s experienced
formula: total activity (A) mCi = Da × 5, where Da
denotes the mean sum value of length (L), width (W)
and height (H) of the targeted lesion as (L +W+ H) /3
(unit is cm). The number of seeds to be implanted was
obtained using the equation: total activity (A) ÷ the average
activity of a single 125I seed = the number of seeds
required [20, 21]. Postoperative observations were conducted
for 2 h. We focused on possible complications
such as bleeding and hematoma during or immediately
after implantation.
Follow-up
Follow-up comprised US, CEUS, routine hematology,
and thyroglobulin (Tg) levels at 1–3, 6, 9 and 12 months
and every 6 months thereafter. If Tg levels were significantly
elevated, for instance doubled, additional systemic
examination was performed to determine whether there
was distant metastasis.
The volume of each CMLN was evaluated by US, and
we calculated the volume reduction rate (VRR) during
follow-up as VRR = ([initial volume – final volume] ×
100)/initial volume [22]. Blood perfusion of the CMLN
was evaluated using CEUS. Variations in the enhancement
pattern of the nodule before and after implantation
were monitored. Hyperenhancement before implantation
and non-enhancement or hypo-enhancement during
follow-up indicated that treatments were effective [23,
24]. For those with no changes in CEUS before and after
implantation, VRR should be combined with serum Tg
values for evaluation. There were the following situations:
(a) if VRR ≥ 50%, the treatment was deemed effective.
(b). If VRR < 50%, but the serum Tg level reduction
was more than 50% compared with pre-implantation,
“wait and watch” would be recommended. (c). If VRR
and the serum Tg level reduction were both less than
50%, further US-guided CNB should be performed to
determine whether there was an active lesion residue.
(d). The volume of nodules increased from the original
during follow-up, indicating treatment failure. Common
symptoms and severity of adverse radiation events were
classified according to the criteria of Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group/European Organization for Research
and Treatment of Cancer (RTOG/EORTC).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS statistical
software (Version 23.0). Continuous data following normal
distribution were represented as −x ± s (range), and
if not, as median (P25, P75). The Wilcoxon signed-rank
test was performed to compare the changes in nodule
volume before implantation and at each follow-up point
as well as the serum Tg levels before implantation and
at the last follow-up visit. P < 0.05, indicating that the
difference was statistically significant.
Results
As was initially planned, 36 CMLNs in 18 patients were
successfully implanted with 125I seeds. All of them tolerated
the procedure well. A total of 237 125I seeds were implanted,
with the least being 1 and the most being 22
seeds, and with a median of 4 (2, 11). All implantations
were performed in the outpatient department. Six patients
experienced mild pain after implantation and they alleviated
themselves without treatment. No serious complications
such as massive hemorrhage, soft tissue necrosis,
neuropathy or carotid damage were noted. Furthermore,
no RTOG/EORTC grade > 2 complications were observed.
All patients were followed up for at least 24 months with
the longest follow-up period being 50months. Postimplantation
US showed that all successfully treated nodules
were reduced from their original volumes during
follow-up. Before implantation, the median volumes of the
CMLNs were 523mm3 (148, 2010mm3), which decreased
to 288mm3 (77, 1638mm3), 156mm3 (51, 1058mm3),
91mm3 (37, 816mm3), 91mm3 (14, 514mm3), 79mm3 (0,
317mm3) and 53mm3 (0, 286mm3) at 1–3, 6, 9, 12, 18 and
24 months after implantation, respectively. There were
significant differences in nodule volume between every
two follow-up visits (P < 0.01). The treatment outcome of
36 nodules is detailed displayed in Table 2. The median
volume and median VRR of the nodules after implantation
at each follow-up point are listed in Table 3. Representative
findings at 125I-seeds implantation and at the followup
of a CMLN case are shown in Fig. 1. The changes in
median volume and VRR at each follow-up point after implantation
are shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. During
the follow-up period (the range was 24–50 months), 25
(69%) nodules had VRR greater than 90%, of which
12(33%) nodules had VVR ≈ 100% with unclear structures
and only 125I seed images were visible in the US. Preimplantation,
CEUS exhibited 29 (81%) lesions with
hyper-enhancement, 7(19%) lesions with hypoenhancement,
whereas during the last examination, 34
(94%) lesions had hypo-enhancement or nonenhancement
and, 2 (6%) lesions had hyper-enhancement.
Among these two cases with persistent hyperenhancement
on CEUS, one case had a VRR of 72%, thus,
continued observation was recommended, whereas the
other case had a VRR of less than 50%. However, the subsequent
US-guided puncture biopsy indicated that there
was a small amount of lymphatic tissue in the puncture,
but no definite metastatic cancer was found. During the
last follow-up visit, the serum Tg level decreased from
57.0 (8.6, 114.8) ng/ml to 4.9 (0.7, 50.3) ng/ml (P < 0.01).
Throughout the follow-up period, physical examination
revealed that three patients developed new CMLNs, one
of which with axillary lymph node metastasis and one of
which with thoracic vertebral metastasis, but there was no
evidence of recurrence at the treatment sites.
Discussion
Locoregional recurrence and metastasis may occur in
20–30% of DTC patients within 10 years after initial
treatment, which is associated with an increased mortality
rate [25] . Most patients diagnosed with recurrent
DTC can still achieve not a poor prognosis after undergoing
salvage treatment, which is based on radioactive
iodine (RAI) and associated with further surgery and
hormone suppression [9, 26]. Nevertheless, a small proportion
of patients may develop local metastasis disease,
which is not only unsuitable for repeated neck surgery
but also refractory to RAI ablation. Treatment of refractory
recurrences and metastases is a major challenge in
the management of DTC. Few treatment options are
available. Systemic therapy with TKIs, oral antiangiogenic
MTKIs, has demonstrated a progression-free survival
benefit based on the results of phase 3 trials [11,
27]. However, these drugs have significant toxicities that
can impair the quality of life and some individuals do
not tolerate them [28, 29]. External beam radiotherapy
may be a modality for patients with unresectable tumors,
but its role in DTC is debatable because it achieves optimized
locoregional control will cause severe damage to
the normal tissues and/or their functions [30]. In recent
years, minimally invasive therapy has played an important
role in local inoperable metastatic foci in DTC,
mainly including US-guided percutaneous intervention
approaches such as ethanol injection, laser ablation, radiofrequency
ablation, and microwave ablation [31–33].
Each of these has feasibility and limitations. Ethanol injection
is generally recommended for lesions with a
maximum diameter > 10 mm, and it requires repeated
treatment [34, 35]. Laser ablation tends to treat lesions
with a maximum diameter of less than 10mm [36, 37].
Radiofrequency ablation and microwave ablation have
certain requirements on lesion sites owing to heat conduction
and thermal damage during operation [32, 33].
Interstitial permanent 125I seed implantation, as a highly
conformal radiotherapy modality that, delivers higher radiation
doses to target areas and even to tumors closely
surrounded by vital structures while sparing surrounding
normal tissues, is widely applicable, almost free from the
limitation of lesion location and volume, and it has been
used in the treatment of unresectable malignant tumors
of various organs [38–40]. It is particularly suitable for
the treatment of malignant tumors of the head and neck
owing to its advantages of low energy, sustained accumulated
radiation, and homogenous dose distribution in
the target area [17, 41]. However, there are few reports
pertaining to the effects of this method in RR-DTC, and
its feasibility and safety require clinical data validation.
In this study, US-guided 125I seed implantation was
performed on 36 CMLNs of 18 DTC patients who met
the inclusion criteria after thyroidectomy, and long-term
follow-up was conducted to evaluate the efficacy and
safety of this procedure. The somatic BRAFV600E mutation,
which was significantly associated with lymph node
or disease metastasis and cancer-related mortality [19,
42–44], was found in 17 (94%) of all subjects. Therefore,
a more aggressive approach than “watch and wait”
should be adopted to control neck recurrence and
metastasis in these patients. In this study, cases implanted
with 125I seeds had a large age span (ranging
27–87), a large lesion volume span (ranging10.9–25,
017.4mm3), and various lesion locations. However no
procedure failed, indicating that this method is widely
applicable and well tolerated. All cases were successfully
implanted as planned, with no technical failure, indicating
that this method was well operable and could be
popularized by experienced US physicians. Considering
the inert biological characteristics of DTC as well as
CMLNs adjacent to the trachea, vessels, nerves and
other cervical critical tissues, this study adopted lowdose
125I brachytherapy, even so, during the last followup,
US indicated that all treated lesions had shrunk. Significant
differences in volume were found between every
two follow-up visits, indicating reliable efficacy. No serious
complications occurred immediately after implantation
or during long-term follow-up indicating that this
method is safe. In addition, the overall cost of 125I implantation
is low, particularly for nodules with small volumes,
which can reduce the economic burden on
patients.
However, some limitations of this study should be considered.
First, only 18 patients with 36 nodules were included
in the study. Second, the volume measured by US
alone was used as the basis for calculating the number of
seeds to be implanted and for evaluating postoperative efficacy;
if other image methods could be combined, the radiation
dose calculation and efficacy evaluation could be
more accurate. Third, during follow-up, two nodules
underwent secondary implantation; on one hand, it demonstrated
that this method had good repeatability; on the
other hand, it demonstrated that there was still a radiation
cold zone and the tumor had not been completely inactivated
in initial treatment. Radioactive cold zones may be
associated with insufficient doses. One of the above two
nodules that required re-implantation is located behind
the internal jugular vein and the common carotid artery,
and its margin is adjacent to the vessel wall. The other is
adjacent to the esophageal wall. To ensure the safety, the
actual number of implanted seeds in the lesions were a little
bit less than the calculated number of seeds. The association
between radiation dose and safety needs to be
further studied.
There are still some points that deserve consideration
in this study: the subjects enrolled in the study were all
diagnosed with RR-DTC; the BRAFV600E gene mutation
occurred in 17 out of 18 patients; however, responses to
low-dose 125I radiotherapy were varied. After a single
treatment, 25 (69%) nodules had VRRs greater than 90%,
whereas 3 (8%) nodules had VRRs less than 50%, and 2
(6%) nodules required secondary implantation. In 15
(83%) patients, the disease did not progress after CMLNs
were controlled, whereas in the remaining 3 (17%) patients,
new metastatic lesions had developed. What accounts
for these varied responses? Further large-sample
studies need to be conducted.
In conclusion, US-guided 125I seed implantation is easy
to operate, feasible, efficacious, and safe in locoregional
control of RR-DTC, which can be an effective supplement
for the comprehensive treatment of thyroid
cancer.