Introduction
Atrial fbrillation (AF) is a common arrhythmia associated with a prothrombotic or hypercoagulable state,
which may increase the risk of cerebral and systemic
embolism [1]. In AF patients, most of the thrombus is
formed in the left atrium (LA).
It is well known that a hypercoagulative state is demonstrated by high levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and
D-dimer [2]. Increased D-dimer levels indicate hyperactivation of secondary fbrinolysis, meaning a tendency
for intravascular thrombosis [3]. D-dimer is a product
of cross-linked fbrin degradation, and it is a circulating
marker of thrombogenesis and thrombus turnover [4].
Increasing D-dimer levels may refect atrial thrombus
formation and higher embolic risk in patients with AF.
D-dimer is universally considered a gold standard test for
activation of coagulation.
Catheter ablation is a well-established treatment option
for patients with symptomatic AF [5]. Apart from vitamin
K antagonists, the direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs)
dabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban, and edoxaban have
been approved for oral anticoagulation in patients with
non-valvular AF [6]. Tus, there are diferent treatment
possibilities for peri-interventional period anticoagulation in the setting of catheter ablation for AF.
Our aim was to assess the diference in coagulation
status of the left atrium and related factors that impact
patients with AF treated with diferent anticoagulants.
Methods
Tis was a single-center, prospective, nonrandomized
study aimed at identifying the antithrombin efect of
the baseline steady state of anticoagulation treatment in
patients with AF. We enrolled consecutive patients with
AF aged>20  years, who underwent ablation at the Yao
Municipal Hospital between February 2018 and June
2019, followed 12 months after enrollment.
Exclusion criteria were a history of severe valvular
heart disease, acute heart failure, thromboembolism,
electrical defbrillation, trauma, and infection within
3  months. Patients receiving underdose and overdose
of DOACs were also excluded. All patients underwent
baseline transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) within
1  week and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
before the ablation procedure. Baseline demographics
and clinical information were obtained, and laboratory
examinations were performed before catheter ablation.
All patients underwent anticoagulation with dabigatran,
apixaban, and edoxaban≥4 weeks before the procedure
(dabigatran 150 mg/110 mg b.i.d., apixaban 5 mg/2.5 mg
b.i.d., edoxaban 60  mg/30  mg  s.i.d.). Rivaroxaban is not
included in this study because the standard dose of rivaroxaban (15  mg/10  mg  s.i.d.) in Japan difers from the
international standard dose (20 mg/15 mg s.i.d.). Anticoagulants were stopped only on the day of ablation. After
ablation, all patients were followed up for 12 months to
observe the presence or absence of thromboembolism.
Written informed consent was provided by all
patients before participation, and the study protocol was
approved by the institutional ethics committee.
Peripheral venous blood samples were collected immediately before the ablation procedure. For the clinical
ablation procedure, a conventional single transseptal
puncture was performed using an SL-1 sheath and a
BRK-1 needle (St. Jude Medical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA,
USA). Immediately after transseptal puncture and before
heparin administration, a left atrial blood sample was
simultaneously collected from the left atrial sheath by a
cardiologist.
TTE was performed within a week before catheter
ablation using a Philips Sonos 7500 ultrasound instrument (Philips Healthcare, Amsterdam, Te Netherlands)
equipped with a sector transducer (carrier frequency of
2.5 or 3.75  MHz). A 5-MHz phased-array multiplane
probe was used for TEE. TTE parameters at baseline
included left ventricular diastolic dimension (LVDd),
ejection fraction (EF), left atrial diameter (LAD), and
left atrial volume index (LAVI). TEE parameters at baseline included left atrial appendage (LAA) peak emptying velocity and presence of spontaneous echo contrast
(SEC).
Te following plasma/serum biomarkers were analyzed
centrally at baseline: (1) thrombogenesis/fbrinolysis biomarkers: D-dimer, fbrinogen, prothrombin fragment
F1+2, protein C, thrombomodulin, and (2) infammation biomarker: CRP. For the quantitative measurement
of D-dimer, a latex-enhanced photometric immunoassay (LPIA, Mitsubishi Chemical Medience Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was used with an automatic analyzer
(LPIA-S500). Te detection limit of this assay was 0.3 μg/
mL. Te association of demographic data and medical history on biomarker levels at baseline was investigated. In addition, we assessed the relationship between
anticoagulants, biomarker levels, and echocardiogram
characteristics.
Statistical Analysis
Data are expressed as mean and SD or median with 25th
to 75th percentiles for normally distributed and skewed
variables, respectively. Normality was assessed using
the Shapiro–Wilk test. We used t-tests and chi-squared
tests to compare continuous and categorical variables.
To assess diferences among the three groups, categorical
variables were compared with the χ2 test, while continuous variables were compared using the Kruskal–Wallis
test. Propensity score analysis was performed to determine the efect of the drug on D-dimer levels. Te multiplicity of the tests was corrected by the Bonferroni
method. A P value<0.05 was considered signifcant. Statistical analysis was carried out using IBM SPSS (version
26.0, SPSS, Inc., Chicago, Illinois).
Results
During entry periods, 169 patients with atrial fbrillation
were initially screened, and fnally 141 patients (on dabigatran n=30, on apixaban n=47, on edoxaban n=64)
were recruited (Fig.  1). Te study population included
84 (60%) men, and the mean age at the baseline examination was 68.1±10.1  years. Sixty-two (44%) patients
had persistent AF. Te mean CHADS2-VASc score was
2.4±1.4. Tere were signifcant diferences among the
three groups in terms of gender, age, and history of heart
failure. Tere was no signifcant diference in the frequency of use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers, β-blockers, statins,
and anti-platelet drugs among the three groups (Table 1).
Laboratory and echocardiographic data of all patients
are shown in Table 1. Serum creatinine and CRP levels,
and brain natriuretic peptide levels in peripheral blood
were not signifcantly diferent between the three groups.
Echocardiographic parameters (LVDd, EF, LAD, LAVI,
and SEC) did not difer among them. Tere were signifcant diferences among the three groups in hemoglobin
concentration and LAA fow velocity (Table 2).
Fibrinogen and thrombomodulin levels were not significantly diferent among the three groups. However, there
were signifcant diferences in the D-dimer levels of the
left atrium (P=0.001). Te prothrombin fragment 1+2
level of peripheral blood in the dabigatran group was
lower among the three groups (P=0.021). Te protein
C level of peripheral blood in the edoxaban group was
markedly lower (P<0.001).
In this study, the prevalence of high D-dimer levels
(≥1.0 µg/mL) was signifcantly higher in the LA than in
the periphery (20.6% vs. 7.8%, P=0.002) (Fig. 2). We performed a single regression analysis of systemic and LA
D-dimer, and found a moderate correlation between the
two parameters (r=0.560, P<0.001) (Fig. 3).
Te efects of medication with dabigatran, apixaban, or
edoxaban on peripheral D-dimer and LA D-dimer were
analyzed by propensity score analysis. Table 2 shows the
standardized function coefcients of the canonical discriminant analysis performed to calculate the propensity score. Tere were no diferences among the three
groups with respect to peripheral D-dimer levels. Te
D-dimer level in the LA was signifcantly lower in the
apixaban group than in the edoxaban group (P=0.047).
On the other hand, the D-dimer level in the LA tended
to be lower in the dabigatran group than in the edoxaban
group (P=0.074).
We classifed the patients into two groups according to
the D-dimer values of the LA i.e., less than 1.0 and 1.0
or more, and compared their characteristics (Table  3).
No signifcant diferences were observed between the
percentage of persistent AF, CHADS2-VASc score,
hemoglobin concentration, and renal function. Fibrinogen levels were signifcantly higher in the high D-dimer
group than in the normal D-dimer group (287.1±56.4
vs. 266.2±46.8, P=0.043). Prothrombin fragment F1+2
levels were signifcantly higher in the high D-dimer
group than in the normal D-dimer group (157.0±84.7 vs.
116.6±39.0, P=0.018).
Echocardiographic parameters, including LVDd, EF,
LAD, LAVI, and LAA fow velocity, were not signifcantly diferent between the two groups. Left ventricular
ejection fraction (LVEF) was signifcantly lower in the
high D-dimer group than in the normal D-dimer group
(59.3±13.7 vs. 65.2±9.1, P=0.037). Te proportion of
patients treated with edoxaban was higher in the high
D-dimer group than in the normal group (P=0.045). Te
joint contribution of predictors of high LA D-dimer levels was assessed by multivariate analysis (Table  4). Prothrombin fragment F1+F2 (odds ratio [OR] 1.012, 95%
confdence interval [CI] 1.003–1.022, P=0.008) and
LVEF (OR 0.947, 95% CI 0.910–0.986, P=0.008) were
independent predictors of high LA D-dimer levels.
All patients were followed up for 12  months after AF
ablation. One patient in the edoxaban group had a transient ischemic attack (TIA) 9  months after ablation. A
new cerebral infarction was detected on head computed
tomography, but fortunately, no sequelae remained.
Discussion
Tree new facts emerged from this study. (1) Systemic
D-dimer level had a good correlation with LA D-dimer
level, and it was lower than the LA D-dimer level in
patients treated with DOACs. (2) Tere were no diferences in peripheral D-dimer levels among patients with
dabigatran, apixaban, and edoxaban. However, the LA
D-dimer level was signifcantly lower in the apixaban
group than in the edoxaban group. (3) Peripheral prothrombin fragment F1+F2 levels and LVEF were potential predictors of high LA D-dimer levels.
It has been reported that elevated D-dimer levels are
associated with thromboembolism [2, 7], but a diference in D-dimer level was found in blood collected
from the LA where thrombus formation readily occurs.
BMI, body mass index; AF, atrial fbrillation; TIA, transient ischemic attack; CHADS2 score, Congestive heart failure, Hypertension, Age≥75, Diabetes mellitus, prior
Stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA); CHADS2-VASc score, Congestive heart failure, Hypertension, Age≥75, Diabetes mellitus, prior Stroke or transient ischemic
attack (TIA), vascular disease, age (65–74), sex category; ACEi, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin-receptor blocker; CrCl, creatinine clearance;
BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; CRP, C-reactive protein; LA, left atrial; LVDd, left ventricular end-diastolic dimension; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; LAD, left
atrial dimension; LAVI, left atrial volume index; LAA, left atrial appendage; SEC, spontaneous echo contrast
Another clinical study demonstrated that LA D-dimer
levels were higher than systemic D-dimer levels in
patients with paroxysmal AF receiving warfarin [8].
Our study found that D-dimer levels in the left atrium
were higher than those in the peripheral circulation in
patients treated with DOAC.
Major phase III clinical trials for prevention of stroke
or systemic embolic events in patients with AF showed
that dabigatran and apixaban signifcantly reduced the
risk of stroke and systemic embolic events compared
to warfarin, but edoxaban failed to show superiority [6,
9, 10]. Tereafter, several meta-analyses have reported
that dabigatran and apixaban were superior to warfarin in prevention of stroke and systemic embolism
[11]. Another meta-analysis reported that apixaban was
overall superior to other DOACs in the prevention of
stroke, systemic embolism, and caused fewer bleeding
complications [12].
We previously reported that a direct thrombin inhibitor, dabigatran, administered twice a day was efective in
resolving preexisting thrombi and would be more efective in reducing thrombus formation than a factor Xa
inhibitor administered once a day [13].
In this study, peripheral prothrombin fragment F1+2
levels were higher in the high LA D-dimer group than
in the normal D-dimer group. Prothrombin fragment
F1+2 is a peptide released from prothrombin upon conversion from prothrombin to thrombin, refecting 100%
thrombin generation. It accurately refects the amount of
thrombin produced [14, 15]. Tis considered to be a state
in which thrombus is more likely to occur in the high
D-dimer group than in the normal D-dimer group. In this
study, low LVEF was a predictor of high LA D-dimer levels. A previous study reported that decreased LVEF led to
LA thrombus formation [16, 17].
In atrial failure through atrial cardiomyopathy, thromboembolic risk seems to be associated with fbrosis
degree [18]. Previously reported that late-gadolinium
enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (LGEMRI) examination of structural remodeling of the left
atrium, structural remodeling of the left atrium was
more common in the group with reduced LVEF [19]. AF
patients with a high degree of LA structural remodeling
may have low baseline LVEF and have LA fbrosis [20].
Te LA D-dimer value was signifcantly higher in
the edoxaban group, and conversely, the proportion of
edoxaban-treated patients was higher in the high LA
D-dimer group. According to a meta-analysis comparing
phase III study evidence, the twice-daily dosing regimen
of non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants appears
to ofer a more balanced risk–beneft profle with respect
to stroke prevention and intracranial hemorrhage [21].
Te half-life of dabigatran is 12 to 17 h, of apixaban is 9
to 14 h, and of edoxaban is 9 to 11 h [22]. Of the three
drugs, edoxaban has the shortest half-life, but is used at
a once-daily dosing regimen. It is possible that a decrease
in the blood concentration of the drug several hours
after administration efected the increase in LA D-dimer
levels.
DOACs have been shown to prevent thromboembolism in patients with non-valvular AF. Compared
to warfarin, DOACs have the advantage that they can
be used without regular coagulation monitoring and
dose adjustment, but they also have the disadvantage
that coagulation monitoring cannot be performed easily, as with warfarin [23]. In the present study, the incidence of thromboembolism was only 1 case during the
12-month follow-up period after ablation. During the
(86%) patients maintain sinus rhythm. Te large number
of patients who maintained sinus rhythm may have contributed to the low incidence of thromboembolism during the 12-month follow-up period. However, in patients
with a high risk of stroke and systemic embolism, regular D-dimer, prothrombin fragment F1+2, and LVEF
check should be performed to determine the presence or
absence of hypercoagulability [19–22].
Study limitations
First, the number of patients in this study was small. Second, the choice of anticoagulant depended on the judgment of each doctor and was not randomized. Tird,
we did not measure anti-Xa activity. Te reason for not
measuring anti-Xa activity is that dabigatran does not
inhibit factor Xa. Another reason is that it has been
previously reported that the anti-Xa activity measured
in anti-Xa drugs does not completely refect the overall biological spectrum of anti-Xa drugs [24]. Fourth,
the incidence of asymptomatic thromboembolism was
unknown because we did not perform whole-body CT
or MRI on asymptomatic patients. It is essential to identify AF patients whose D-dimer levels of left atrium are
high. Fifth, we did not perform LGE-MRI. Terefore,
the degree of fbrosis and structural remodeling of the
left atrium involved in thromboembolism have not been
evaluated. A multicenter randomized trial is necessary to
confrm the accuracy of the present results and the incidence of thromboembolic events.
Conclusions
Measurements of D-dimer, prothrombin fragment F1+2,
and LVEF may be efective in confrming hypercoagulability in patients with AF taking DOACs. In the apixaban
group, LA D-dimer level was lower than in the edoxaban
group, suggesting that the anticoagulant efect of apixaban is better than that of edoxaban in patients with nonvalvular AF.
