Background
The developments in the treatment and management of
patients in intensive care units (ICUs) have enhanced
the chances of survival of these patients. However, as a
result of survival, the probability of incidence of various
complications in these patients increases during the
hospitalization period [1]. During this period, due to the
patients’ immobility, some problems occur in the natural
physiology of the body. If they are not prevented, they
can result in the incidence of irrecoverable consequences
[2]. One important complication of long immobility in
these units is joint contracture. The main characteristic
of this is the diminished range of motion in patients [3, 4].
Long-term immobility plays the main role in the
development of this problem [3, 5]. Contracture usually
occurs in people with joint problems or stroke patients
along with the elderly or immobile patients [6, 7]. Patients
hospitalized in ICUs are more susceptible to joint contracture
due to immobility as well as other underlying factors
such as cerebral damage [3, 5].
Although stretching and passive motions are often performed
by nurses or physiotherapists for patients in ICUs,
incidence of joint contracture is reported. Hence, more
measures should be taken to prevent contracture [3, 5, 8].
Detection of the extent of contracture of joints is based
on the measured range of motion. In a contracture state,
range of motion is restricted. With respect to the ankle,
the range of motion is measured from the maximum plantar
flexion angle until the maximum dorsiflexion angle of
the joint [3, 8]. If physiotherapy is provided to patients in
the initial days spent in the ICUs as a preventive, it will
result in a significant improvement in their functional
state in the post-treatment period [3, 5, 6, 8]. The first
week of rehabilitation measures is considered as a critical
period, as these measures are associated with 13% reduction
in atrophy of quadriceps, leg, and foot muscles [3, 5].
These interventions can also have long-term effects [9].
This initial prevention reduces therapeutic costs and
prevents invasive measures such as surgery. Various therapeutic
measures are taken to prevent and treat ankle
contracture, based on the situation of every person and
the severity of the contracture [10, 11]. These include
active and passive stretch, use of cast, splint, intramuscular
Botox injection, and surgery to release the tendon to
prevent contracture of the joint. Active and passive
stretching are among the most common major measures
for preventing and treating ankle contracture [12]. Today,
stretching is used to improve the flexibility of muscles and
tendons. Recent studies on humans have shown the effectiveness
of rehabilitation measures in enhancing the physical
and functional ability of patients [5, 8, 13].
Further, in recent studies, the effect of transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) on improving the
range of motion of joints, contracture, and spasticity has
been reported [8, 13]. TENS is a simple and safe non-invasive
method for mitigating pain, which is widely used
in therapeutic clinics. Its uses include mitigating acute
and chronic pain, anti-nausea effects, and increasing
blood circulation [14]. Thus, the aim of this study is to
investigate the effect of adding TENS to stretch (which
is a common method in preventing and treating joint
contracture) in preventing the diminished range of ankle
motion in patients admitted to the ICU.
Methods
Design
This study was performed as a double blind controlled
clinical trial with parallel groups on patients admitted to
the ICUs of academic-healthcare hospitals affiliated to
the Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences in 2016.
This study was approved by the ethics committee of this
university and registered in the Iranian Clinical Trial
Center with the code IRCT2017010814333N64.
Participants
The inclusion criteria included hospitalization in the ICU
ward for more than 1 week, age between 18 and 60 years,
patients who were not able to move their legs voluntarily
(unconscious patients and those who were not able to
move their lower limbs due to paralysis), agreement to sign
the written consent form by the patient or his or her guardian
(in case of unconsciousness), lack of disease or musculoskeletal
disorder according to a physical examination,
lack of damage inside or around the ankle, no history of
treatment by electrical stimulation in the ankle zone, no
skin disease hindering placement of electrodes or causing
sensitivity to electrical stimulation, absence of electrical implant
devices (such as pacemaker), and lack of sever spasticity
that prevented joint movement. However, the exclusion
criteria included skin sensitivity to stimulating electrodes,
TENS intolerance and acquiring the ability to move the
lower limbs voluntarily during the interventions.
The patients were chosen using the convenience sampling
method. Thereafter, they were assigned into two
groups (experimental and control groups) with a block
size of two through a permuted block random sampling
method by a statistical expert not involved in data collection
(allocation concealment). The sample size was
estimated to be at least 18 patents in each group according
to a study by Oo [15] considering the mean ± SD for
composite spasticity score as the key variable, confidence
interval of 95% and power of 80%. At the beginning of
the study, the objective and method of study implementation
were explained to the patients or their companions.
Also, written consent was taken from them and
then the demographic information (age and gender)
questionnaire was completed with the help of information
from the patients’ file.
Outcome measures
The first outcome measurement in this study was passive
ankle range of motion along the plantar flexion and
dorsiflexion directions. The ankle’s range of motions was
measured using an international manual goniometer device.
Compared to radiography, the measurement of a
joint angle with the goniometer has a high level of accuracy
[16]. It has been claimed that measuring a joint
angle with a universal goniometer has moderate to
excellent reliability [17]. Therefore, it can be used as a
repeatable instrument for measuring the range of motion
of human joints.
To measure the range of motions, the patient was
placed in a supine position, with absolutely no deviation
to right or left in the hip joint (Fig. 1). The measurement
technique is described in similar studies [18].
Ankle joint ROM measurement was done bilaterally
and the mean value was considered for calculation. One
independent assessor who was not the person who applied
the stretches, travelled to all three sites and did all
ankle measurements.
Interventions
In the control group, when the patient was in supine
position with a straight knee, the therapist dorsiflexed
the patient’s ankle by applying gentle pressure. Keeping
the exertion of the same force but with two degrees less
of dorsiflexion, he/she maintained the stretching (Fig. 2)
[19]. The stretch was performed for 10 min in each
session. For this purpose, there were five 2-min stretches
with 1 min of rest between every two stretches. A therapist
who had been trained by an experienced physiotherapist
applied the ankle stretches for all patients. He
tried to keep the applying force equal for different joints.
In the experimental group (TENS along with stretch),
before performing the stretching, TENS was used. First,
the skin of the ankle region was cleaned using cotton
smeared with 70% alcohol to decrease the skin resistance.
Next, two electrodes (4*4 cm) were placed on both sides
of the ankles. Finally, the TENS stimulations were applied
for 30 min at a frequency of 100 Hz, duration of 0.2 ms,
and intensity of 15mA [15, 20, 21]. The electrical stimulation
was applied using the ES-320 stimulator (ITO, Japan).
Among the TENS mechanism is the activation of nerve
impulse in a large number of alpha afferent nerve roots,
resulting in the excitation of inhibitory neurons of the dorsal
horn or the release of endorphin or both [14]. Further,
TENS enhances blood circulation close to the electrodes,
which indirectly contributes to regeneration, reduction of
spasm and contracture, and relaxation of muscles [14].
The TENS mechanism in mitigating spasticity and contracture
of ankle can be due to the excitation of afferent
fibers in the peroneal nerve [15].
Increased blood circulation close to the electrodes is
also effective in reducing ankle contracture. As there is
no need for active participation by the patient in TENS
application, it can be used by people who have not been
able to perform physical activity for a long time. They
can benefit from TENS thanks to its safety and low
complications as well as convenience [22].
The interventions of both groups were done three
times a week for 2 weeks. The therapist who performed
the interventions were not informed about the participants
groups. In the first session, the interventions
(ankle stretching or TENS stimulation) were explained
for patients (or their relatives in case of unawareness).
Data analysis
Data analyses were conducted by SPSS 21.0 (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL) and P values of < 0.05 were set at level of
significance. Frequency (percent) and mean (standard
deviation) were used to summarize the accumulated
data. The comparisons of background variables including
demographic variables and clinical parameters were
investigated between the experimental and control
groups using the t-test and the chi-squared test.
Normality was confirmed for all ankle range of motion
parameters by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov one-sample test.
The within-group differences in time trend for each group
was assessed by repeated measures analysis of variance. For
this test, assumption of the sphericity (consistency of correlations)
was not confirmed by Mauchly’s test. Therefore, P
values were stated based on the Greenhouse–Geisser test
in both groups.
Additionally, the basic measurements of the ankle range
of motion parameters were adjusted as covariate and differences
between groups from baseline to weeks 1 and 2
were assessed by analysis of covariance (ANCOVA).
Results
In this trial, all the patients remained in the study and
there was no loss to follow up on during the study (Fig. 3).
The comparison of demographic variables of patients
showed that there was no significant difference between
the groups in terms of distribution of sex, history of
underlying illness and drug use, cause of hospitalization,
as well as mean age and level of consciousness (in all
cases, P > 0.05; Table 1).
There was no statistical difference between groups regarding
drug use.
Mean values of dorsiflexion and plantar flexion during
the study are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. In both groups, the
increase in the mean values of ankle range of motion parameters
was significant over time. Based on the Sidak
post-hoc test, the differences between the first and the
second measurements, between the second and the third
measurements, as well as between the first and the third
measurements were significant (means ranged over 44–
48 for plantar flexion and means ranged over 5–11 for
dorsiflexion, P < 0.001 for all of time points; Table 2).
According to the results of the effect of the experimental
group compared to the control group on the variables,
there were statistically significant differences
between the groups with respect to plantar flexion and
dorsiflexion change at the end of the study (Table 3).
These differences in values of the ankle range of motion
existed in the first and second measurements (mean between-
group differences ranged over 1.35–2.5, (95%
CI = 1.04 to 2.70), P < 0.001). After making adjustments
for the baseline measurement, the differences between
the experimental group and the control group regarding
change in ankle plantar and dorsiflexion from the
first measurement (before intervention) and the last
measurement (after intervention) remained significant
(mean between-group differences ranged over 2.67–
3.57, (95% CI = 2.04 to 4. 01), P < 0.001).
Discussion
The aim of this randomized controlled trial was to compare
the effectiveness of adding TENS to a passive range of motion
stretch in hospitalized patients in ICUs to that of
passive stretch alone on ankle contracture. After 2 weeks of
treatment, the between-group comparisons showed that
ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion improved more in
the TENS and stretch group than in the merely stretch
group.
Limited mobility and increased risk of falls, which are
associated with older adults and many neurological
conditions, may be related to deficits of strength, joint
position sense and balance control. Applying TENS at
the foot and ankle has the potential to be a highly beneficial
intervention in deficits in these abilities [23]. It is
hypothesized that using TENS in the foot and ankle area
would improve the balance and postural control [23]. As
TENS improves strength, joint position sense and balance
control, it is reasonable that it has effects on joint
mobility.
To our knowledge, none of studies in the literature applied
TENS at the foot and ankle for prevention or treatment
of joint stiffness. However, there are many related
studies on other joints. Therefore, the novelty of our
study is investigating the effect of TENS on ankle stiffness
in immobility conditions.
It has been shown in many studies that adding TENS
to an intervention of joint movement (passive or active)
had an impact on joint mobility improvement. Angulo et
al. [24] studied patients undergoing total knee replacement
(TKR) surgery. In the three days after the surgery,
he used TENS along with a continuous passive motion
(CPM) device, but he did not observe any significant difference
in adding TENS to joint passive motion for enhancing
the range of motion. In terms of the interventions,
this study was similar to ours, but it was different in terms
of the studied joint and hospitalization of the patients in
the ICU. Unfortunately, no study investigating the effect
of adding TENS to the joint motions in patients lacking
consciousness in the ICU was found in the literature.
Most of related studies were on knee joint as the involvement
of this joint is more than others. In similar papers
about other joints, as mentioned previously, different controversial
results were observed.
The effect of TENS in mitigating pain is evident and
widely accepted. Definitely, diminished pain in the joint
will develop conditions which facilitate the joint motion,
thus decreasing motion constraints.
Sometimes the limited range of motion of a joint is
due to muscular spasm and the constraint resulting from
the contraction of muscles. In such cases, the use of
TENS and other neural stimulations will lead to resolution
of the spasm and freedom of motion. Probably, in
studies emphasizing the effect of TENS on reducing the
limited motion, the origin of the abnormal contraction
restraint has been muscular. In contrast, sometimes the
limitation is due to soft tissue contracture and reduced
flexibility of non-contractile soft tissues as well as joint
stiffness and capsular adhesion. In these cases, electrical
stimulations mitigate the pain temporarily and have no
effect on resolving the joint limitations in the long term.
Possibly, the studies implying the lack of effect of TENS
in resolving joint constraint may belong to this group.
On the other hand, patients admitted to ICU wards
experience pain in joints and most parts of the body due
to immobility and long hospitalization. To avoid the
pain developed in response to movement, the patient
prefers to remain immobile. This vicious cycle causes
further reduction in the range of motion of joints. By
breaking this cycle and developing the opportunity
whereby joints move without pain, use of TENS and reduction
of pain may have been able to develop conditions
to minimize the limited range of motion to an
acceptable level.
Our study had some limitations: 1- Samples were recruited
only from three hospitals and it was not possible
to participate patients from more ones because this kind
of patients was not admitted in other hospitals, 2- The frequency
of interventions in both groups (three times a
week) was low. If possible, applying the interventions
every day may have more impact on variables. 3- Although
there were no significant differences between
groups in baseline data, the study groups are not quite
balanced in respect to the cause of admission to ICU, due
to the relatively small sample size. 4- Patients had different
trial starting points, as it is feasible that any patient who
had a prolonged stay prior to recruitment may have had a
measurable limitation of ROM before treatment started.
Conclusion
Adding TENS to stretch may provide more improvement
in ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion in prevention of
ankle joint stiffness. Thus, it can be recommended as a
non-pharmacological treatment to manage the patients
hospitalized in ICUs.