Background: The diagnosis of pediatric pancreatitis has been increasing over the last 15 years but the etiology of
this is uncertain. The population of pre-adolescent patients with pancreatitis in the emergency department has not
been specifically described. Our objective was to determine the characteristics of these patients to illuminate this
population and disease in order to better identify them and avoid a delay in diagnosis and treatment.
Methods: This was a retrospective descriptive study of consecutive pediatric patients under the age of 13 years
between 2006 and 2016 who presented to our pediatric emergency department with a diagnosis of atraumatic
pancreatitis. Patient characteristics, lab and imaging results, identified etiology of pancreatitis, and recurrence rates
were recorded and evaluated.
Results: There were 139 visits, of which 85 were for a first episode of acute pancreatitis, and 54 were patients with
an episode of recurrent pancreatitis. The median age for all visits was 8 years (IQ range 5–11). Of the acute cases,
26% had uncertain or undetermined etiologies of which half were thought to likely be viral related; 20% had systemic
inflammatory or autoimmune diseases; 19% were associated with medications, with the most common being valproic
acid; 16% were cholelithiasis-related; and 15% were found to have a genetic, congenital or structural etiology.
No patients had elevated triglycerides. Those with cholelithiasis and genetic or structural defects were found
to have a higher recurrence rate than those with other etiologies. There were only four patients diagnosed
with chronic pancreatitis.
Conclusions: The etiology of pancreatitis in pre-adolescent children has a different distribution than in adolescents
and adults, with gallstone disease less frequent and concurrent contributing illness more common. Patients
on pancreatitis-causing medications or with known genetic risk or structural pancreatic problems should be
tested for pancreatitis if presenting with concerning symptoms. Hypertriglyceridemia and chronic pancreatitis
with evidence of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency is uncommon in this population.