Having to work in unpredictable and critical conditions, emergency care services (EMS) personnel
experience complicated situations at the scene of accidents which, inevitably, influence their clinical decisions.
There is a lack of research into the challenges which these professionals encounter. Accordingly, the present study
aims to explore the major challenges and barriers which affect clinical decision-making from the perspective of EMS
personnel.
Methods: The present study is a qualitative work with a content analysis approach. Selected via purposeful
sampling, the subjects were 25 members of the EMS personnel in Iran who met the inclusion criteria. The study
lasted from December 2019 to July 2020. Sampling was maintained to the point of data saturation. Data were
collected using semi-structured, in-depth, individual interviews. The collected data were analyzed via qualitative
content analysis.
Results: The results of data analysis were categorized into four themes and eight categories. The main themes
were professional capabilities, occupational and environmental factors, inefficient organizational management, and
ethical issues.
Conclusion: The results of the present study show that clinical knowledge, experience, and skills contribute to
emergency care personnel’s professional capabilities in making clinical decisions. Good teamwork skills and time
management can prevent feelings of confusion when the number of the injured to be attended to is large.
Effective clinical decision-making skills can not only help the personnel make the right decision, but enhances their
resilience and enables them to adapt to hard and unpredictable conditions. Professional factors, organizational
management, and ethical matters constitute the other major factors which influence the clinical decision-making of
emergency care personnel at the scene of accidents and determine the quality of their clinical performance. Thus, it
is essential that pre-hospital emergency care managers improve the quality of EMS personnel’s clinical decisionmaking
skill.