Background: Retroperitoneal vascular leiomyosarcoma (RVLMS) is an extremely rare disease in clinical practice, and
it has poor prognosis. This article is to explore the diagnosis and treatment of RVLMS and present our experience.
Methods: Data of RVLMS patients were continuously collected in our hospital from August 2018 to February 2020:
two males and two females with a median age of 56 (min–max=33–61) years were included. Patients in whom para‑
ganglioma could not be excluded were asked to take phenoxybenzamine before surgery. A multi-disciplinary team
(MDT) meeting had been held and surgery was recommended. The operation procedures varied based on the tumor
location, shape, and stage, and the core steps were "exposure of the retroperitoneum and tumor, identifcation of vital
blood vessels, blocking the bloodstream, complete removal of the tumor and tumor thrombus, and release of blood
fow". A Satinsky clamp was used to partially block the blood vessels. Follow-up was conveyed by revisits and phone
calls.
Results: One patient underwent open surgery, and three patients underwent laparoscopic surgery, one of whom
underwent conversion to open surgery. The procedures were fnished successfully, with a median operative time of
314.5 (min–max=224–467) mins. The median amount of intraoperative bleeding was 550 (min–max=200–1500) ml,
and three patients had transfusion during the operation. The mass was irregular in shape, with a median maximum
size of 7.45 (min–max=4.2–10.7) cm, and the pathological examination confrmed RVLMS, which has spindle-shape,
high mitotic activity and atypia. One week after the operation, the median serum creatinine level was 85 (min–
max=70–99) µmol/L. The median follow-up time was 16 (min–max=13–21) months, and 1 case reported asympto‑
matic recurrence.
Conclusion: Uncharacteristic manifestations and imaging features contribute to the problematic diagnosis of RVLMS.
Comprehensive preoperative evaluation and careful surgical planning are essential. Multicenter research is needed in
the future to reach a dominant consensus.