Background: Coronary artery disease (CAD) remains one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide and is associated
with multiple inherited and environmental risk factors. This study is designed to identify, design, and develop
a panel of genetic markers that combined with clinical and angiographic information, will facilitate the creation of a
personalized risk prediction algorithm (GEnetic Syntax Score—GESS). GESS score could be a reliable tool for predicting
cardiovascular risk for future adverse events and for guiding therapeutic strategies.
Methods: GESS (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03150680) is a prospective, non-interventional clinical study
designed to enroll 1080 consecutive patients with no prior history of coronary revascularization procedure, who
undergo scheduled or emergency coronary angiography in AHEPA, University General Hospital of Thessaloniki. Next
generation sequencing (NGS) technology will be used to genotype specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
across the genome of study participants, which were identified as clinically relevant to CAD after extensive bioinformatic
analysis of literature-based SNPs. Enrichment analyses of Gene Ontology-Molecular Function, Reactome
Pathways and Disease Ontology terms were also performed to identify the top 15 statistically significant terms and
pathways. Furthermore, the SYNTAX score will be calculated for the assessment of CAD severity of all patients based
on their angiographic findings. All patients will be followed-up for one-year, in order to record any major adverse
cardiovascular events.
Discussion: A group of 228 SNPs was identified through bioinformatic and pharmacogenomic analysis to be
involved in CAD through a wide range of pathways and was correlated with various laboratory and clinical parameters,
along with the patients’ response to clopidogrel and statin therapy. The annotation of these SNPs revealed 127
genes being affected by the presence of one or more SNPs. The first patient was enrolled in the study in February
2019 and enrollment is expected to be completed until June 2021. Hence, GESS is the first trial to date aspiring to
develop a novel risk prediction algorithm, the GEnetic Syntax Score, able to identify patients at high risk for complex
CAD based on their molecular signature profile and ultimately promote pharmacogenomics and precision medicine
in routine clinical settings.