Background: Uncomplicated urinary tract infection (uUTI) is very common among women in primary care. The risk
of developing pyelonephritis remains low after uUTI, nonetheless, empiric antibiotic therapy is frequently prescribed
for symptomatic purposes. This may lead to adverse effects and antibiotic resistance. Furthermore, patients may
express the will to limit the use of antibiotics. Some European countries recommend discussing a delayed
prescription with the patient and developing a shared decision. The aim of this study is to create a patient decision
aid (PtDA) used in primary care settings to make a shared decision between practitioners and women about
whether or not to treat uUTI with antibiotics.
Methods: We followed the steps recommended by the International Patient Decision Aids Standards, with a
scoping phase, a design phase (including focus groups and literature review), and an alpha-testing phase. A
steering group, made of patients and physicians, met throughout the study to develop a prototype PtDA.
Results: The information included in the PtDA is the definition of uUTI, information on the options, their benefits,
risks, and consequences, based on a review of the literature. The results of the focus group made possible to
determine the patient’s values and preferences to consider in decision-making, including: the discomfort felt, the
impact on daily life, patients’ perceptions of antibiotics, and the position relative to the risk of adverse effect. The
choices in presentation, organisation and design are the result of the work of the steering group, improved by
feedback from alpha testing. We confirmed the need for shared decision-making and the equipoise in this situation.
Conclusions: We developed a PtDA to be used in primary care for sharing decision on the use of antibiotic in
uUTI. It needs to be validated in a beta-testing phase, with complementary advice from peers, and then tested in a
clinical study comparing its use with the systematic prescription approach.