Background: Enteral feeding intolerance (EFI) is a frequent problem in the Intensive care unit (ICU) and is associated
with poor clinical outcomes leading to worse prognosis in terms of mortality and ICU stay. Nowadays, prokinetic
drugs are the mainstay of therapy in EFI. However, available prokinetics have uncertain efficacy and safety profiles.
Itopride, is a prokinetic agent which is different and unique from the available prokinetics because of its dual mode
of action as well as its tolerability and safety. The current study compared the efficacy and safety of Itopride against
metoclopramide for EFI in critically ill patients. Moreover, it tested the utility and applicability of ultrasonography to
measure gastric residual volume (GRV) in this population.
Methods: This randomized, double-blind study included 76 EFI patients who were randomly assigned to either Itopride
or metoclopramide group. The primary outcome was to measure GRV by ultrasonography. Secondary outcomes
included the percentage ratio of enteral feed volume, energy and protein received by patients over 7 days of treatment,
ICU length of stay, safety parameters and occurrence of infectious complications or vomiting.
Results: Thirty-five patients of each group completed the study. At day 7, itopride significantly decreased GRV
compared with metoclopramide group (p = 0.001). Moreover, there was a significant increase in the ratios of received
enteral nutrition feed volume, calories, and protein after the one-week therapy in the itopride group more than the
metoclopramide group (p = 0.001), (p = 0.002), (p = 0.01), respectively and there were no differences in any secondary
outcomes or adverse events between the two groups.
Conclusion: In critically ill patients with EFI, itopride was well tolerated with superior efficacy to metoclopramide. In
addition, we demonstrated that ultrasonography is a simple, non-invasive, inexpensive, and undemanding method
for GRV measurements and can offer reliable assessments in the gastric emptying modality.