Background: Quality improvement (QI) is used in nursing homes (NH) to implement and sustain improvements in
patient outcomes. Little is known about how QI strategies are used in NHs. This lack of information is a barrier to
replicating successful strategies. Guided by the Framework for Implementation Research, the purpose of this study
was to map-out the use, evaluation, and reporting of QI strategies in NHs.
Methods: This scoping review was completed to identify reports published between July 2003 through February
2019. Two reviewers screened articles and included those with (1) the term “quality improvement” to describe their
methods, or reported use of a QI model (e.g., Six Sigma) or strategy (e.g., process mapping) (2), findings related to
impact on service and/or resident outcomes, and (3) two or more NHs included. Reviewers extracted data on study
design, setting, population, problem, solution to address problem, QI strategies, and outcomes (implementation,
service, and resident). Vote counting and narrative synthesis were used to describe the use of QI strategies,
implementation outcomes, and service and/or resident outcomes.
Results: Of 2302 articles identified, the full text of 77 articles reporting on 59 studies were included. Studies focused
on 23 clinical problems, most commonly pressure ulcers, falls, and pain. Studies used an average of 6 to 7 QI
strategies. The rate that strategies were used varied substantially, e.g., the rate of in-person training (55%) was more
than twice the rate of plan-do-study-act cycles (20%). On average, studies assessed two implementation outcomes;
the rate these outcomes were used varied widely, with 37% reporting on staff perceptions (e.g., feasibility) of
solutions or QI strategies vs. 8% reporting on fidelity and sustainment. Most studies (n = 49) reported service
outcomes and over half (n = 34) reported resident outcomes. In studies with statistical tests of improvement,
service outcomes improved more often than resident outcomes.
Conclusions: This study maps-out the scope of published, peer-reviewed studies of QI in NHs. The findings suggest
preliminary guidance for future studies designed to promote the replication and synthesis of promising solutions.
The findings also suggest strategies to refine procedures for more effective improvement work in NHs.