Background: In cancer care as well as other types of treatment and care, little is known about the contribution of
Patient and Family Advisory Councils (PFACs) operating at the managerial level in healthcare organizations. The aim
of the study was to investigate the effectiveness of a Swedish PFAC operating at the managerial level at one of
Sweden’s six regional cancer centres.
Methods: This was a qualitative, single-case study based on interviews with PFAC participants and meeting
minutes from PFAC meetings. These were analysed using a modified version of a framework developed by Abelson
et al. to design and evaluate collective involvement processes in the healthcare sector: (i) representation; (ii)
information; (iii) process or procedures and (iv) outcomes and decisions.
Results: The descriptive representation was good regarding geographical location and cancer diagnosis.
Information from the regional cancer centre was an important part of the meeting agenda. The procedures
encouraged everyone to speak up, and the participants saw the representatives from the regional cancer centre as
allies against the hospitals and regions, raising some questions about the PFAC's independence. Regarding
outcomes, most participants did not know to what extent their work had led to any improvements in cancer care.
However, they still regarded the council as effective, as issues the participants raised were listened to by the
representatives from the regional cancer centre and ‘taken further’ in the healthcare organization.
Conclusions: The participants were satisfied with being listened to, but they found it difficult to know whether
their work had led to improvements, in part because they did not know enough about how the healthcare
organization worked above the care-provision level. This was a hurdle to achieving change. The study suggests it is
more difficult for patients and next of kin to participate at the managerial level, compared to the care-provision
level in healthcare systems, where they could potentially influence important aspects of cancer care and policy,
since it is at these levels strategic decisions about priorities in cancer care and service configurations are made. This
indicates that there is a particular need for guidance and support for patient and public involvement to work
successfully at this level, which may include relevant education and training in system knowledge.