Objective: To review published randomised controlled trials to assess the benefit and harm of
imiquimod in the treatment of external genital warts.
Data sources: MEDLINE (1966 - December 2000), Cochrane Library (Issue 3, 2000) and PubMed
(December 15, 2000), review articles and reference lists.
Review methods: Included studies had to be randomised trials of imiquimod, to be full published
papers, and to have a comparison group. Quality of trial reporting was assessed. Relative benefit
and number needed to treat were calculated for the main outcomes of wart clearance at the end
of therapy, of at least 50% reduction in wart area, and of complete clearance at the end of
treatment and no recurrence of warts during a follow-up period, as well as for adverse effect
withdrawal or lack of efficacy withdrawal.
Results: There were six trials, all with quality scores of 3 (out of 5) or greater. In five trials with
HIV-negative patients complete clearance of warts at the end of treatment occurred in 51% of
patients treated with imiquimod 2% or 5% cream and 6% of placebo treated patients. The number
needed to treat was 2.2 (95% confidence interval 2.0 to 2.6). In four trials at least 50% wart area
reduction occurred with 72% of patients treated with imiquimod 5% cream and 20% of placebo
treated patients. The number needed to treat was 1.9 (1.7 to 2.2). In three trials complete
clearance of warts at the end of treatment plus no recurrence occurred in 37% of patients treated
with imiquimod 5% cream and 4% of those treated with placebo. The number needed to treat was
3.0 (2.5 to 3.8). Adverse event withdrawal was rare and no more likely with imiquimod than with
placebo. Imiquimod was not effective in one trial in HIV-positive patients.
Conclusion: The evidence base for imiquimod in treating genital warts is of high quality and the
necessary size from which to draw useful conclusions. Imiquimod is effective in home application,
though not in patients with HIV infection with the evidence presently available.