Background: Poor communication skills can potentially compromise patient care. However, as communication
skills training (CST) programs are not seen as a priority to many clinical departments, there is a discernible absence
of a standardised, recommended framework for these programs to be built upon. This systematic scoping review
(SSR) aims to gather prevailing data on existing CSTs to identify key factors in teaching and assessing
communication skills in the postgraduate medical setting.
Methods: Independent searches across seven bibliographic databases (PubMed, PsycINFO, EMBASE, ERIC, CINAHL,
Scopus and Google Scholar) were carried out. Krishna’s Systematic Evidence-Based Approach (SEBA) was used to
guide concurrent thematic and content analysis of the data. The themes and categories identified were compared
and combined where possible in keeping with this approach and then compared with the tabulated summaries of
the included articles.
Results: Twenty-five thousand eight hundred ninety-four abstracts were identified, and 151 articles were included
and analysed. The Split Approach revealed similar categories and themes: curriculum design, teaching methods,
curriculum content, assessment methods, integration into curriculum, and facilitators and barriers to CST.
Amidst a wide variety of curricula designs, efforts to develop the requisite knowledge, skills and attitudes set out by
the ACGME current teaching and assessment methods in CST maybe categorised into didactic and interactive
methods and assessed along Kirkpatrick’s Four Levels of Learning Evaluation.
Conclusions: A major flaw in existing CSTs is a lack of curriculum structure, focus and standardisation. Based upon
the findings and current design principles identified in this SSR in SEBA, we forward a stepwise approach to
designing CST programs. These involve 1) defining goals and learning objectives, 2) identifying target population
and ideal characteristics, 3) determining curriculum structure, 4) ensuring adequate resources and mitigating
barriers, 5) determining curriculum content, and 6) assessing learners and adopting quality improvement processes.