Background: Medical educators have promoted self-directed learning (SDL) as an important means of enabling
students to take responsibility for their own learning throughout their training and practice. While SDL has been
well-studied in classroom settings, it remains a story half told: barriers to and facilitators of SDL in the clinical
setting are not yet well described. The goals of this study were to explicate student experiences of SDL in their
clinical training and to identify the roles that local social and cultural contexts play in shaping their experiences of
SDL.
Methods: To understand students’ conceptualization and experiences of SDL in the clinical setting, we carried out
a qualitative study with 15 medical students at Harvard Medical School. The semi-structured interviews were
recorded and transcribed. Using an interpretivist approach, data were analyzed both deductively and inductively
using the Framework method of content analysis.
Results: Participants described patient care activities as primary motivators for engagement in SDL in the clinical
setting. Participants’ descriptions of SDL aligned with Knowles’ steps in SDL, with an additional step of
consolidation of learning related to their patients’ diagnosis and management. Participants described using a range
of cognitive, social-emotional, and peer learning strategies to enhance their SDL. Participants who described a
growth mindset appeared to engage in SDL more easily. Learning environments that fostered SDL were those in
which faculty and residents demonstrated an educational orientation, promoted psychological safety, and invited
student engagement. Teams with perceived excessive work demands were perceived to be less supportive of SDL.
Conclusions: Our study enhances previous classroom-based models of SDL by providing specific, practical
implications for both students and faculty in the clinical training setting. Participants described SDL in the clinical
setting as patient-centered, and when effectively implemented, SDL appears to support a mastery rather than
performance orientation. Our study paves the way for improving medical students’ clinical SDL and helping them
become lifelong learners in the field of medicine.