Background: Technological advances have previously been hailed as a new dawn in Higher Education, with the
advent of ‘massive open online courses’ (MOOCs) and online learning. Virtual platforms have potential advantages
such as accessibility and availability but simply transferring educational material to the online environment may not
ensure high quality learning. Clinical examination is a fundamental principle of medical assessment, and this study
aimed to assess the role of technology in teaching these skills.
Aims/objectives: To determine whether three teaching modalities were of equal efficacy in teaching examination
of the shoulder joint to naïve medical students.
Methods: Sixty-seven pre-clinical medical students naïve to large joint examination were recruited. Participants
completed a learning style questionnaire and were then block randomised to three study: textbook study, face-toface
seminar, or video tutorial via online platform. The same examination technique was taught in all groups, with
the intervention being the method of delivery All second year students were eligible for inclusion. The single
exclusion criteria was previous exposure to clinical examination teaching. Students were assessed using a
standardised scoring system at baseline (pre-intervention), and days 5 and 19 post-intervention (maximum score
30). Assessors were blinded to group allocation. The primary outcome was assessment score at day 5 post
intervention.
Results: There was no difference between the three groups at baseline assessment (mean scores 2.4 for textbook,
2.8 for face-to-face, and 3.1 for video; p = 0.267). Mean post-intervention scores were 16.5 textbook, 25.5 face-toface,
and 22.4 video (p < 0.001, η2 = .449). There was no change between day 5 and day 19 post-intervention
assessment scores in any group (p = 0.373), Preferred learning style did not affect scores (p = 0.543).
Conclusion: Face-to-face teaching was the most effective method for teaching clinical examination of the
shoulder. Technology can potentially increase accessibility and remove geographic barriers, but is not as effective if
teaching techniques are simply mirrored in an online format.