Background: Health professionals should have certain degree of empathy to eliminate the pain and suffering of
their patients. There is a need to design a scale, which can assess empathy among health professionals and is
relevant to community and culture. Therefore, this study was undertaken to measure the empathy among Syrian
health professionals and students of health professions using a newly designed Syrian Empathy Scale that is
relevant to community during Syrian crisis.
Methods: A cross-sectional observational study was undertaken. A total of 214 participants (118 males and 96
females) responded to the Syrian Empathy Scale SES from Medical (n = 62), Dental (n = 152). They were 59
undergraduates, 116 postgraduates and 39 general practitioners. The SES was designed as a tool that includes 20
items in a 7-point Likert-type scale with overall score ranges from 20 to 140. Group comparisons of the empathy
scores were conducted using t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA). A factor analysis was performed. Bartlett’s test
of the sphericity and the KMO measure of sampling adequacy were also determined. Cronbach’s alpha was
calculated.
Results: A significant difference was found between males and females in the SES mean score. The ANOVA analysis
showed that the SES empathy scores of dentists were higher than the SES empathy scores in medical doctors with
no significant difference. The SES empathy score of undergraduates was significantly higher than postgraduates and
practitioners. Findings of KMO indicated sampling adequacy (KMO = 0.824 > 0.7) and the value of Bartlett’s test of
the sphericity (1255.65, df = 190, P-value< 0.001) proved that the factor analysis is meaningful and acceptable. The
results of varimax rotation proved that five main factors were retained.
Conclusion: Findings of this study support the reliability of the newly designed Syrian Empathy Scale for
measuring empathy in the field of health care. The SES can be suggested for assessing empathy in different health
educational programs. However, future works are still essential to support the validity of the scale as well as to
ascertain the role of empathy in improving health care.