Background: Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) in Canada came into effect in 2016 with the passing of Bill C-14.
As patient interest and requests for MAID continue to evolve in Canada, it is important to understand the attitudes
of future providers and the factors that may influence their participation. Attitudes towards physician hastened
death (PHD) in general and the specific provision of MAID (e.g., causing death by lethal prescription or injection)
are unknown among Canadian residents. This study examined residents’ attitudes towards PHD and MAID, and
identified factors (e.g., demographics, clinical exposure to death and dying) that may influence their decision to
participate in PHD and provide MAID.
Methods: A cross-sectional survey was adapted from prior established surveys on MAID to reflect the Canadian
setting. All Canadian family medicine programs were invited to participate. The survey was distributed between
December 2016 and April 2017. Analysis of the results included descriptive statistics to characterize the survey
participants and multivariable logistic regressions to identify factors that may influence residents’ attitudes towards
PHD and MAID.
Results: Overall, 247 residents from 6 family medicine training programs in Canada participated (response rate of
27%). While residents were most willing to participate in treatment withdrawal (52%), active participation in PHD
(41%) and MAID by prescription of a lethal drug (31%) and lethal injection (24%) were less acceptable. Logistic
regressions identified religion as a consistent and significant factor impacting residents’ willingness to participate in
PHD and MAID. Residents who were not strictly practicing a religion were more likely to be willing to participate in
PHD (OR = 17.38, p < 0.001) and MAID (lethal drug OR = 10.55, p < 0.01, lethal injection OR = 8.54, p < 0.05). Increased
clinical exposure to death and dying crudely correlated with increased willingness to participate in PHD and MAID,
but when examined in multivariable models, only a few activities (e.g., declaring death, completing a death
certificate) had a statistically significant association. Other significant factors included the residents’ sex and location
of training.
Conclusions: Residents are hesitant to provide MAID themselves, with religious faith being a major factor
impacting their decision.