Background: Private umbilical cord blood banking is a for-profit industry in which parents pay to store blood for
potential future use. Governments have noted the tendency for private banks to oversell the potential for cord
blood use, especially in relation to speculative cell therapies not yet supported by clinical evidence. We assessed
the regulatory landscape governing private cord bank marketing in Canada.
Main body: Because the problematic marketing of private cord blood banking for future use often relates to
speculative future cell therapies that do not exist and are not being advertised for current clinical use, most private
blood bank marketing seems to fall outside Health Canada’s regulatory scope. However, this problematic marketing
is regulated by the Competition Bureau pursuant to the Competition Act. While representations relating to future
hypothetical treatments may not always be subject to the legal requirement for claim substantiation, the law also
prohibits individuals and companies from knowingly or recklessly making representations that are “false or
misleading in a material respect.” A representation is materially false or misleading when it could “influence a
consumer’s behavior or purchasing decisions,” and consumers are likely to be considered to be “credulous and
inexperienced” for the purposes of assessing an advertisement’s general impression. Because all of the potential
benefit of the banking is derived from the potential future use of the biological material for health interventions
directed toward the customers and their relatives, and because we know the best available medical evidence
indicates a very low probability of utility in this context, we can say with confidence that some private cord blood
banking claims are materially misleading. Moreover, to the extent that medical professionals are involved in private
bank interactions with customers or hold ownership stakes in private banks, they are subject to professional codes,
standards of practice, and potentially fiduciary obligations that further prohibit misleading marketing.
Conclusions: Private cord blood bank marketing that advertises hypothetical future treatments can be misleading
and may influence consumer behaviour. This marketing may breach existing advertising law. Regulatory bodies
should enforce the law in order to help prevent public health and personal financial harm.