Background: Multiple guidelines for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) suggest that all stages of patients
need to receive postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. S-1 is a recently emerged oral antitumour agent recommended
by the guidelines. However, which population would benefit from S-1 needs to be determined, and predictors
of chemotherapy response are needed for personalized precision medicine. This pilot study aimed to initially
identify whether whole-tumour evaluation with MRI and radiomics features could be used for predicting the efficacy
of S-1 and to find potential predictors of the efficacy of S-1 as evidence to assist personalized precision treatment.
Methods: Forty-six patients with PDAC (31 in the primary cohort and 15 in the validation cohort) who underwent
curative resection and subsequently adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 were included. Pre-operative abdominal
contrast-enhanced MRI was performed, and radiomics features of the whole PDAC were extracted from the primary
cohort. After univariable analysis and radiomics features selection, a multivariable Cox regression model for survival
analysis was subsequently used to select statistically significant factors associated with postoperative disease-free survival
(DFS). Predictive capacities of the factors were tested on the validation cohort by using Kaplan–Meier method.
Results: Multivariable Cox regression analysis identified the probability of T1WI_
NGTDM_Strength and tumour location
as independent predictors of the efficacy of S-1 for adjuvant chemotherapy of PDAC (p = 0.005 and 0.013) in the
primary cohort, with hazard ratios (HRs) of 0.289 and 0.293, respectively. Further survival analysis showed that patients
in the low-T1WI_NGTDM_Strength group had shorter DFS (median = 5.1 m) than those in the high-T1WI_NGTDM_
Strength group (median = 13.0 m) (p = 0.006), and patients with PDAC on the pancreatic head exhibited shorter DFS
(median = 7.0 m) than patients with tumours in other locations (median = 20.0 m) (p = 0.016). In the validation cohort,
the difference in DFS between patients with low-T1WI_NGTDM_Strength and high-T1WI_NGTDM_Strength and the
difference between patients with PDAC on the pancreatic head and that in other locations were approved, with marginally
significant (p = 0.073 and 0.050), respectively.