Background: It is essential for radiologists to communicate actionable findings to the referring clinicians reliably.
Natural language processing (NLP) has been shown to help identify free-text radiology reports including actionable
findings. However, the application of recent deep learning techniques to radiology reports, which can improve the
detection performance, has not been thoroughly examined. Moreover, free-text that clinicians input in the ordering
form (order information) has seldom been used to identify actionable reports. This study aims to evaluate the benefits
of two new approaches: (1) bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT), a recent deep learning
architecture in NLP, and (2) using order information in addition to radiology reports.
Methods: We performed a binary classification to distinguish actionable reports (i.e., radiology reports tagged as
actionable in actual radiological practice) from non-actionable ones (those without an actionable tag). 90,923 Japanese
radiology reports in our hospital were used, of which 788 (0.87%) were actionable. We evaluated four methods,
statistical machine learning with logistic regression (LR) and with gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT), and deep
learning with a bidirectional long short-term memory (LSTM) model and a publicly available Japanese BERT model.
Each method was used with two different inputs, radiology reports alone and pairs of order information and radiology
reports. Thus, eight experiments were conducted to examine the performance.
Results: Without order information, BERT achieved the highest area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC) of
0.5138, which showed a statistically significant improvement over LR, GBDT, and LSTM, and the highest area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.9516. Simply coupling the order information with the radiology
reports slightly increased the AUPRC of BERT but did not lead to a statistically significant improvement. This may be
due to the complexity of clinical decisions made by radiologists.
Conclusions: BERT was assumed to be useful to detect actionable reports. More sophisticated methods are required
to use order information effectively.