Background and objectives: Diabetes mellitus is a major chronic disease that results in readmissions due to poor
disease control. Here we established and compared machine learning (ML)-based readmission prediction methods to
predict readmission risks of diabetic patients.
Methods: The dataset analyzed in this study was acquired from the Health Facts Database, which includes over
100,000 records of diabetic patients from 1999 to 2008. The basic data distribution characteristics of this dataset were
summarized and then analyzed. In this study, 30-days readmission was defined as a readmission period of less than
30 days. After data preprocessing and normalization, multiple risk factors in the dataset were examined for classifier
training to predict the probability of readmission using ML models. Different ML classifiers such as random forest,
Naive Bayes, and decision tree ensemble were adopted to improve the clinical efficiency of the classification. In this
study, the Konstanz Information Miner platform was used to preprocess and model the data, and the performances of
the different classifiers were compared.
Results: A total of 100,244 records were included in the model construction after the data preprocessing and
normalization. A total of 23 attributes, including race, sex, age, admission type, admission location, length of stay,
and drug use, were finally identified as modeling risk factors. Comparison of the performance indexes of the three
algorithms revealed that the RF model had the best performance with a higher area under receiver operating characteristic
curve (AUC) than the other two algorithms, suggesting that its use is more suitable for making readmission
predictions.
Conclusion: The factors influencing 30-days readmission predictions in diabetic patients, including number of inpatient
admissions, age, diagnosis, number of emergencies, and sex, would help healthcare providers to identify patients
who are at high risk of short-term readmission and reduce the probability of 30-days readmission. The RF algorithm with the highest AUC is more suitable for making 30-days readmission predictions and deserves further validation in
clinical trials.
