Background: Non-proportional hazards are common with time-to-event data but the majority of randomised
clinical trials (RCTs) are designed and analysed using approaches which assume the treatment effect follows
proportional hazards (PH). Recent advances in oncology treatments have identified two forms of non-PH of
particular importance - a time lag until treatment becomes effective, and an early effect of treatment that ceases
after a period of time. In sample size calculations for treatment effects on time-to-event outcomes where
information is based on the number of events rather than the number of participants, there is crucial importance in
correct specification of the baseline hazard rate amongst other considerations. Under PH, the shape of the baseline
hazard has no effect on the resultant power and magnitude of treatment effects using standard analytical
approaches. However, in a non-PH context the appropriateness of analytical approaches can depend on the shape
of the underlying hazard.
Methods: A simulation study was undertaken to assess the impact of clinically plausible non-constant baseline hazard
rates on the power, magnitude and coverage of commonly utilized regression-based measures of treatment effect and
tests of survival curve difference for these two forms of non-PH used in RCTs with time-to-event outcomes.
Results: In the presence of even mild departures from PH, the power, average treatment effect size and coverage were
adversely affected. Depending on the nature of the non-proportionality, non-constant event rates could further
exacerbate or somewhat ameliorate the losses in power, treatment effect magnitude and coverage observed. No
single summary measure of treatment effect was able to adequately describe the full extent of a potentially timelimited
treatment benefit whilst maintaining power at nominal levels.
Conclusions: Our results show the increased importance of considering plausible potentially non-constant event rates
when non-proportionality of treatment effects could be anticipated. In planning clinical trials with the potential for
non-PH, even modest departures from an assumed constant baseline hazard could appreciably impact the power to
detect treatment effects depending on the nature of the non-PH. Comprehensive analysis plans may be required to
accommodate the description of time-dependent treatment effects.