Background: Swallowing therapy is commonly provided as a treatment to lessen the risk or severity of dysphagia
secondary to radiotherapy (RT) for head and neck cancer (HNC); however, best practice is not yet established. This
trial will compare the effectiveness of prophylactic (high and low intensity) versus reactive interventions for
swallowing in patients with HNC undergoing RT.
Methods: This multi-site, international randomized clinical trial (RCT) will include 952 adult patients receiving
radiotherapy for HNC and who are at high risk for post-RT dysphagia. Participants will be randomized to receive
one of three interventions for swallowing during RT: RE-ACTIVE, started promptly if/when dysphagia is identified;
PRO-ACTIVE EAT, low intensity prophylactic intervention started before RT commences; or, PRO-ACTIVE
EAT+EXERCISE, high intensity prophylactic intervention also started before RT commences. We hypothesize that the
PRO-ACTIVE therapies are more effective than late RE-ACTIVE therapy; and, that the more intensive PRO-ACTIVE (EAT
+ EXERCISE) is superior to the low intensive PRO-ACTIVE (EAT). The primary endpoint of effectiveness is duration of
feeding tube dependency one year post radiation therapy, selected as a pragmatic outcome valued equally by
diverse stakeholders (e.g., patients, caregivers and clinicians). Secondary outcomes will include objective measures
of swallow physiology and function, pneumonia and weight loss, along with various patient-reported swallowingrelated outcomes, such as quality of life, symptom burden, and self-efficacy Discussion: Dysphagia is a common and potentially life-threatening chronic toxicity of radiotherapy, and a priority
issue for HNC survivors. Yet, the optimal timing and intensity of swallowing therapy provided by a speech-language
pathologist is not known. With no clearly preferred strategy, current practice is fraught with substantial variation.
The pragmatic PRO-ACTIVE trial aims to specifically address the decisional dilemma of when swallowing therapy
should begin (i.e., before or after a swallowing problem develops). The critical impact of this dilemma is heightened
by the growing number of young HNC patients in healthcare systems that need to allocate resources most
effectively. The results of the PRO-ACTIVE trial will address the global uncertainty regarding best practice for
dysphagia management in HNC patients receiving radiotherapy.