Background: This study aimed to assess a multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting approach for the management
of patients with complex extremity defects, analyze treatment recommendations, and evaluate factors influencing
non-implementation.
Methods: All patients introduced to an MDT meeting for complex extremity defects from 2015 to 2017 were
included in a retrospective cohort study. Patients’ characteristics and defect causes were evaluated. Treatment recommendations
(TR) of MDT meetings and subsequent implementation were reviewed (cohort with implementation of
TR versus cohort with non-implementation of TR), and factors associated with non-adherence to recommendations
were statistically analyzed using logistic regression.
Results: Fifty-one patients (41 male) with a mean age of 54 years were presented in 27 MDT meetings. Most of the
patients (70%) suffered from reconstructive challenging or combined bone- and soft tissue defects, primarily located
at the lower extremity (88%). Large skeletal defects, chronic osteomyelitis, and multi-fragmented fractures were
present in 65% of cases. Forty-five percent of the patients suffered from peripheral vascular disease, necessitating
surgical optimization. Of the 51 MDT decisions, 40 were implemented (78%; (32/40) limb salvage versus 22%; (8/40)
limb amputation). Limb salvage was successfully achieved in 91% (29/32) of the cases. Failed limb salvages were due
to flap failure (33%; 1/3), recurring periprosthetic joint infections (66%; 2/3) and concomitant reconstructive failure.
Patients who underwent limb amputation, as recommended, showed proper stump healing and regained mobility
with a prosthesis. Overall the MDT treatment plan was effective in 92.5% (37/40) of the patients, who adhered to the
MDT treatment recommendation. In eleven patients (22%; 11/51), the MDT treatment was not implemented. MDT
decisions were less likely to be implemented, if amputation was recommended (p = 0.029).
Conclusions: MDT meetings represent a valid tool to formulate individualized treatment plans, avoiding limb
amputation in most patients with severe extremity defects. Recommendation for limb amputation is less likely to be
implemented than plans for limb salvage.