Background: Nursing student numbers have risen in response to projected registered nurse shortfalls, increasing
numbers of new graduates requiring transitional support and pressure on clinical placements. A Collaborative
Clusters Education Model, in which Entry to Practice facilitators coach ward-based registered nurses to support
students’ and new graduates’ learning, may address placement capacity. The research aim was to evaluate the
acceptability of the Collaborative Clusters Education Model to stakeholders by examining their perceptions of the
facilitators and barriers to the model in its implementation.
Methods: A convergent mixed methods evaluation approach was adopted. The study took place in a large
Australian health service in south-east Queensland. Participants included Bachelor of Nursing students, Entry to
Practice facilitators, ward-based registered nurses, academics and new graduates. A mixed methods design was
used. Elements included an online survey of nursing students, and interviews with new graduates, Entry to Practice
facilitators, ward-based registered nurses, and academics. Descriptive statistics were calculated on quantitative data.
Thematic analysis was conducted on qualitative data.
Results: Participants included 134 (of 990) nursing students (response rate 13.5%), five new graduates, seven Entry
to Practice facilitators, four registered nurses, and three nurse academics. Students rated facilitators’ effectiveness
highly (4.43/5 ± 0.75), although this finding is tempered by a low response rate (13.5%). For learners, the model
provided access to learning experiences, although preferences for sources of support differed between students
and new graduates, and further clarification of responsibilities was required. For other stakeholders, three themes
emerged: students’ and new graduates’ integration into the workplace can promote learning; tensions arise in new
ways to approach performance assessment; and aligning expectations requires high levels of communication.
Conclusions: This evaluation found that acceptability was good but at risk from limited clarity around roles and
responsibilities. Further research into this model is recommended.