Background: This study aimed to assess the feasibility of a pan-cancer panel assay for high-risk renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) in the Korean population. We also analyzed the clinical and genetic factors contributing to metastasis in clear
cell RCC.
Methods: Thirty-one patients with advanced RCC who underwent radical nephrectomy were analyzed. A 1.8 Mb multicancer
panel (including 25 RCC-related genes, such as VHL, PBRM1, SETD2, and MET), comprising 181 target genes, 23
fusion genes, and 45 drug target lesions developed by Seoul National University Hospital, was used for this study.
Results: We extracted DNA from 30 of the 31 (96.7%) RCC specimens. Twenty-one patients (average age 63.3 ± 11.3
years) with clear cell RCC, 5 with papillary RCC, 3 with chromophobe RCC, and one patient, each with MiT family
translocation carcinoma RCC and succinate dehydrogenase deficiency RCC, were analyzed. The sequencing depth was
430.8 ± 206.6 and 97 mutations (7.3 ± 2.7 mutations per patient) were detected. The most commonly mutated genes
were VHL (46%), PBRM1 (30%), and BAP1, NOTCH4, and POLQ (23.33% each). Compared with TNM stage matched data
from TCGA of clear cell RCC, VHL and PBRM1 are most common in both cohorts. Univariate and multivariate analyses
revealed that tumor size (Hazard ratio = 2.47, p = 0.04) and PBRM1 (Hazard ratio = 28.69, p = 0.05) were related to
metastasis in clear cell RCC.
Conclusion: The pan-cancer panel comprised of RCC-related genes is a feasible and promising tool to evaluate genetic
alterations in advanced RCC. However, large-scale studies and a focus on the clinical utility of this cancer panels is needed.
Keywords: Kidney cancer, Genes, VHL gene, PBRM1 mutation, Metastasis, Pan-cancer panel, Next-generation sequencing
Background
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a malignancy that arises
in the nephron tubules and has very heterogeneous
histologic and clinical manifestations, accounting for approximately
90% of all cases of kidney cancer and 2.4%
of all adult tumors [1]. The incidence of RCC continues
to increase [2]. As of 216, there are more than 15 RCC
subtypes classified by the World Health Organization [2],
based on histologic and molecular criteria. Clear cell RCC
(ccRCC) is the most common subtype, accounting for
75% of RCC cases, followed by papillary RCC (pRCC) and
chromophobe RCC (chrRCC) [3]. The MiT family of
translocation carcinomas (tRCC) and succinate dehydrogenase
deficiency RCC (SDHD RCC) are rare subtypes,
which are diagnosed based on molecular alterations.
Recent advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology have revealed numerous genetic alterations
© The