Background: The psychometric properties of self-administered instruments for measuring patient satisfaction with
removable dentures should be tested before inviting patients to express their opinions. This study aimed to evaluate
the validity and reliability of new instruments in the Arabic language that measure patient satisfaction with all types
of removable dentures.
Methods: A three-step methodology was used to translate and test the instruments. In step one, the instruments
were translated from tested German instruments to develop the pilot questionnaires. In step two, the face validity
of the pilot questionnaires was tested through three rounds of interviews. There were 15, 13, and 15 participants
per round, respectively. At the end of every round, the results of the interviews were discussed with an expert panel.
The expert panel confirmed the form and the type of questionnaires’ adjustments before a new round of interviews
began. At the end of step two, the final form of the questionnaires was reached. In step three, 235 questionnaires
were distributed to 133 participants to estimate the construct validity of the upper jaw and the lower jaw questionnaires.
After one week, the participants were asked to complete the questionnaires again. A total of 102 questionnaires
were returned and used to assess the instruments’ reliability. Factor analysis was used to assess the construct
validity. The intraclass correlation coefficient and Cronbach’s alpha were used to estimate the reliability and suitability
of the items in the indexes.
Results: The result of step one was two pilot questionnaires. The pilot questionnaires were adjusted in step two.
At the end of step two, the questionnaires proved to have good face validity. Factor analyses in step three revealed
that only one factor could be retained. The one-factor model explained 60.95% and 63.06 of the total variance of the
upper jaw and lower jaw questionnaires, respectively. The items in every questionnaire shared the same cluster and
could be summed to form an upper jaw index and lower jaw index that reflected patient satisfaction with removable
dentures. Cronbach’s alpha values indicated excellent internal consistency and reliability for the upper jaw questionnaire
(α = 0.91) and the lower jaw questionnaire (α = 0.92). Intraclass correlation coefficient values ranged from 0.72 to
0.95, which can be considered “moderate” to “excellent”.
Conclusions: The Arabic version of questionnaires and indexes assessing patient satisfaction with upper and lower
removable dentures are reliable and valid self-administered instruments.