Background: Advance care planning (ACP) conversations are associated with improved end-of-life healthcare
outcomes and patients want to engage in ACP with their healthcare providers. Despite this, ACP conversations rarely
occur in primary care settings. The objective of this study was to implement ACP through adapted Serious Illness Care
Program (SICP) training sessions, and to understand primary care provider (PCP) perceptions of implementing ACP
into practice.
Methods: We conducted a quality improvement project guided by the Normalization Process Theory (NPT), in
an interprofessional academic family medicine group in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. NPT is an explanatory model that
delineates the processes by which organizations implement and integrate new work. PCPs (physicians, family medicine
residents, and allied health care providers), completed pre- and post-SICP self-assessments evaluating training effectiveness,
a survey evaluating program implementability and sustainability, and semi-structured qualitative interviews to elaborate on
barriers, facilitators, and suggestions for successful implementation. Descriptive statistics and pre-post differences (Wilcoxon
Sign-Rank test) were used to analyze surveys and thematic analysis was used to analyze qualitative interviews.
Results: 30 PCPs participated in SICP training and completed self-assessments, 14 completed NoMAD surveys, and 7
were interviewed. There were reported improvements in ACP confidence and skills. NoMAD surveys reported mixed
opinions towards ACP implementation, specifically concerning colleagues’ abilities to conduct ACP and patients’ abilities
to participate in ACP. Physicians discussed busy clinical schedules, lack of patient preparedness, and continued
discomfort or lack of confidence in having ACP conversations. Allied health professionals discussed difficulty sharing
patient prognosis and identification of appropriate patients as barriers.
Conclusions: Training in ACP conversations improved PCPs’ individual perceived abilities, but discomfort and other
barriers were identified. Future iterations will require a more systematic process to support the implementation of
ACP into regular practice, in addition to addressing knowledge and skill gaps.