Background: Evaluation of palliative care services is crucial in order to ensure high quality care and to plan future
services in light of growing demand. There is also an acknowledgement of the need to better understand patient
experiences as part of the paradigm shift from paternalistic professional and passive patient to a more collaborative
partnership. However, while clinical decision-making is well-developed, the science of the delivery of care is
relatively novel for most clinicians. We therefore introduce the Trajectory Touchpoint Technique (TTT), a systematic
methodology designed using service delivery models and theories, for capturing the voices of palliative care service
users.
Methods: We used design science research as our overarching methodology to build our Trajectory Touchpoint
Technique. We also incorporated a range of kernel theories and service design models from the wider social
sciences. We developed and tested our Trajectory Touchpoint Technique with palliative care patients and their
families (n = 239) in collaboration with different hospices and hospital-based palliative care providers (n = 8).
Results: The Trajectory Touchpoint Technique is user-friendly, enables systematic data collection and analysis, and
incorporates all tangible and intangible dimensions of palliative care important to the service user. These
dimensions often go beyond clinical care to encompass wider aspects that are important to the people who use
the service. Our collaborating organisations have already begun to make changes to their service delivery based on
our results.
Conclusions: The Trajectory Touchpoint Technique overcomes several limitations of other palliative care evaluation
methods, while being more comprehensive. The new technique incorporates physical, psychosocial, and spiritual
aspects of palliative care, and is user-friendly for inpatients, outpatients, families, and the bereaved. The new
technique has been tested with people who have a range of illnesses, in a variety of locations, among people with
learning disabilities and low levels of literacy, and with children as well as adults. The Trajectory Touchpoint
Technique has already uncovered many previously unrecognised opportunities for service improvement,
demonstrating its ability to shape palliative care services to better meet the needs of patients and their families.