Background: The urinary stone and urinary tract infection (UTI) are invariably associated and are frequent causes of
morbidity. Date on burden of UTI among urinary stone patients is lacking in Ethiopia. This study was aimed to assess
bacterial profile, antimicrobial susceptibility and associated factors among urinary stone patients at the University of
Gondar Comprehensive Specialized Hospital.
Methods: An institution based cross sectional study was conducted. Basic sociodemographic data were collected
using a structured questionnaire. Bacterial identification of uropathogens and drug susceptibility testing were done
following standard microbiological techniques. The data were entered and analyzed using SPSS version-23. Bivariate
and multivariate logistic regressions were used to identify possible associated risk factors. Results with P value < 0.05
was considered statistically significant.
Result: A total of 300 urinary stone patients were enrolled. Of these, 153 (51%) were male and 261(87%) were urban
residents. The overall prevalence of urinary tract infection was 49 (16.3%) (95% CI 12–21%). A high level of resistance
was observed to ampicillin, penicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole while majority of isolates were most
sensitive to nitrofurantoin and ciprofloxacin. Multi-drug resistant isolates were 16/49 (32.7%), 75% of them being
Enterobacteriaceae isolates. More than one-third 9/26 (34.6%) of Gram-negative isolates were Extended Spectrum
Beta-Lactamase (ESBL) producing E. coli and K. pneumoniae. Being female, history of urinary tract infection and history
of drug use were the independent risk factors.
Conclusion: Most of the bacterial isolates from urinary stone patients were resistant to ampicillin, penicillin and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. E. coli and K. pneumoniae were the most common extended spectrum beta-lactamase
producing isolates. Sex, history of urinary tract infection and previous drug use were found to be risk factors.
Routine diagnosis of urinary stone patients for urinary tract infection should be promoted and further researches are
encouraged.