Background: Gasoline is a complex mixture of saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons, in which aromatic
compounds, such as BTX (benzene, toluene, and xylene) feature as the main constituents. Simultaneous exposure
to these aromatic hydrocarbons causes a significant impact on benzene toxicity. In order to detect early alterations
caused in gasoline station attendants exposed to BTX compounds, immunological, inflammatory, and oxidative
stress biomarkers were evaluated.
Methods: A total of 66 male subjects participated in this study. The gasoline station attendants (GSA) group
consisted of 38 gasoline station attendants from Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. The non-exposed group consisted of 28
subjects who were non-smokers and who had no history of occupational exposure. Environmental and biological
monitoring of BTX exposure was performed using blood and urine.
Results: The GSA group showed increased BTX concentrations in relation to the non-exposed group (p < 0.001).
The GSA group showed elevated protein carbonyl (PCO) levels and pro-inflammatory cytokines, decreased
expression of CD80 and CD86 in monocytes, and reduced glutathione S-transferase (GST) activity compared to the
non-exposed group (p < 0.05). BTX levels and trans,trans-muconic acid levels were positively correlated with proinflammatory
cytokines and negatively correlated with interleukin-10 contents (p < 0.001). Increased levels of proinflammatory
cytokines were accompanied by increased PCO contents and decreased GST activity (p < 0.001).
Furthermore, according to the multiple linear regression analysis, benzene exposure was the only factor that
significantly contributed to the increased pro-inflammatory cytokines (p < 0.05).
Conclusions: Taken together, these findings show the influence of exposure to BTX compounds, especially
benzene, on the immunological, inflammatory, and oxidative stress biomarkers evaluated. Furthermore, the data
suggest the relationship among the evaluated biomarkers of effect, which could contribute to providing early signs
of damage to biomolecules in subjects occupationally exposed to BTX compounds.