Background: Poncirin is flavanone derivative (isolated from Poncirus trifoliata) with known pharmacological
activities such as anti-tumor, anti-osteoporotic, anti-inflammatory and anti-colitic. The present study aimed to
explore the anti-allodynic and anti-hyperalgesic potentials of poncirin in murine models of inflammatory pain.
Methods: The analgesic potential of poncirin was evaluated in formalin-, acetic acid-, carrageenan- and Complete
Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA)-induced inflammatory pain models in mice. Anti-allodynic and anti-hyperalgesic activities
were measured using Von Frey filaments, Randall Selitto, hotplate and cold acetone tests. The serum nitrite levels
were determined using Griess reagent. The Quantitative Real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed to assess the
effect of poncirin on mRNA expression levels of inflammatory cytokines and anti-oxidant enzymes.
Results: Intraperitoneal administration of poncirin (30 mg/kg) markedly reduced the pain behavior in both acetic
acid-induced visceral pain and formalin-induced tonic pain models used as preliminary screening tools. The
poncirin (30 mg/kg) treatment considerably inhibited the mechanical hyperalgesia and allodynia as well as thermal
hyperalgesia and cold allodynia. The qRT-PCR analysis showed noticeable inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(mRNA expression levels of TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6) (p < 0.05) in poncirin treated group. Similarly, poncirin treatment
also enhanced the mRNA expressions levels of anti-oxidant enzymes such as transcription factor such as nuclear
factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) (p < 0.05), heme oxygenase (HO-1) (p < 0.05) and superoxide dismutase
(SOD2) (p < 0.05). Chronic treatment of poncirin for 6 days did not confer any significant hepatic and renal toxicity.
Furthermore, poncirin treatment did not altered the motor coordination and muscle strength in CFA-induced
chronic inflammatory pain model.
Conclusion: The present study demonstrated that poncirin treatment significantly reduced pain behaviors in all
experimental models of inflammatory pain, suggesting the promising analgesic potential of poncirin in
inflammatory pain conditions.