Background: Prosthesis-related complications, after knee reconstruction with endoprosthesis during operation for
tumors around the knee, remain an unresolved problem which necessitate a revision or even an amputational
surgery. The purpose of the current study was to identify significant risk factors associated with implant failure, and
establish a novel model to predict survival of the prosthesis in patients operated with endoprostheses for tumor
around knee.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the clinical database of our institution for patients who underwent knee
reconstruction due to tumors. A total of 203 patients were included, including 123 males (60.6%) and 80 (39.4%)
females, ranging in age from 14 to 77 years (mean: 34.3 ± 17.3 years). The cohort was randomly divided into training
(n = 156) and validation (n = 47) samples. Univariable COX analysis was used for initially identifying potential
independent predictors of prosthesis survival with the training group (p < 0.150). Multivariate COX proportional
hazard model was selected to identify final significant prognostic factors. Using these significant predictors, a
graphic nomogram, and an online dynamic nomogram were generated for predicting the prosthetic survival. Cindex
and calibration curve were used for evaluate the discrimination ability and accuracy of the novel model, both
in the training and validation groups.
Results: The 1-, 5-, and 10-year prosthetic survival rates were 94.0, 90.8, and 83.0% in training sample, and 96.7, 85.8,
and 76.9% in validation sample, respectively. Anatomic sites, length of resection and length of prosthetic stem were
independently associated with the prosthetic failure according to multivariate COX regression model (p<0.05).
Using these three significant predictors, a graphical nomogram and an online dynamic nomogram model were
generated. The C-indexes in training and validation groups were 0.717 and 0.726 respectively, demonstrating
favourable discrimination ability of the novel model. And the calibration curve at each time point showed favorable
consistency between the predicted and actual survival rates in training and validation samples.
Conclusions: The length of resection, anatomical location of tumor, and length of prosthetic stem were
significantly associated with prosthetic survival in patients operated for tumor around knee. A user-friendly novel
online model model, with favorable discrimination ability and accuracy, was generated to help surgeons predict the
survival of the prosthesis.