Background: Implementation of psychosocial interventions in mental health services has the potential to improve
the treatment of psychosis spectrum disorders (PSD) in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) where care is
predominantly focused on pharmacotherapy. The first step is to understand the views of key stakeholders. We
conducted a multi-language qualitative study to explore the contextual barriers and facilitators to implementation
of a cost-effective, digital psychosocial intervention, called DIALOG+, for treating PSD. DIALOG+ builds on existing
clinician-patient relationships without requiring development of new services, making it well-fitting for healthcare
systems with scarce resources.
Methods: Thirty-two focus groups were conducted with 174 participants (patients, clinicians, policymakers and
carers), who were familiarized with DIALOG+ through a presentation. The Southeast European LMICs included in
this research were: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, (Kosovo is referred throughout the text by United Nations
resolution) North Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia. Framework analysis was used to analyse the participants’
accounts.
Results: Six major themes were identified. Three themes (Intervention characteristics; Carers’ involvement; Patient
and organisational benefits) were interpreted as perceived implementation facilitators. The theme Attitudes and
perceived preparedness of potential adopters comprised of subthemes that were interpreted as both perceived
implementation facilitators and barriers. Two other themes (Frequency of intervention delivery; Suggested changes
to the intervention) were more broadly related to the intervention’s implementation. Participants were exceedingly
supportive of the implementation of a digital psychosocial intervention such as DIALOG+. Attractive intervention
characteristics, efficient use of scarce resources for its implementation and potential to improve mental health
services were seen as the main implementation facilitators. The major implementation barrier identified was
psychiatrists’ time constrains.
Conclusions: This study provided important insights regarding implementation of digital psychosocial interventions
for people with PSD in low-resource settings by including perspectives from four stakeholder groups in five LMICs
in Southeast Europe – a population and region rarely explored in the literature. The perceived limited availability of
psychiatrists could be potentially resolved by increased inclusion of other mental health professionals in service
delivery for PSD. These findings will be used to inform the implementation strategy of DIALOG+ across the
participating countries. The study also offers insights into multi-country qualitative research.