Background: Family involvement for persons with psychotic disorders is supported by scientific evidence, as well
as legal and ethical considerations, and recommended in clinical practice guidelines. This article reports a crosssectional
measurement of the level of implementation of such guidelines in fifteen community mental health
centre units in Norway, and presents a novel fidelity scale to measure basic family involvement and support. The
aim was to investigate current family involvement practices comprehensively, as a basis for targeted quality
improvement.
Methods: We employed three fidelity scales, with 12–14 items, to measure family involvement practices. Items
were scored from 1 to 5, where 1 equals no implementation and 5 equals full implementation. Data was analysed
using descriptive statistics, a non-parametric test, and calculation of interrater reliability for the scales.
Results: The mean score was 2.33 on the fidelity scale measuring basic family involvement and support. Among
patients with psychotic disorders, only 4% had received family psychoeducation. On the family psychoeducation
fidelity assessment scale, measuring practice and content, the mean score was 2.78. Among the eight units who
offered family psychoeducation, it was 4.34. On the general organizational index scale, measuring the organisation
and implementation of family psychoeducation, the mean score was 1.78. Among the units who offered family
psychoeducation, it was 2.46. As a measure of interrater reliability, the intra-class correlation coefficient was 0.99 for
the basic family involvement and support scale, 0.93 for the family psychoeducation fidelity assessment scale and
0.96 for the general organizational index scale.
Conclusions: The implementation level of the national guidelines on family involvement for persons with psychotic
disorders was generally poor. The quality of family psychoeducation was high, but few patients had received this
evidence-based treatment. Our novel fidelity scale shows promising psychometric properties and may prove a
useful tool to improve the quality of health services. There is a need to increase the implementation of family
involvement practices in Norway, to reach a larger percentage of patients and relatives.
