Background: Intrafascial prostatectomy was a modified technique from the conventional nerve-sparing surgery in
order to improve patients’ post-surgical continence and erectile function; however, ongoing controversy exists
regarding the oncological safety of this technique. In this study we aimed to provide a critical and pooled analysis
based on published literatures regarding the oncological outcomes after intrafascial nerve-sparing prostatectomy.
Methods: Database searches were performed for published articles till June 2018 on PubMed. Three reviewers
screened fulfilled papers and extracted data independently. Main outcome was the positive surgical margins (PSMs) rates
stratified by pathological stages. We performed both one-arm and comparative meta-analysis to evaluate the oncological
safety of intrafascial technique. Moreover, we built meta-regression models to assess the confounding factors.
Results: We retrieved a total of 117 records after electronic search, of which 21 studies were finally included in this
review. There were 15 controlled studies and 6 surgical series. Our one-arm meta-analysis demonstrated that the total
PSM rates after intrafascial techniques ranging from 2.2 to 35%, with a pooled rate of 14.5% on average (480 of 3151
patients, 95% confidence interval[CI]: 11.2–17.5%). Meta-regression model showed that patients’ age, pT2 cancer
percentage and Selection Score of Oncological Safety (SSOS) were significantly associated with total PSM rate; moreover,
each 1 point of SSOS could decrease the total PSM rate by 1.3% on average. Comparative meta-analysis demonstrated
that there was no significant difference between intra- and inter-fascial group regarding PSM rates.
Conclusions: With stringent case selection and when performed by experienced surgeons, intrafascial prostatectomy
could offer an acceptable or, at least, equivalent PSM rate compared with the conventional interfascial approach.
Preoperative SSOS more than 7 points could be considered as an indication of intrafascial radical prostatectomy.