Background: Endometriosis is a common benign gynecological disease that has the potential to debilitate due to
pain and reduced quality of life. Treatment modalities such as hormones and surgery have limitations and do not treat
all dimensions of the problems caused by endometriosis, and physical activity (PA) and exercise have been suggested
as alternative treatments. Aim of this study was to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the effect
of PA and exercise on endometriosis-associated symptoms.
Methods: Eleven databases were searched systematically. Study selection, quality assessment, and data extraction
were carried out by two independent researchers in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Eligibility criteria were
women with diagnosed endometriosis receiving an intervention (PA and/or exercise). The primary outcome was pain
intensity, but all outcomes were accepted.
Results: This study screened 1045 citations for eligibility. Four interventional studies were identified, of which one
showed fatal design flaws and so was excluded. Three studies, two randomized controlled trials (RCT) and one prepost
study with no control group, involving 109 patients were included in a descriptive synthesis. The interventions
included flexibility and strength training, cardiovascular fitness, and yoga, and were performed from one to four times
per week for a total duration of 8–24 weeks, with or without supervision. Only one study found improvements in pain
intensity. One study showed decreases in stress levels. Due to the heterogeneity of the study outcomes and measures,
as well as confounding factors, a quantitative meta-analysis could not be performed.
Conclusion: The effect of PA and exercise as treatments for endometrioses-associated symptoms could not be
determined due to significant limitations of the included studies. Future research should be based on RCTs of high
methodological quality, measuring and reporting relevant core outcomes such as pain, improvements in symptoms
and quality of life, and acceptability and satisfaction from the perspectives of patients. Furthermore, these outcomes
need to be measured using reliable and validated tools.