Background: Exercise is often used to obtain a negative energy balance. However, its effects on body weight
reduction are usually below expectations. One possible explanation is a reduction in spontaneous physical activity
(SPA) after exercise since the increase in energy expenditure caused by the exercise session would be offset by the
decrease in SPA and its associated energy cost. Thus, we evaluated the effects of a single bout of moderate
exercise at individualized intensity on spontaneous physical activity. The impact of the single bout of exercise was
determined in early adulthood and at the transition to middle age.
Methods: Male C57bl/6j (n = 10) mice were evaluated at 4 (4 M) and 9 (9 M) months of age. One week after a
treadmill Maximal Exercise Capacity Test (MECT), mice performed a 30-min single bout of exercise at 50 % of the
maximal speed reached at MECT. An infrared-based system was used to determine locomotor parameters (SPA and
average speed of displacement, ASD) before (basal) and immediately after the single bout of exercise for 48 h (D1,
0-24 h; D2, 24-48 h). Food intake was measured simultaneously. Data were analyzed by GEE and statistical
significance was set at p < 0.05.
Results: Basal SPA declined from 4 M to 9 M (p = 0.01), but maximal exercise capacity was similar. At both ages,
SPA and ASD decreased significantly (p < 0.0001) on day 1 after exercise. On D2, SPA returned to basal levels but
ASD remained lower than basal (p < 0.001). The magnitude (% of basal) of change in SPA and ASD on D1 and D2
was similar at 4 M and 9 M. Food intake did not change at 4 M but decreased on D2 at 9 M.
Conclusions: A single bout of moderate exercise decreases physical activity in the first 24 h and average speed of
locomotion in the 48 h following exercise. This compensation is similar from early adulthood to the transition to
middle age. The decrease in both the amount and intensity (speed) of SPA may compensate for the increase in
energy expenditure induced by exercise, helping to understand the below-than-expected effect of exercise
interventions to cause a negative energy balance.