Background: Whole body vibration (WBV) training as an intervention method can cure chronic low back pain
(CLBP). Different WBV parameters exert different effects on lumbar-abdominal muscle performance. Currently, there
is a lack of study researched the influence of WBV training on patients with CLBP by lumbar–abdominal muscle
activity. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate how WBV and exercise and their interactions influence lumbarabdominal
muscle activity in patients with CLBP.
Methods: a group of ambulatory patients with chronic low back pain. Muscle activities of the multifidus (MF), erector
spinae (ES), abdominal oblique externus muscle (AOE) and the rectus abdominis muscle (RA) were measured by
surface electromyography, whereas participants performed 4 different exercises (single bridge, plank, side stay and V
crunch) during three whole body vibration conditions and a no-vibration condition in a single experimental session.
Results: Compared with the same exercises without whole body vibration, muscle activity increased when whole
body vibration was added to the exercises. MF; the WBV frequency (P = 0.002,) and exercise (P < 0.001) presented
significant effects on the root mean square of MF, whereas exercise * frequency (P=0.044) also resulted in significant
interaction effects. ES: the significant differences were detected at WBV frequency (P < 0.001), exercise (P < 0.001), the
interaction effect of exercise and frequency (P = 0.225) was no significant. RA: the significant difference was detected at
WBV frequency (P = 0.018), the effect of exercise (P = 0.590) and the exercise * frequency interaction (P = 0.572) were no
significant. AOE: the significant difference was detected at WBV frequency (P < 0.001), the effect of exercise (P = 0.152)
and the exercise * frequency interaction (P = 0.380) were no significant.
Conclusion: Adding whole body vibration to exercise could increase muscle activation of lumbar–abdominal muscle in
patients with CLBP. The optimum frequency for lumbar–abdominal muscles is 15 Hz. The best exercises include plank for
multifidus and erector spinae, V crunch for rectus abdominis and single bridge for abdominal oblique externus.