Background: Practical methods for facilitating process improvement are needed to support high quality, safe care.
How best to specify (identify and define) process improvements – the changes that need to be made in a
healthcare process – remains a key question. Methods for doing so collaboratively, rapidly and remotely offer much
potential, but are under-developed. We propose an approach for engaging diverse stakeholders remotely in a
consensus-building exercise to help specify improvements in a healthcare process, and we illustrate the approach
in a case study.
Methods: Organised in a five-step framework, our proposed approach is informed by a participatory ethos, crowdsourcing
and consensus-building methods: (1) define scope and objective of the process improvement; (2) produce a draft or
prototype of the proposed process improvement specification; (3) identify participant recruitment strategy; (4) design and
conduct a remote consensus-building exercise; (5) produce a final specification of the process improvement in light of
learning from the exercise. We tested the approach in a case study that sought to specify process improvements for the
management of obstetric emergencies during the COVID-19 pandemic. We used a brief video showing a process for
managing a post-partum haemorrhage in women with COVID-19 to elicit recommendations on how the process could be
improved. Two Delphi rounds were then conducted to reach consensus.
Results: We gathered views from 105 participants, with a background in maternity care (n = 36), infection prevention and
control (n = 17), or human factors (n = 52). The participants initially generated 818 recommendations for how to improve the
process illustrated in the video, which we synthesised into a set of 22 recommendations. The consensus-building exercise
yielded a final set of 16 recommendations. These were used to inform the specification of process improvements for
managing the obstetric emergency and develop supporting resources, including an updated video.
Conclusions: The proposed methodological approach enabled the expertise and ingenuity of diverse stakeholders to be
captured and mobilised to specify process improvements in an area of pressing service need. This approach has the
potential to address current challenges in process improvement, but will require further evaluation.