Background: Multifunction surveillance alerting systems have been found to be beneficial for the operating room
and labor and delivery. This paper describes a similar system developed for in-hospital acute care environments, Alert-
Watch Acute Care (AWAC).
Results: A decision support surveillance system has been developed which extracts comprehensive electronic
health record (EHR) data including live data from physiologic monitors and ventilators and incorporates them into an
integrated organ icon-based patient display. Live data retrieved from the hospitals network are processed by presenting
scrolling median values to reduce artifacts. A total of 48 possible alerts are generated covering a broad range of
critical patient care concerns. Notification is achieved by paging or texting the appropriated member of the critical
care team. Alerts range from simple out of range values to more complex programing of impending Ventilator Associated
Events, SOFA, qSOFA, SIRS scores and process of care reminders for the management of glucose and sepsis.
As with similar systems developed for the operating room and labor and delivery, there are green, yellow, and red
configurable ranges for all parameters. A census view allows surveillance of an entire unit with flashing or text to voice
alerting and enables detailed information by windowing into an individual patient view including live physiologic
waveforms. The system runs via web interface on desktop as well as mobile devices, with iOS native app available,
for ease of communication from any location. The goal is to improve safety and adherence to standard management
protocols.
Conclusions: AWAC is designed to provide a high level surveillance view for multi-bed hospital units with varying
acuity from standard floor patients to complex ICU care. Alerts are generated by algorithms running in the background
and automatically notify the selected member of the patients care team. Its value has been demonstrated for
low acuity patients, further study is required to determine its effectiveness in high acuity patients.