Chronic pain is a disabling illness, often comorbid with depression. 
We performed a randomized controlled pilot study on mindfulness-based cognitive 
therapy (MBCT) targeting depression in a chronic pain population.
Participants with chronic pain lasting ≥ 3 months; DSM-IV major 
depressive disorder (MDD), dysthymic disorder, or depressive disorder not 
otherwise specified; and a 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology-Clinician Rated (QIDS-C₁₆) score ≥ 6 were randomly assigned to 
MBCT (n = 26) or waitlist (n = 14). We adapted the original MBCT intervention 
for depression relapse prevention by modifying the psychoeducation and 
cognitive-behavioral therapy elements to an actively depressed chronic pain 
population. We analyzed an intent-to-treat (ITT) and a per-protocol sample; the 
per-protocol sample included participants in the MBCT group who completed at 
least 4 of 8 sessions. Changes in scores on the QIDS-C₁₆ and 17-item Hamilton 
Depression Rating Sale (HDRS₁₇) were the primary outcome measures. Pain, quality 
of life, and anxiety were secondary outcome measures. Data collection took place 
between January 2012 and July 2013.
Nineteen participants (73%) completed the MBCT program. No significant 
adverse events were reported in either treatment group. ITT analysis (n = 40) 
revealed no significant differences. Repeated-measures analyses of variance for 
the per-protocol sample (n = 33) revealed a significant treatment × time 
interaction (F₁,₃₁ = 4.67, P = .039, η²p = 0.13) for QIDS-C₁₆ score, driven by a 
significant decrease in the MBCT group (t₁₈ = 5.15, P < .001, d = >1.6), but not 
in the control group (t₁₃ = 2.01, P = .066). The HDRS₁₇ scores did not differ 
significantly between groups. The study ended before the projected sample size 
was obtained, which might have prevented effect detection in some outcome 
measures.
MBCT shows potential as a treatment for depression in individuals 
with chronic pain, but larger controlled trials are needed.
