The word glossolalia, also referred to as "speaking in tongues," originates from 
the Greek "glossa" which means "language" and "Lalia" which means "speak." It 
simply means to talk language. On a linguistic perspective, glossolalia is 
characterized by almost no recognizable words or semantic content, apart from 
biblical words and phrases, with an overrepresentation of a small phonemes 
number, accelerated speech output, and modification of accents and melody. Its 
phonemic properties have been said to resemble those of the language(s) of the 
speaker. It is generally a voluntary intimate communication act associated with 
religious spiritual thoughts, although it has also been described in mental 
disorders. Glossolalia state is a special mental state, completely different 
from aphasia. Aphasia is characterized by some phonological and grammatical 
rules; however, these are related to neurolinguistics and not to developmental 
principles. Unlike aphasia, glossolalia is not associated with central nervous 
system affection. There is, however, a psychiatric type of glossolalia, which, 
although similar in terms of phenomenology, is probably a different phenomenon. 
A common thought is that there is a linguistic trend, whose basic component is a 
stream of speech. This stream is suggested to use early-acquired rules of 
phonation, adapted according to socially meaningful values and attitudes, in an 
unconscious way. Therefore, the act of glossolalia is out of the "glossolalists" 
control. It would appear, therefore, that there is a broad spectrum of anomalous 
speech, of which religious glossolalia is only one manifestation. The aim of 
this chapter is to understand the mental state of glossolalia in comparison to 
aphasia in the light of neurolinguistic and psychiatric features. Moreover, we 
tried to highlight the underlying brain network. Pilot neuroscientific data 
suggest that it is associated with a deactivation of the cognitive system and an 
activation of some parts of the mirror neuron networks.