Although the neurohypophyseal hormones vasopressin 
(VP) and oxytocin (OT) are mostly known for their role respectively in 
antidiuresis, and in labour, lactation and maternal behavior, both might exert 
widespread influences either on emotion and cognition in healthy subjects, 
showing some gender-related differences. They interact with each other 
facilitating shifts between positive socially- oriented and defensive states. In 
fact, VP amplifies the reactivity to stressors showing also beneficial effects 
on attention, verbal learning as well as memory, whereas OT reduces the 
amplitude of the stress response, improves emotion processing, and can play a 
negative effect on memory and verbal learning in healthy individuals. Several 
data indicate the possible involvement of these neuropeptides in the 
pathophysiology of psychiatric conditions involving social interactions, such as 
autism, as well as in schizophrenia and depression. The aim of this paper is to 
review the literature relating to the role played by neurohypophyseal hormones 
in neuropsychiatric disorders.
We analyzed the best of published literature dealing with the 
relationships between neurohypophyseal hormones and neuropsychiatric conditions 
like autism (AD), major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BD) and 
schozophrenia, identifying keywords and MeSH terms in Pubmed and then searching 
them. The last search was performed on December 2017.
Several studies indicate a role played by OT and VP in AD, 
schizophrenia, MDD and BD. Even if conflicting data have been reported, several 
mechanisms may be involved in these behavioral diseases, such as differences in 
aminoacid sequence and peptide biological activity, neurotransmission and 
genetic disorders involving OT and VP receptors.
The involvment of VP and OT in neurpopsychiatric disorders can 
support a possible beneficial therapy with OT or with VP antagonists. The target 
may be obtained using effective drug delivery methods as well as the association 
with other drugs.