The cerebellum is now at the forefront of research in neuroscience. This is not 
just a coincidence, occurring about 250 years after the first description of the 
human cerebellum. The cerebellum contains the majority of neurons in the central 
nervous system and it is heavily connected with almost all cortical and 
subcortical areas of the supratentorial region as well as with the brainstem and 
the spinal cord. Cerebellar circuits are embedded in large-scale networks 
contributing to motor control and neurocognition. From a phenotypic standpoint, 
damage to cerebellar lobules interconnected with the sensorimotor cortices leads 
to a cerebellar motor syndrome, whereas lesions of the posterolateral cerebellum 
cause cognitive and neuropsychiatric impairments which may or may not be subtle. 
This topographic rule is valid in children and adults. Midline posterior vermal 
lesions cause behavioral/affective dysregulation, especially in kids. The extent 
of the spectrum of human cerebellar disorders is increasingly recognized from 
the fetus to the elderly, with recognition of consequences for the quality of 
life and socioeconomic costs due to lifelong morbidity of many cerebellar 
ataxias/pathologies. The prolonged duration of human cerebellar development 
makes the cerebellum especially susceptible to developmental disruption, both 
genetic and nongenetic. This explains the current emphasis on the clarification 
of the developmental course and impact of the cerebellum. The understanding of 
how germinal matrix zones and migration of neurons and glial cells end in a 
highly organized and foliated human cerebellum is essential. This is greatly 
accelerated by inputs from rodent developmental studies, in particular because 
cerebellar anatomy is conserved across species. Still, numerous questions on 
human fetal development remain unanswered. Although both advanced neuroimaging 
and genetic studies are currently leading to a better definition and 
understanding of the multitude of cerebellar symptoms, there is a gap, with a 
great need to develop therapies aiming at first, protection of the cerebellum 
during development, and second, restoration of cerebellar function in children 
and in adults. Dynamic profiles of the compensatory processes from newborns to 
elderly require specific studies.