This cross-sectional study investigates the prevalence and risks for psychiatric 
diagnoses in a large cohort of children with Chiari malformation type 1 (CM1) 
presenting for neurosurgical evaluation. Children between the ages of 6 and 17 
years who were evaluated and diagnosed with CM1 at a neurosurgery clinic were 
identified. Eighty-six participants were recruited for this study with an 
average age of 11 years. Parents of participants completed a pediatric medical 
history questionnaire and a semistructured interview regarding the child's 
psychiatric, developmental, medical, and family history. A review of medical 
records was completed to complement interview data. Elevated rates of 
psychiatric diagnoses, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
(22.1%), anxiety (12.8%), and depression (10.5%), were identified in the study 
population when compared to published norms in the general population documented 
by the American Psychiatric Association in 2013. In addition, elevated rates of 
psychiatric diagnoses in first-degree relatives of study participants were also 
identified. A 2-step binary logistic regression analysis revealed that maternal 
complications during pregnancy (Wald = 6.52, p = 0.01) increased the risk of a 
psychiatric diagnosis 9-fold. Premature birth (Wald = 6.79, p = 0.01) also 
significantly predicted a psychiatric diagnosis amongst participants. The 
current findings suggest a high prevalence of psychiatric illness in children 
with CM1. Pregnancy complications were associated with a high risk of a 
psychiatric diagnosis. Early CNS developmental disturbance may explain this 
relationship. Prematurity only slightly improved the prediction model. 
Limitations and future directions are discussed, including the cross-sectional 
nature of the present study, possible self-selection bias, and the importance of 
future investigation of other causative and/or associative factors of CM1, such 
as cognitive, psychiatric, and medical influences on health status.