The social environment strongly influences individual mental health. 
Individuals with strong social support systems tend to experience higher levels 
of well-being, lower levels of psychological distress and exhibit fewer 
psychiatric symptoms. However, there is a significant degree of individual 
variability as to the extent to which social support is beneficial to overall 
mental health. From a neurobiological perspective, it is suggested that the 
social hormone, oxytocin, may moderate the favorable effects of social 
interaction. To explore this possibility, we evaluated oxytocin genotype, social 
support and psychological health in a group of individuals diagnosed with DSM-IV 
alcohol dependence.
The associations between OXT genotype, social support and psychological 
health were analyzed in data from 269 adults diagnosed with DSM-IV alcohol 
dependence (25% female) admitted into residential treatment programs and 
outpatient centers in Warsaw, Poland.
RESULTS: In line with past observations, we noted that psychiatric distress 
scores were negatively correlated with social support. Extending these 
observations, we uncovered a significant moderating effect of OXT genotype 
(rs2740210) on the relationship between social support and psychiatric distress. 
While G carriers displayed the predicted negative relationship between social 
support and psychiatric distress, T homozygotes failed to exhibit such a 
relationship.
Genetically driven variation in oxytocin system functioning may 
influence the degree to which the beneficial effects of social support are felt 
in this population. These results have direct clinical relevance as enhancing 
social engagement to improve mental health may prove to be a less effective 
strategy in some patients owing to intrinsic factors.
The associations between oxytocin genotype, social support, and 
psychological health were analyzed in data from 269 adults diagnosed with DSM-IV 
alcohol dependence. A significant moderating effect of OXT genotype (rs2740210) 
on the relationship between social support and psychiatric distress was 
detected.