The DSM-IV personality disorders (PDs) are comorbid with 
alcohol use disorder (AUD) and with each other. It remains unclear which PD 
criteria are most likely to drive onset and recurrence of AUD and which are 
merely confounded with those criteria. We determine which individual PD criteria 
predict AUD and the degree of underlying genetic and/or environmental aetiology.
A prospective observational twin study.
Norway 1999-2011.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2528 and 2275 Norwegian adult twins in waves 1 and 2 
variable-selection analyses, and 2785 in biometric analyses.
MEASUREMENTS: DSM-IV PDs and their 80 criteria were assessed using a structured 
personal interview, and AUD using the World Health Organization's Composite 
International Diagnostic Interview.
In a variable-selection analysis, two PD criteria were associated with 
AUD even after taking all the other criteria into account: criterion 8 of 
antisocial PD (childhood conduct disorder) and criterion 4 of borderline PD 
(self-damaging impulsive behaviours). Adjusting for each other, their respective 
odds ratios were 3.4 [confidence interval (CI) = 2.1-5.4] and 5.0 
(CI = 3.3-7.7). Endorsement strength of the criteria was associated with AUD in 
a dose-response manner and they explained 5.5% of variation in AUD risk-more 
than the full diagnoses of antisocial and borderline PDs together (0.5%). The 
association between borderline criterion 4 and AUD 10 years later derived mainly 
from their overlapping genetic factors, whereas the association between 
antisocial criterion 8 and AUD 10 years later was due to both genetic and 
non-genetic factors.
Conduct disorder and self-harming impulsivity are the foremost risk 
traits for alcohol use disorder among the 80 personality disorder criteria of 
DSM-IV, predicting alcohol use disorder more effectively than personality 
disorder diagnoses. The twin-study analysis suggested that conduct disorder 
represents a joint genetic and developmental risk for alcohol use disorder and 
that impulsivity is a genetic risk.