IMPORTANCE: Lithium is a first-line mood stabilizer for the treatment of bipolar 
affective disorder (BPAD). However, the efficacy of lithium varies widely, with 
a nonresponse rate of up to 30%. Biological response markers are lacking. 
Genetic factors are thought to mediate treatment response to lithium, and there 
is a previously reported genetic overlap between BPAD and schizophrenia (SCZ).
OBJECTIVES: To test whether a polygenic score for SCZ is associated with 
treatment response to lithium in BPAD and to explore the potential molecular 
underpinnings of this association.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2586 patients with BPAD who had 
undergone lithium treatment were genotyped and assessed for long-term response 
to treatment between 2008 and 2013. Weighted SCZ polygenic scores were computed 
at different P value thresholds using summary statistics from an international 
multicenter genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 36 989 individuals with SCZ 
and genotype data from patients with BPAD from the Consortium on Lithium 
Genetics. For functional exploration, a cross-trait meta-GWAS and pathway 
analysis was performed, combining GWAS summary statistics on SCZ and response to 
treatment with lithium. Data analysis was performed from September 2016 to 
February 2017.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Treatment response to lithium was defined on both 
the categorical and continuous scales using the Retrospective Criteria of 
Long-Term Treatment Response in Research Subjects with Bipolar Disorder score. 
The effect measures include odds ratios and the proportion of variance 
explained.
RESULTS: Of the 2586 patients in the study (mean [SD] age, 47.2 [13.9] years), 
1478 were women and 1108 were men. The polygenic score for SCZ was inversely 
associated with lithium treatment response in the categorical outcome, at a 
threshold P < 5 × 10-2. Patients with BPAD who had a low polygenic load for SCZ 
responded better to lithium, with odds ratios for lithium response ranging from 
3.46 (95% CI, 1.42-8.41) at the first decile to 2.03 (95% CI, 0.86-4.81) at the 
ninth decile, compared with the patients in the 10th decile of SCZ risk. In the 
cross-trait meta-GWAS, 15 genetic loci that may have overlapping effects on 
lithium treatment response and susceptibility to SCZ were identified. Functional 
pathway and network analysis of these loci point to the HLA antigen complex and 
inflammatory cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study provides evidence for a negative 
association between high genetic loading for SCZ and poor response to lithium in 
patients with BPAD. These results suggest the potential for translational 
research aimed at personalized prescribing of lithium.