
Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome (CCS) is a rare, nonfamilial
hamartomatous polyposis syndrome that is characterized
by polyps distributed throughout the stomach and colon
(90%), small bowel (80%), and rectum (67%) with characteristic
esophageal sparing [1, 2]. Tis condition was first described by
Cronkhite and Canada in 1955, and the incidence is now es-
timated to be one per million persons per year [3]. It is a disease
of middle age with an average age of diagnosis in the early 60s,
and it is more common in males (3:2) [4]. Interestingly, the
majority of cases in the literature have been reported in Japan.
Te typical clinical presentation is varied, illustrated by
Goto, in a epidemiologic retrospective study of 110 cases of
CCS reported in Japan [3]. Te most common presenting
symptoms include hypogeusia (40.9%), diarrhea (35.4%),
abdominal discomfort (9.1%), alopecia (8.2%), and xero-
stomia (6.4%) [3, 5]. Intestinal bleeding and intussusception
are rare but potentially lethal complications of CCS [6]. Te
classic CCS dermatological triad includes alopecia, skin
hyperpigmentation, and onychodystrophy.
Te differential diagnosis for CCS includes a number of
other polyposis syndromes including Cowden’s disease, Peutz-
Jeghers syndrome, Turcot syndrome, and juvenile polyposis
syndrome; however, compared to juvenile polyposis syn-
drome, CCS polyps are less pedunculated and demonstrate
inflammatory cell infiltration in the lamina propria with as-
sociated edema [7]. Conventional adenomatous polyps have
also been reported in CCS. Despite high coincident rates of
gastrointestinal and colorectal carcinoma, it remains unclear if
CCS is a premalignant condition or if this is associated with
conventional adenoma-carcinoma sequence progression.
Diagnosis of CCS is clinical, based on clinical presentation,
endoscopic findings, and histopathology. Tere is no consensus
for an underlying etiology of pathogenesis; however, immune
dysregulation has been implicated as this condition is com-
monly identified in patients with lupus, hypothyroidism, and
rheumatoid arthritis [2, 8, 9]. Additionally, serology commonly
shows antinuclear antibody positivity [10]. More recently,
gastric and colonic CCS polyps have been shown to immu-
nostain IgG4 positive, raising the possibility that IgG4 may
be involved in CCS pathogenesis [11].
Hindawi
Case Reports in Medicine
Volume 2018, Article ID 9409732, 5 pages
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/9409732
Medical treatment for CCS is not based on firm science
as controlled randomized therapeutic trials have not been
possible due to the rarity of the disease. One of the most
important mainstays of treatment is aggressive nutritional
support with a high protein diet, hyperalimentation, and fluid
and electrolyte replacement [12]. Antiacid measures including
histamine receptor antagonists, proton pump inhibitors, and
cromolyn have been used, particularly in patients with biopsies
demonstrating eosinophilia [13].
Systemic immunosuppression is the most common
medical treatment tried, yielding anecdotal and inconsistent
results [14]. A number of studies have reported that timely
corticosteroid therapy can facilitate endoscopic regression of
the polyposis syndrome resulting in nodular mucosa with
a cobblestone appearance, but it is unclear if this translates to
a change in the natural history of the disease. Tere is no
consensus for appropriate dose and duration of glucocor-
ticoid therapy [4, 14, 15]. Immunomodulators including
azathioprine, calcineurin inhibitors, and cyclosporine have
been tried with mixed success [8, 16, 17].
Recently, Watanabe et al. have described a patient with
steroid-refractory CCS exhibiting a dramatic clinical and en-
doscopic improvement with infliximab (Remicade) therapy [6].
Here, we report the fourth case report in the English literature
describing a prototypical case of CCS which was successfully
treated with an anti-TNF.
2. Case Report
2.1.ClinicalPresentation. A 76-year-old male was referred to
the emergency department in May 2016 for significant un-
intentional weight loss of approximately 57kg and associated
chronic nonbloody watery diarrheal illness in the preceding
18 months. Medical history was notable for prostate cancer
curatively treated in 2012, gout, a remote transient ischemic
attack, osteoarthritis, and bilateral cataracts. In the months prior
to presentation to Gastroenterology, an extensive medical
workup performed as an outpatient was negative for prostate
cancer recurrence, new malignancy, autoimmunity, or an
identifiable malabsorption syndrome including celiac disease
and pancreatic insufficiency.
Te patient also noticed onycholysis in both his hands
and feet (Figure 1), followed by hyperpigmentation of his
hands (Figure 2), soles of his feet and legs, and abdomen. In
addition to the nonbloody diarrhea, the patient reported
a severe change in taste, early satiety, chronic heartburn,
and nonspecific abdominal pain. He denied a history of
fever, cough, night sweats, or abdominal pain. Tere was
no family history of gastrointestinal malignancy or similar
disorder.
Physical examination demonstrated profound cachexia
with a weight of 50.9 kg and a BMI 16.5. Generalized sarco-
penia was noted. Te abdomen was scaphoid and nontender
with no hepatosplenomegaly. Nonscarring alopecia was seen
on the scalp, dystrophic nail changes were identified in both
the hands (Figure 1) and feet, skin hyperpigmentation was
noted primarily involving the palms (Figure 2), dorsal aspects
of fingers, face, and limbs, as well as sexual pattern hair loss of
the abdomen, groin, and axillary hair. No cervical, inguinal, or
axillary lymphadenopathy was identified. Te rest of the
physical exam was unremarkable.
2.2. Investigations. Complete blood count was notable for
a mild normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 119 g/L (reference
range, 130–175 g/L) and mild eosinophilia of 0.82 g/L (ref-
erence range, 0–0.35 g/L)). Serum albumin was low at 28 g/L
(reference range, 35.0–55.0 g/L). Serum electrolytes platelet
count, white count, renal, liver enzyme and function tests,
lipase and total protein, serum immunoglobulins, CRP, and
TSH were normal. PSA was undetectable. Autoantibodies,
including antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody, and rheumatoid factor (RF) were undetectable as were
serologic tests for HIV, hepatitis, syphilis, and Lyme disease.
Serum protein electrophoresis exhibited a modest elevation in
kappa free light chains (23.0g/L) but a normal kappa/lambda
ratio was not consistent with a monoclonal gammopathy. Tere
were no extended nutrient deficiencies with lead, copper, zinc,
B12, or iron. Fecal elastase, stool culture, C. difficile, ova and
parasites, and fecal leukocytes were negative. Stool for occult
blood was positive.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated ex-
tensive gastric and duodenal mucosal fold thickening (Figure 3).
Upper endoscopy demonstrated florid gastric and du-
odenal polyposis, with thickening of gastric folds and “carpet-
like” semipedunculated gastric and duodenal polyps ranging
from 5 mm to 20 mm (Figures 4(a) and 4(b)). Histologically,
the duodenal polyps showed edematous mucosa with variably
dilated and branching glands, foci of gastric foveolar meta-
plasia, and blunted or absent intestinal villi. Te inflammatory
cell content of the lamina propria was mildly increased with
prominent eosinophils.
Where native intestinal-type surface epithelium remained,
it showed a mild increase of intraepithelial lymphocytes and an
occasional intraepithelial eosinophil. Tere was no subepithelial
collagen deposition. Te gastric polyps were also a characteristic
of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome. Te foveolar glands were
elongated, irregular, and focally dilated. Te lamina propria was
widely expanded by edema with an infiltrate of eosinophils and
mononuclear cells (Figures 5(a) and 5(b)). Helicobacter or-
ganisms were not identified in gastric or duodenal specimens.
Te involvement of the duodenum and gastric antrum in this
process ruled out Menetrier’s disease which is typically confined
to the gastric body.
Figure 1: Onchodystrophy of toenails.
2
Case Reports in Medicine
Based on these clinical, endoscopic, and histopatho-
logic features, a diagnosis of Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome
was made.
2.3. Outcome and Follow-Up. Due to near complete in-
ability to take in enteral intake from severe early satiety and
subjective global assessment of severe malnutrition, TPN
was initiated in conjunction with a short course of meth-
ylprednisolone, followed by a tapering prednisone regimen
starting at 50 mg per day. Azathioprine was also initiated at
75 mg daily. A jejunostomy tube was placed under radio-
logical guidance to provide enteral nutrition, and a high
protein formula was used for caloric requirements, as the
patient was unable to take in more than a few tablespoons at
a time.
Approximately six weeks after discharge, during the course
of continued outpatient evaluation, the patient exhibited
a worsening of his diarrheal illness accompanied by fever
and progressive abdominal pain. Stool testing was positive
for C difficile, and oral vancomycin was initiated with
satisfactory clinical response. After several clinical relapses
on vancomycin taper, the patient was advised by infectious
diseases to continue suppressive vancomycin 125 mg PO
daily.
Several months into steroid taper, the patient developed
polyuria, polydipsia, and hyperglycemia which had not been
present at higher steroid doses. Insulin was initiated with
reversion to normoglycemia.
Despite adequate enteral caloric intake and immuno-
suppression, the patient continued to experience progres-
sive weight loss, failure to thrive, and ongoing diarrhea
(C. difficile toxin-negative). Based on a successful recent
case report, off-label infliximab was employed [6]. Typical
induction and maintenance infusions of infliximab were
initiated with a regimen of 5mg/kg at weeks 0, 2, and 6 followed
by maintenance regimen of 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks thereafter.
Remicade level was within the accepted range at week 14.
Azathioprine was initiated with infliximab, at the beginning of
therapy to prevent antibody formation to the anti-TNF.
Te patient did not have an immediate initial response,
and due to nausea, azathioprine was discontinued after
3 months. Azathioprine metabolites showed a 6-thioguanine
of 106pmol/8×108 RBC in the nontherapeutic range (230–400)
and an undetectable 6-methyl mercaptopurine, appropriate
for combination therapy with infliximab. Terefore, azathi-
oprine was discontinued.
At 4 months from induction, the patient began to have
nail regrowth, improvements in taste, and a modest im-
provement in diarrhea and weight.
Eight months following induction therapy with inflix-
imab, bowel hygiene was significantly improved with ap-
proximately two formed movements daily. Te patient was
able to resume eating and drinking, and weight had increased
by 10 kg. Te patient also noted an improved sense of taste.
Physical examination showed hair regrowth on the scalp,
abdomen, and axillary and pubic regions in addition with
improved proximal nail bed health. Hyperpigmentation was
globally improved (Figure 2(b)). Laboratory values were within
normal range.
Repeat upper endoscopy 9 months after initiation of
anti-TNF showed notable improvement in gastric disten-
tion; however, there was persistent polyposis and no obvious
pathological improvement in inflammatory cell infiltrate.
3. Discussion
CCS is a rare clinical entity characterized by diffuse gas-
trointestinal polyposis and unique ectodermal changes of
alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and nail dystrophy. It is a near-
uniformly progressive disease. Additionally, the 5-year
mortality has been estimated as high as 55%. On review
of the English literature, there are 59 cases of CCS treated
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Hyperpigmentation of hands before therapy. (b) Resolution of hyperpigmentation 9 months following therapy with infliximab.
Figure 3: Abdominal CT on admission demonstrating hypertro-
phic gastric folds.
Case Reports in Medicine
3
with prednisone with a clear response defined by clinical
improvement in symptoms of malabsorption or endoscopic
improvement defined primarily by polyp regression.
Including our own case, 17% of CCS cases have been
identified as corticosteroid resistant. Azathioprine has shown
utility in maintaining remission of disease in 5 patients, with
a median remission period of 4.5 years [8]. Other reported
successful treatments for CCS include calcineurin inhibitors,
cyclosporine, and TNF antagonists. Anti-TNF therapy has
been reported in three cases with clinical response dictated by
symptom improvement and weight gain, as well as polyp
regression in 2 of these patients [6].
Here, we report a fourth CCS case partially responsive to
anti-TNF therapy. Tis is also the first case of CCS reported
in Canada [6, 17, 18]. Anti-TNF therapy was associated with
clinical improvement in weight, appetite, taste, alopecia,
and ectodermal changes. Regression of polyposis has not
occurred, unlike a previously reported case [6].
Tere has been no evidence of gastrointestinal or co-
lorectal cancer thus far. Frequent endoscopic surveillance
will be continued given high rates of concomitant colorectal
and gastric cancer reported in this patient population.
Further prospective studies are needed to assess the
effectiveness of steroid-sparing treatment given the superior
side effect profile of these agents compared with high-dose
glucocorticoid therapy.
4. Conclusion
In summary, we present a prototypical case of CCS with
marked clinical response and partial endoscopic response
after treatment with aggressive enteral nutrition and aza-
thioprine and infliximab combination therapy.
Consent
Te patient has given written informed consent for his case
to be reported.
Conflicts of Interest
Te authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
Authors’ Contributions
Dr. J. Kelly provided the pathological review for the paper.
Dr. S. A. Taylor and Dr. D. E. Loomes contributed to the
content and editing of the manuscript.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: (a, b) Irregular glands with focal cystic dilation, severe edema of the lamina propria, and a sprinkling of eosinophil leukocytes.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Endoscopic findings of the upper gastrointestinal tract at the initial diagnosis. (a) Te stomach revealing mucosal edema and
hypertrophic gastric villi and (b) multiple semipedunculated gastric polyps.
4
Case Reports in Medicine
