Quantitative SPECT techniques are important for many applications including internal emitter therapy dosimetry where accurate estimation of total target activity and activity distribution within targets are both potentially important for dose–response evaluations. We investigated non-local means (NLM) post-reconstruction filtering for accurate I-131 SPECT estimation of both total target activity and the 3D activity distribution. We first investigated activity estimation versus number of ordered-subsets expectation–maximization (OSEM) iterations. We performed simulations using the XCAT phantom with tumors containing a uniform and a non-uniform activity distribution, and measured the recovery coefficient (RC) and the root mean squared error (RMSE) to quantify total target activity and activity distribution, respectively. We observed that using more OSEM iterations is essential for accurate estimation of RC, but may or may not improve RMSE. We then investigated various post-reconstruction filtering methods to suppress noise at high iteration while preserving image details so that both RC and RMSE can be improved. Recently, NLM filtering methods have shown promising results for noise reduction. Moreover, NLM methods using high-quality side information can improve image quality further. We investigated several NLM methods with and without CT side information for I-131 SPECT imaging and compared them to conventional Gaussian filtering and to unfiltered methods. We studied four different ways of incorporating CT information in the NLM methods: two known (NLM CT-B and NLM CT-M) and two newly considered (NLM CT-S and NLM CT-H). We also evaluated the robustness of NLM filtering using CT information to erroneous CT. NLM CT-S and NLM CT-H yielded comparable RC values to unfiltered images while substantially reducing RMSE. NLM CT-S achieved −2.7 to 2.6% increase of RC compared to no filtering and NLM CT-H yielded up to 6% decrease in RC while other methods yielded lower RCs than them: Gaussian filtering (up to 11.8% decrease in RC), NLM method without CT (up to 9.5% decrease in RC), and NLM CT-M and NLM CT-B (up to 19.4% decrease in RC). NLM CT-S and NLM CT-H achieved 8.2 to 33.9% and −0.9 to 36% decreased RMSE on tumors compared to no filtering respectively while other methods yielded less reduced or increased RMSE: Gaussian filtering (up to 7.9% increase in RMSE), NLM method without CT (up to 18.3% increase in RMSE), and NLM CT-M and NLM CT-B (up to 31.5% increase in RMSE). NLM CT-S and NLM CT-H also yielded images with tumor shapes that better-matched the true shapes than other methods. All NLM methods using CT information were robust to small misregistration between SPECT and CT, but NLM CT-S and NLM CT-H were more sensitive than NLM CT-M and NLM CT-B to missing CT information.