OBJECTIVES: Methodologically, to assess the feasibility of participant 
recruitment and retention, as well as missing data in studying mental disorder 
among children newly diagnosed with chronic physical conditions (ie, 
multimorbidity). Substantively, to examine the prevalence of multimorbidity, 
identify sociodemographic correlates and model the influence of multimorbidity 
on changes in child quality of life and parental psychosocial outcomes over a 
6-month follow-up.
DESIGN: Prospective pilot study.
SETTING: Two children's tertiary-care hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: Children aged 6-16 years diagnosed in the past 6 months with one 
of the following: asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, food allergy or juvenile 
arthritis, and their parents.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Response, participation and retention rates. Child mental 
disorder using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview at baseline and 
6 months. Child quality of life, parental symptoms of stress, anxiety and 
depression, and family functioning. All outcomes were parent reported.
RESULTS: Response, participation and retention rates were 90%, 83% and 88%, 
respectively. Of the 50 children enrolled in the study, the prevalence of 
multimorbidity was 58% at baseline and 42% at 6 months. No sociodemographic 
characteristics were associated with multimorbidity. Multimorbidity at baseline 
was associated with declines over 6 months in the following quality of life 
domains: physical well-being, β=-4.82 (-8.47, -1.17); psychological well-being, 
β=-4.10 (-7.62, -0.58) and school environment, β=-4.17 (-8.18, -0.16). There was 
no association with parental psychosocial outcomes over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary evidence suggests that mental disorder in children with 
a physical condition is very common and has a negative impact on quality of life 
over time. Based on the strong response rate and minimal attrition, our approach 
to study child multimorbidity appears feasible and suggests that multimorbidity 
is an important concern for families. Methodological and substantive findings 
from this pilot study have been used to implement a larger, more definitive 
study of child multimorbidity, which should lead to important clinical 
implications.