PURPOSE: It has been shown that relatives of patients with epilepsy could 
experience a seizure as a traumatic event followed by a posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD). In one questionnaire study, 51% of the patients with epilepsy 
were reported to have a PTSD caused by a traumatic seizure, termed postepileptic 
seizure PTSD by the authors. However, it remained unclear whether these patients 
had further psychiatric comorbidities and if certain seizure features may foster 
the development of the proposed epilepsy-specific PTSD.
METHODS: We conducted a structured clinical interview assessing psychiatric 
disorders in 120 patients with difficult-to-treat epilepsies. We also used a 
modified version of the Posttraumatic Stress Diagnostic Scale conducted as an 
interview to assess the number of patients who fulfilled the criteria for a PTSD 
caused by an epileptic seizure. We additionally compared certain features of 
traumatic versus nontraumatic seizures.
RESULTS: Fifty of the 120 patients identified a seizure that fulfilled the 
criteria for a traumatic event, whereas 28 patients identified a worst seizure 
not meeting the trauma definition. Six patients fulfilled all PTSD criteria 
caused by a traumatic seizure. However, three of these patients also had a 
regular PTSD, and in two further patients, the results of the clinical interview 
suggested that the PTSD-like symptoms could be better explained by an adjustment 
disorder. We could not identify seizure characteristics differentiating 
traumatic from nontraumatic seizures.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that it is recommendable to conceptualize an 
epileptic seizure as being potentially traumatic in nature when assessing PTSD 
in patients with epilepsy, although we could not identify specific 
characteristics that could differentiate between traumatic and nontraumatic 
seizures. However, while using interview-based psychiatric assessment, we found 
a very low rate of a postepileptic seizure PTSD. It is worth conducting a 
comprehensive psychiatric diagnostic interview to differentiate PTSD-like 
symptoms from other comorbidities, such as epilepsy-related adjustment disorder.
