Three and a half decades of research on posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has 
produced substantial knowledge on the pathobiology of this frequent and 
debilitating disease. However, despite all research efforts, so far no drug that 
has specifically targeted PTSD core symptoms progressed to clinical use. 
Instead, although not overly efficient, serotonin re-uptake inhibitors continue 
to be considered the gold standard of PTSD pharmacotherapy. The 
psychotherapeutic treatment and symptom-oriented drug therapy options available 
for PTSD treatment today show some efficacy, although not in all PTSD patients, 
in particular not in a substantial percent of those suffering from the 
detrimental sequelae of repeated childhood trauma or in veterans with combat 
related PTSD. PTSD has this in common with other psychiatric disorders - in 
particular effective treatment for incapacitating conditions such as resistant 
major depression, chronic schizophrenia, and frequently relapsing 
obsessive-compulsive disorder as well as dementia has not yet been developed 
through modern neuropsychiatric research.In response to this conundrum, the 
National Institute of Mental Health launched the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) 
framework which aims to leave diagnosis-oriented psychiatric research behind and 
to move on to the use of research domains overarching the traditional diagnosis 
systems. To the best of our knowledge, the paper at hand is the first that has 
systematically assessed the utility of the RDoC system for PTSD research. Here, 
we review core findings in neurobiological PTSD research and match them to the 
RDoC research domains and units of analysis. Our synthesis reveals that several 
core findings in PTSD such as amygdala overactivity have been linked to all RDoC 
domains without further specification of their distinct role in the 
pathophysiological pathways associated with these domains. This circumstance 
indicates that the elucidation of the cellular and molecular processes 
ultimately decisive for regulation of psychic processes and for the expression 
of psychopathological symptoms is still grossly incomplete. All in all, we find 
the RDoC research domains to be useful but not sufficient for PTSD research. 
Hence, we suggest adding two novel domains, namely stress and emotional 
regulation and maintenance of consciousness. As both of these domains play a 
role in various if not in all psychiatric diseases, we judge them to be useful 
not only for PTSD research but also for psychiatric research in general.