BACKGROUND: De-escalation techniques are recommended to manage violence and 
aggression in mental health settings yet restrictive practices continue to be 
frequently used. Barriers and enablers to the implementation and effectiveness 
of de-escalation techniques in practice are not well understood.
OBJECTIVES: To obtain staff descriptions of de-escalation techniques currently 
used in mental health settings and explore factors perceived to influence their 
implementation and effectiveness.
DESIGN: Qualitative, semi-structured interviews and Framework Analysis.
SETTINGS: Five in-patient wards including three male psychiatric intensive care 
units, one female acute ward and one male acute ward in three UK Mental Health 
NHS Trusts.
PARTICIPANTS: 20 ward-based clinical staff.
METHODS: Individual semi-structured interviews were digitally recorded, 
transcribed verbatim and analysed using a qualitative data analysis software 
package.
RESULTS: Participants described 14 techniques used in response to escalated 
aggression applied on a continuum between support and control. Techniques along 
the support-control continuum could be classified in three groups: 'support' 
(e.g. problem-solving, distraction, reassurance) 'non-physical control' (e.g. 
reprimands, deterrents, instruction) and 'physical control' (e.g. physical 
restraint and seclusion). Charting the reasoning staff provided for technique 
selection against the described behavioural outcome enabled a preliminary 
understanding of staff, patient and environmental influences on de-escalation 
success or failure. Importantly, the more coercive 'non-physical control' 
techniques are currently conceptualised by staff as a feature of de-escalation 
techniques, yet, there was evidence of a link between these and increased 
aggression/use of restrictive practices. Risk was not a consistent factor in 
decisions to adopt more controlling techniques. Moral judgements regarding the 
function of the aggression; trial-and-error; ingrained local custom (especially 
around instruction to low stimulus areas); knowledge of the patient; 
time-efficiency and staff anxiety had a key role in escalating intervention.
CONCLUSION: This paper provides a new model for understanding staff intervention 
in response to escalated aggression, a continuum between support and control. It 
further provides a preliminary explanatory framework for understanding the 
relationship between patient behaviour, staff response and environmental 
influences on de-escalation success and failure. This framework reveals 
potentially important behaviour change targets for interventions seeking to 
reduce violence and use of restrictive practices through enhanced de-escalation 
techniques.
