
BACKGROUND: A quarter of people with psychotic conditions experience persistent 
auditory verbal hallucinations, despite treatment. AVATAR therapy (invented by 
Julian Leff in 2008) is a new approach in which people who hear voices have a 
dialogue with a digital representation (avatar) of their presumed persecutor, 
voiced by the therapist so that the avatar responds by becoming less hostile and 
concedes power over the course of therapy. We aimed to investigate the effect of 
AVATAR therapy on auditory verbal hallucinations, compared with a supportive 
counselling control condition.
METHODS: We did this single-blind, randomised controlled trial at a single 
clinical location (South London and Maudsley NHS Trust). Participants were aged 
18 to 65 years, had a clinical diagnosis of a schizophrenia spectrum (ICD10 
F20-29) or affective disorder (F30-39 with psychotic symptoms), and had enduring 
auditory verbal hallucinations during the previous 12 months, despite continued 
treatment. Participants were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive AVATAR therapy 
or supportive counselling with randomised permuted blocks (block size randomly 
varying between two and six). Assessments were done at baseline, 12 weeks, and 
24 weeks, by research assessors who were masked to therapy allocation. The 
primary outcome was reduction in auditory verbal hallucinations at 12 weeks, 
measured by total score on the Psychotic Symptoms Rating Scales Auditory 
Hallucinations (PSYRATS-AH). Analysis was by intention-to-treat with linear 
mixed models. The trial was prospectively registered with the ISRCTN registry, 
number 65314790.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 1, 2013, and Jan 28, 2016, 394 people were referred to the 
study, of whom 369 were assessed for eligibility. Of these people, 150 were 
eligible and were randomly assigned to receive either AVATAR therapy (n=75) or 
supportive counselling (n=75). 124 (83%) met the primary outcome. The reduction 
in PSYRATS-AH total score at 12 weeks was significantly greater for AVATAR 
therapy than for supportive counselling (mean difference -3·82 [SE 1·47], 95% CI 
-6·70 to -0·94; p<0·0093). There was no evidence of any adverse events 
attributable to either therapy.
INTERPRETATION: To our knowledge, this is the first powered, randomised 
controlled trial of AVATAR therapy. This brief, targeted therapy was more 
effective after 12 weeks of treatment than was supportive counselling in 
reducing the severity of persistent auditory verbal hallucinations, with a large 
effect size. Future multi-centre studies are needed to establish the 
effectiveness of AVATAR therapy and, if proven effective, we think it should 
become an option in the psychological treatment of auditory verbal 
hallucinations.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust.