Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neurocognitive disorder 
characterized by symptoms of inattention, impulsivity and motor hyperactivity. 
The worldwide prevalence of ADHD, in the general adult population, has been 
estimated to be 2.8%. Patients with ADHD have a high incidence of comorbidity 
with other psychiatric disorders. Those with a psychiatric disorder as well as 
ADHD have more psychosocial difficulties than those without ADHD. Despite 
knowing that ADHD is often comorbid with other psychiatric diagnoses, there are 
currently no studies elucidating the prevalence of ADHD in the inpatient 
psychiatric population, nor is there significant information about its impact. 
The lack of research into this topic suggests more needs to be done in the field 
of adult ADHD, especially in the inpatient psychiatric population and with 
respect to impairment in patient function. Knowing the prevalence of ADHD and 
its impact on quality of life in adult inpatients will help lay the groundwork 
for effective screening and management. The purpose of this study was to 
understand the prevalence rates of ADHD among psychiatric acute care inpatients. 
Other objectives included comparing the quality of life and functioning between 
patients with a primary psychiatric diagnosis and ADHD (treated or untreated) 
versus those with a primary psychiatric diagnosis and no ADHD. Thirty-three 
(N = 31) psychiatric inpatients were screened using the Adult ADHD Self-Report 
Scale. Those that screened positive for ADHD received a full diagnostic 
assessment for ADHD. All patients completed the Weiss Functional Impairment 
Rating Scale (WFIRS) to assess level of functioning and a Clinical Global 
Impression of Severity/Improvement Scale (on admission and discharge). 
Demographic information was also obtained. Of the 31 patients analyzed, 12 had a 
diagnosis of ADHD (36.4%). The participants diagnosed with ADHD scored 
significantly higher on the WFIRS, suggesting decreased functioning compared to 
patients without comorbid ADHD. Patients with ADHD also scored significantly 
higher in the individual domains of this rating scale, suggesting impairment in 
family, work and social functioning as well as decreased life-skills, poor 
self-concept and increased risk-taking behavior. In this sample, the prevalence 
of ADHD is significantly higher among acute care psychiatric inpatients than in 
the general population. Patients with concomitant ADHD suffer more functional 
impairment than those without. These findings merit further investigation into 
the value of routine screening and patient-specific treatment of ADHD in this 
patient population.
