PURPOSE: Prescription drug use during pregnancy has increased during the past 
decades. However, little is known about prescription drug use for high-risk 
pregnancies. We aimed to estimate the prevalence of redeemed prescriptions in 
Danish pregnant women with and without previous psychiatric history.
METHODS: A Danish population-based descriptive study of 981 392 pregnancies 
ending in live-born singletons by 586 988 women aged 15 to 55 years between 1997 
and 2012, of which 113 449 (11.6%) pregnancies were by women with a psychiatric 
history prior to the index pregnancy. All prescription drugs redeemed during 
pregnancy were identified, and dispensing patterns among the women were reported 
by therapeutic classes of drugs, calendar year of childbirth, and trimester.
RESULTS: Overall, women with psychiatric history prior to pregnancy were more 
likely to fill a prescription (75.8%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 75.5-76.0%), 
compared with women with no psychiatric history (64.5%; 95% CI, 64.4-64.6%). The 
difference was observed even when psychotropic drug use was excluded and in all 
therapeutic classes except for antineoplastic and immunomodulating drugs. The 
most commonly prescribed drugs were anti-infectives. Approximately 44.7% (95% 
CI, 44.5-45.0%) of women with psychiatric history and 31.3% (95% CI, 31.2-31.4%) 
of women with no psychiatric history redeemed more than one therapeutic class of 
drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: Women with a psychiatric history were more likely to redeem 
prescriptions during pregnancy across almost all drug classes, especially 
anti-infectives. Two thirds of all women redeemed at least one prescription drug 
during pregnancy and one third more than one drug class. KEY POINTS We mapped 
prescription drug use of almost 600 000 women during almost one million 
pregnancies with focus on women with a history of psychiatric disorder before 
conception compared with women with no such history. Pregnant women with a 
previous psychiatric disorder were more likely to redeem prescription drugs 
compared with pregnant women without a previous psychiatric disorder. The 
observed overall difference was not due to obvious differences in psychotropic 
drug use. The difference was evident across calendar years, all trimesters, and 
almost all drug classes, but to a large extent in anti-infectives, among those 
mainly antibiotics. Two thirds of pregnant women redeemed prescription drugs 
during pregnancy, and one third redeemed more than one drug class. Health 
professionals should be aware of comorbid conditions requiring multiple drug use 
during pregnancy with the risk of unknown fetal effects.