OBJECTIVE: Compared to the general U.S. population, smokers with comorbid 
psychiatric and/or substance use disorders have lower quit rates after 
evidence-based treatments and disproportionately high smoking-related deaths. 
Improved modalities for reducing tobacco-related harm in this subpopulation are 
needed. Because electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) can now deliver 
physiologically relevant levels of nicotine to consumers, they represent an 
additional nicotine delivery system that could be used in cessation 
interventions. While current data suggest that the use of e-cigarettes by 
smokers promotes a reduction in combustible cigarette use, smoking quit rates 
through use of e-cigarettes appears to be low. The goal of this study was to 
examine impact of e-cigarette use on combustible tobacco use as well as on the 
readiness to quit smoking and changes in nicotine dependence in a multimorbid 
population.
METHODS: We conducted a 4-week, open-label study in 43 military veteran smokers 
who had no immediate intention to stop smoking and were currently receiving 
psychiatric services from the Department of Veterans Affairs health care system. 
Participants were provided with a study e-cigarette they could use ad libitum 
along with other tobacco products and were encouraged to attend weekly 
laboratory visits and a one-month follow-up visit. Main outcome measures were 
number of cigarettes smoked per day (CPD), the frequency of e-cigarette use, the 
amount of money spent on combustible cigarettes (U.S. dollars/week), alveolar 
carbon monoxide (CO) levels, and urine cotinine levels.
RESULTS: Mean e-cigarette use was 5.7 days per week and only 9% of participants 
used the e-cigarette for fewer than 4 days per week. Significant reductions in 
breath CO (9.3 ppm to 7.3 ppm, p < .02) and CPD (from 16.6 to 5.7, p < .001) 
were observed across study weeks, and no serious adverse events were reported. 
Three participants (10% of completers) reported smoking cessation that was 
corroborated biochemically. At one-month follow-up, motivation to quit smoking 
remained significantly higher and the level of nicotine dependence was 
significantly lower than at baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: E-cigarettes are acceptable to smokers with psychiatric 
comorbidities, as indicated by sustained and frequent e-cigarette use by 90% of 
participants, and may promote reduction and/or cessation of combustible 
cigarette use. E-cigarettes appear to be a viable harm reduction modality in 
smokers with psychiatric comorbidities.