Background: Poor communication during patient handover is recognised internationally as a root cause of a
significant proportion of preventable deaths. Data used in handover is not always easily recorded using ambulance
based tablets, particularly in time-critical cases. Paramedics have therefore developed pragmatic workarounds
(writing on gloves or scrap paper) to record these data. However, such practices can conflict with policy, data
recorded can be variable, easily lost and negatively impact on handover quality.
Methods: This study aimed to measure the feasibility and acceptability of a novel, low tech intervention, designed
to support clinical information recording and delivery during pre-alert and handover within the pre-hospital and ED
setting. A simple pre and post-test design was used with a historical control. Eligible participants included all
ambulance clinicians based at one large city Ambulance Station (n = 69) and all nursing and physician staff (n = 99)
based in a city Emergency Department.
Results: Twenty five (36%) ambulance clinicians responded to the follow-up survey. Most felt both the pre-alert
and handover components of the card were either ‘useful-very useful’ (n = 23 (92%); and n = 18 (72%) respectively.
Nineteen (76%) used the card to record clinical information and almost all (n = 23 (92%) felt it ‘useful’ to ‘very useful’
in supporting pre-alert. Similarly, 65% (n = 16) stated they ‘often’ or ‘always’ used the card to support handover. For
pre-alert information there were improvements in the provision of 8/11 (72.7%) clinical variables. Results from the
post-test survey measuring ED staff (n = 37) perceptions of handover demonstrated small (p < 0.05) improvements
in handover in 3/5 domains measured.
Conclusion: This novel low-tech intervention was highly acceptable to ambulance clinician participants, improving
their data recording and information exchange processes. However, further well conducted studies are required to
test the impact of this intervention on information exchange during pre-alert and handover.