resulted in high burn-out numbers. Increasing PCPs’ job satisfaction is proposed as a solution in this regard. Positive
Health (PH) is an upcoming, comprehensive health concept. Among others, this concept promises to promote PCPs’
job satisfaction. However, there is limited research into PH’s effects on this topic. This study, therefore, aims to provide
insight into how adopting PH in a general practice affects PCPs’ job satisfaction.
Methods: An ethnographic case study was conducted in a Dutch general practice that is currently implementing
PH. Data collected included 11 semi-structured interviews and archival sources. All data were analyzed thematically.
Results: Thematic analysis identified three themes regarding PCPs’ adoption of PH and job satisfaction, namely [1]
adopting and adapting Positive Health, [2] giving substance to Positive Health in practice, and [3] changing financial
and organizational structures. Firstly, the adoption of PH was the result of a match between the practice and the
malleable and multi-interpretable concept. Secondly, PH supported PCPs to express, legitimize, and promote their distinctive
approach to care work and its value. This strengthened them to further their holistic approach to health and
stimulate autonomy in practice, with respect to both patients and professionals. Thirdly, the concept enabled PCPs
to change their financial and organizational structures, notably freeing time to spend on patients and on their own
well-being. This allowed them to enact their values. The changes made by the practice increased the job satisfaction
of the PCPs.
Conclusions: PH contributed to the job satisfaction of the PCPs of the general practice by functioning as an adaptable
frame for change. This frame helped them to legitimize and give substance to their vision, thereby increasing
job satisfaction. PH’s malleability allows for the frame’s customization and the creation of the match. Simultaneously,
malleability introduces ambiguity on what the concept entails. In that regard, PH is not a readily implementable intervention.
We recommend that other organizations seeking to adopt PH consider whether they are willing and able to
make the match and explore how PH can help substantiate their vision.