Background: Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a rare, chronic cholestatic liver disease that often progresses to
end-stage liver disease and/or the development of hepatobiliary neoplasia. Lack of prognostic tools and treatment
options for PSC is driven in part by our poor understanding of its pathogenesis, which is thought to be complex, the
interaction of genetic variants, environmental influences and biological response throughout the course of disease.
The PSC Scientific Community Resource (PSC-SCR) seeks to overcome previous shortcomings by facilitating novel
research in PSC with the ultimate goals of individualizing patient care and improving patient outcomes.
Methods: PSC patients who receive their health care at Mayo Clinic or a collaborating site are identified by chart
review and invited in person or by mail to participate. Non-Mayo patients are offered enrollment if they provide sufficient
access to their medical records to evaluate inclusion/exclusion criteria. Controls without liver disease are identified
with assistance of the Mayo Clinic Biobank. Participant consent is obtained at the beginning of the recruitment
process by mail-in, electronic or face-to-face protocols. Clinical data is extracted from the medical record by qualified
physicians and entered in a custom designed database. Participants fill out a custom-designed, comprehensive
questionnaire, which collects scientifically relevant demographic and clinical information. Biospecimens are collected
using mail-in kits thar are returned via overnight carrier service and processed by the biospecimen accessioning
and processing facility at Mayo Clinic, which coordinates sample transfers and provides required sample preparation
services. The resource is currently being utilized to perform omics-scale projects investigating the exposome, metabolome,
methylome, immunome and microbiome in PSC. Datasets and residual biospecimens will be shared with
researchers proposing scientifically sound PSC-focused research with approval of the appropriate review boards.
Discussion: Patient-based studies leveraging the latest technologies for targeted and wide-scale interrogation of
multiple omics layers offer promise to accelerate PSC research through discovery of unappreciated aspects of disease
pathogenesis. However, the rarity of PSC severely limits such studies. Here we describe our effort to overcome this
limitation, the PSC-SCR, a repository of patient biospecimens coupled with clinical and omics data for use by the
broader PSC research community.