Background: There is an increasing global interest in selection processes for candidates to surgical training. The
aim of the present study is to compare selection processes to specialist surgeon training in the European Union
(EU). A secondary goal is to provide guidance for evidence-based methods by a proposed minimum standard that
would align countries within the EU.
Methods: Publications and grey literature describing selection strategies were sought. Correspondence with Union
Européenne des Médecins Specialists (UEMS) Section of Surgery delegates was undertaken to solicit current
information on national selection processes. Content analysis of 13 semi-structured interviews with experienced
Swedish surgeons on the selection process. Two field trips to Ireland, a country with a centralized selection process
were conducted. Based on collated information typical cases of selection in a centralized and decentralized setting,
Ireland and Sweden, are described and compared.
Results: A multitude of methods for selection to surgical training programs were documented in the 27
investigated countries, ranging from locally run processes with unstructured interviews to national systems for
selection of trainees with elaborate structured interviews, and non-technical and technical skills assessments.
Associated with the difference between centralized and decentralized selection systems is whether surgical training
is primarily governed by an employment or educational logic. Ireland had the most centralized and elaborate
system, conducting a double selection process using evidence-based methods along an educational logic. On the
opposite end of the scale Sweden has a decentralized, local selection process with a paucity of evidence-based
methods, no national guidelines and operates along an employment logic, and Spain that rely solely on
examination tests to rank candidates.
Conclusion: The studied European countries all have different processes for selection of surgical trainees and the
use of evidence-based methods for selection is variable despite similar educational systems. Selection in
decentralized systems is currently often conducted non-transparent and subjectively. A suggested improvement
towards an evidence-based framework for selection applicable in centralized and decentralized systems as well as
educational and employer logics is suggested.