Background: With the increase in cannabis use rates, cannabis use disorder is being reported as one of the most
common drug use disorders globally. Cannabis use has several known physical, psychological, and social adverse
events, such as altered judgement, poor educational outcomes, and respiratory symptoms. The propensity for taking
cannabis and the development of a cannabis use disorder may be genetically influenced for some individuals. Heritability
estimates suggest a genetic basis for cannabis use, and several genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have
identified possible regions of association, albeit with inconsistent findings. This systematic review aims to summarize
the findings from GWASs investigating cannabis use and cannabis use disorder.
Methods: This systematic review incorporates articles that have performed a GWAS investigating cannabis use or
cannabis use disorder. MEDLINE, Web of Science, EMBASE, CINAHL, GWAS Catalog, GWAS Central, and NIH Database
of Genotype and Phenotype were searched using a comprehensive search strategy. All studies were screened in
duplicate, and the quality of evidence was assessed using the quality of genetic association studies (Q-Genie) tool. All
studies underwent qualitative synthesis; however, quantitative analysis was not feasible.
Results: Our search identified 5984 articles. Six studies met our eligibility criteria and were included in this review.
All six studies reported results that met our significance threshold of p ≤ 1.0 × 10–
7. In total 96 genetic variants were
identified. While meta-analysis was not possible, this review identified the following genes, ANKFN1, INTS7, PI4K2B,
CSMD1, CST7, ACSS1, and SCN9A, to be associated with cannabis use. These regions were previously reported in different
mental health conditions, however not in relation to cannabis use.
Conclusion: This systematic review summarized GWAS findings within the field of cannabis research. While a metaanalysis
was not possible, the summary of findings serves to inform future candidate gene studies and replication
efforts.