Background: Strabismus is a complex disease that has various treatment approaches each with its own advantages
and drawbacks. In this context, shared decisions making (SDM) is a communication process with the provider sharing
all the relevant treatment alternatives, all the benefits, and risks of each procedure, while the patient shares all the
preferences and values regarding his/her choices. In that way, SDM is a bidirectional process that goes beyond the
typical informed consent. Therefore, it is known a little of the extent to which SDM influences the satisfaction with the
treatment outcome along with strabismus patients. To study this correlation, an SDM-Q-9 questionnaire was provided
within surgical consultations where treatment decisions were made; the SDM-Q-9 aims to assess the relationship
between the post-operative patient’s satisfaction and their SMD score.
Methods: The study is considered a prospective observational pilot study. Eligible patients were adult patients diagnosed
with strabismus, who had multiple treatment options, were given at the right of choice without being driven
into a physician’s preference. Ninety-three strabismus patients were asked to fill out the SDM-Q-9 questionnaire
related to their perception of SDM during the entire period of strabismus treatment. After the treatment, patients
were asked to rate their satisfaction level with the surgical outcome as excellent, good, fair, and poor. Descriptive statistics
and the linear regression statistical tests (Spearman, Mann Whitney U, and Kriskal–Wallis) were used as analysis
tools.
Results: The average age of the participants was 24, where 50.6% were women. The mean SDM-Q-9 score among
patients was 32 (IQR = 3). The postoperative patient satisfaction was rated as being excellent by 16 (17.2%) patients,
good by 38 (40.9%), fair by 32 (34.4%), and poor by 7 patients (7.5%). Data analysis by linear regression statistical tests
showed a positive correlation between the SDM-Q-9 score and the patient satisfaction related to the surgery outcome
(B = 0.005, p < 0.001). Criteria in assessing patients’ satisfaction were age, gender, and strabismus type. A positive
correlation between SDM and real satisfaction (r = 0.834, p < 0.01) was found with age, and no significant relationship
was found while taking into consideration the responder’s gender and the strabismus type.
Conclusions: Assessing patient satisfaction after choosing a treatment for strabismus method helped us evaluate
the gaps in constructive dialogue that would lead to a positive outcome for both patient and clinician. The correlation
between the SDM process and the patients’ satisfaction with surgery outcome, adjusted by age, has been established.
These findings can serve as a springboard to further communicative improvements related to the SDM process and
between patients and physicians, thereby consequently leading to patients’ satisfaction raise in strabismus care. The
study underlines the importance of further analysis and validation of on-ground interactions among the adolescent and adult patients and the clinicians across the strabismus management trajectory. A multicentral study and its validation
will follow.
