Background: The coronavirus disease (COVID-19), a pneumonia caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has shown its destructiveness with more than one million confirmed cases and dozens of
thousands of death, which is highly contagious and still spreading globally. World-wide studies have been conducted
aiming to understand the COVID-19 mechanism, transmission, clinical features, etc. A cross-language terminology of
COVID-19 is essential for improving knowledge sharing and scientific discovery dissemination.
Methods: We developed a bilingual terminology of COVID-19 named COVID Term with mapping Chinese and
English terms. The terminology was constructed as follows: (1) Classification schema design; (2) Concept representation
model building; (3) Term source selection and term extraction; (4) Hierarchical structure construction; (5) Quality
control (6) Web service. We built open access for the terminology, providing search, browse, and download services.
Results: The proposed COVID Term include 10 categories: disease, anatomic site, clinical manifestation, demographic
and socioeconomic characteristics, living organism, qualifiers, psychological assistance, medical equipment, instruments
and materials, epidemic prevention and control, diagnosis and treatment technique respectively. In total,
COVID Terms covered 464 concepts with 724 Chinese terms and 887 English terms. All terms are openly available
online (COVID Term URL: http:// covid term. imica ms. ac. cn).
Conclusions: COVID Term is a bilingual terminology focused on COVID-19, the epidemic pneumonia with a high
risk of infection around the world. It will provide updated bilingual terms of the disease to help health providers and
medical professionals retrieve and exchange information and knowledge in multiple languages. COVID Term was
released in machine-readable formats (e.g., XML and JSON), which would contribute to the information retrieval,
machine translation and advanced intelligent techniques application.