Background: Data collection is the most critical stage in any population health study and correctly implementing
fieldwork enhances the quality of collected information. However, even the most carefully planned large-scale
household surveys can encounter many context-specific issues. This paper reflected on our research team’s recent
experience conducting surveys for a quasi-experimental evaluation of a reproductive health program in urban areas
of Karachi, Pakistan. We aim to describe the issues encountered and lessons learned from this process, and present
some potential solutions for conducting future household surveys in similar urban environments.
Methods: The study followed a three-stage random sampling design. Initially, a Geographical Information System
(GIS) was used to construct the sampling frame with union council (UC) area mapping and cluster demarcation
followed by random selection of clusters in the selected UCs within the intervention and control sites. The second
stage involved a complete household listing in selected clusters and the final stage was a random sampling of
households with eligible women.
Result: This paper describes the issues that were encountered including technical problems related to GIS
demarcation of cluster boundaries and hand-held devices for computer assisted personal interviews (CAPI), household
listing, interviewing respondents on sensitive topics and their expectations, and ensuring privacy during the survey.
Conclusion: This study identifies a number of unique barriers to conducting household surveys in Karachi and
highlights some key lessons for survey research in urban settlements. GIS mapping technology is a cost-effective
method for developing sampling frames in resource-constrained settings. Secondly, the strategy of interviewing
women immediately after the cluster is listed may be applied to make it easier to re-locate selected respondents and
to reduce loss-to-follow up. Understanding local norms and developing culturally appropriate strategies to build trust
with communities may significantly improve survey participation. Researchers should hire experienced female
enumerators and provide continuous training on best practices for interviewing women on sensitive reproductive
health topics in urban communities.