Background: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of surgical resection and stereotactic biopsy on the
complication rate, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) of 70 patients diagnosed at a single
institution with primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) and to explore the predictors of selection for
resection and the prognostic factors of PCNSL.
Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed of 70 patients with PCNSL that was diagnosed by surgical
resection or stereotactic brain biopsy in our department from January 2013 to May 2019. We divided the patients
into two groups: a resection group (n = 28) and a stereotactic biopsy group (n = 42). Data on clinical characteristics,
imaging findings, complication rates, PFS and OS were retrospectively reviewed and compared between these two
groups. We also analysed the predictors of selection for resection and prognostic factors of PCNSL by multivariate
analysis.
Results: The median age was 53.3 ± 14.3 years, and there was a male predominance with a sex ratio of 1.33:1. The
most common clinical manifestation was a headache. The complication rate in the resection group was 10.7%
versus 7.1% in the stereotactic biopsy group, and there was no statistically significant difference. The rate of
improvement in symptoms of the resection group was significantly higher than that of the stereotactic biopsy
group. Multivariable analysis identified a single tumour and not involving deep structures as predictors of selection
for resection. With a median follow-up of 30 months (range 1–110), the mean OS and PFS of all patients were 16.1
months and 6.2 months, respectively. Patients who underwent surgical resection had a mean OS of 23.4 months
and PFS of 8.6 months versus 11.2 months and 4.6 months for those who had a brain biopsy performed. In addition,
multivariable analysis showed that not involving deep structures and resection were favourable prognostic factors
for PCNSL.
Conclusions: The outcomes of patients with PCNSL treated in our cohort are still poor. In our series, surgical
resection might play a role in significantly improving OS and PFS compared with stereotactic biopsy in a subset of
patients. The type of surgery and tumour location are prognostic factors for PCNSL.