Background: Spinal AVF (SAVF), a potentially treatable cause of myelopathy, remains a challenging diagnosis. Its
rarity and non-specific imaging findings often result in misdiagnosis despite a high index of clinical suspicion. The
classically described high T2 signal in the spinal cord or prominent vascular flow voids in the intradural space were
not infrequently missed on initial imaging, only to be picked up at follow-up imaging after progression of
symptoms. Additionally, small sized fistulas(< 1 mm) and SAVF involving less frequent locations like the
craniocervical junction in a patient presenting with paraplegia further complicates the diagnosis. On rare occasions,
acute atypical presentation following a surgery adds to the conundrum. Definite diagnosis with spinal angiography,
the gold-standard modality requires the expertise of highly skilled interventionists which may otherwise lead to
false negative findings. We describe four SAVF patients with unconventional presentations, highlighting less
described clinical findings.
Case presentation: First was a 50-year-old man presented with spastic paraparesis and was found to have an AVF
at the cervical region arising from the vertebral artery. Second, a 45-year-old man with acute paraplegia postoperatively,
initially treated for a transverse myelitis before lumbar region AVF was detected. Thirdly, a 27-year-old
man presented with subacute lower thoracic myelopathy and deteriorated after corticosteroid treatment. The last
patient, who initially appeared to have conus medullaris/cauda equina syndrome had a SAVF at the mid thoracic
level. Presentation varied with some exhibiting acute deterioration mimicking other spinal cord pathology such as
inflammatory disorders. All patients eventually underwent endovascular treatment with successful embolization of
SDAVF. None of them exhibited further neurological deterioration after embolization.
Conclusion: Successful treatment of SAVF is possible provided the diagnosis is made early, allowing timely
intervention. Certain clues may aid the diagnosis. Firstly, arteriovenous fistula can be located distant to the clinical
localization of myelopathy resulting in the unexpected longitudinally extensive spinal cord signal change. This
clinical-radiological discrepancy can be a useful clue in diagnosing SAVF. Secondly, an acute myelopathic
presentation immediately post-surgery may be related to SAVF. Other SAVF feature of note includes progressive
myelopathy mimicking immune-mediated myelitis among young adults below 30 years of age refractory to
immune therapy.