Background: Undernutrition during pregnancy is an important public health problem. It is highly prevalent in
Ethiopia but not sufficiently addressed yet. Hence, this study aimed to assess the prevalence of undernutrition and
its associated factors among pregnant mothers in Konso district, Ethiopia.
Methods: Community-based cross-sectional study was conducted with a qualitative inquiry from December 2018
to January 2019. A multistage stratified sampling technique was used to select 527 subjects and quantitative data
were collected from these subjects using a structured interviewer-administered questionnaire and additionally
qualitative data were generated through two focus group discussions among purposely selected discussants. Mid
upper arm circumference (MUAC) was measured by standard non-stretchable MUAC tape. Data were entered into
Epi-data version3.1 and analyzed by SPSS version 21. In multivariable binary logistic regression, a statistically
significant association was declared at p-value < 0.05 while thematic framework analysis was employed for the
qualitative data.
Results: Among 501 participants, the overall prevalence of undernutrition (MUAC < 23 cm) was 43.1% (95% CI 38.7–
47.5%). Household food security (AOR = 3.1; 95% CI: 2.1–4.6), low dietary diversity score (AOR = 4.9; 95% CI: 2.6–9.2),
medium dietary diversity score (AOR = 2.3; 95% CI: 1.2–4.7), absence of latrine (AOR = 1.8; 95% CI: 1.2–2.6) and
having family resource decision making by husband only (AOR = 1.7; 95% CI: 1.1–2.6) were significantly associated
factors. Traditional believes to restrict food such as egg, milk, and milk products, avocado for women, weak
nutrition education and malnutrition screening program, daily consumption of locally prepared alcoholic drink
called “Cheka”, drought-prone nature of this setting, traditional way of farming practices and low socio-economic
status were found to be barriers for women’s undernutrition.
Conclusions: The prevalence of undernutrition was found to be higher than previously reported findings.
Household food security, dietary diversity, latrine availability, family resource decision making, food restrictions, weak
maternal nutrition education, and malnutrition screening program, the practice of depending on a local alcoholic
drink called “Cheka”, drought, traditional way of farming and low socio-economic status were identified factors.
Hence, interventions targeting maternal nutrition education, hygiene, and sanitation promotion, household food
insecurity improvement strategies should be implemented to improve the nutritional status of pregnant women.