Backgrounds: Myopia has become a global public health problem. Children with early onset of myopia are at
particular risk of complications associated with myopia. Younger children and children with greater initial myopic
refractive errors are at a greater risk of myopia progression. Therefore, it is essential to identify subjects at high risk
of developing myopia to facilitate myopia prevention in the early stage, especially during the preschool period. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether premyopia and myopia in preschool children can be predicted by
easily obtainable parameters.
Methods: Data was collected in a population-based cohort. Comprehensive examinations included height, weight,
refraction, axial length (AL), and corneal radius of curvature (CR), with a follow-up of 2 years. Parental myopia history
was obtained from a questionnaire. Myopia was defined as spherical equivalent (SE)≤−0.50 D. Premyopia was
defined as − 0.50 D < SE ≤ + 0.75 D. Multivariate linear regression models were fitted to determine the associations
between these parameters at baseline and future SE. To predict premyopia and myopia, Cox proportional hazard
regression analysis coupled with a nomogram was used.
Results: A total of 830 children (433 boys and 397 girls) were included (40.83 ± 3.43 months old at baseline). A
significantly negative relationship was observed in the multivariate analysis between baseline AL, AL/CR, two
myopic parents, and the future SE after adjusting for age and gender (coefficient = − 0.291, coefficient = − 5.791,
coefficient = − 0.273, respectively, both p < 0.001). Higher baseline AL, AL/CR (hazard ratio (HR) = 4.916, HR = 2.979,
respectively, comparing the top quartile with the bottom quartile, both p < 0.001) and two myopic parents (HR =
1.756, compared to no myopic parents, p = 0.001) were associated with a higher risk of future onset of premyopia.
From the nomogram, AL/CR was found to have the most enormous effect on survival. Different baseline AL and
AL/CR values (both Log Rank p < 0.001) had different survival curves.
Conclusions: AL and AL/CR could be used as obtainable indicators for identifying subjects at high risk of developing
premyopia and myopia in young preschool children.