Background: The importance of Silver diamine fluoride (SDF) as a minimally invasive and nonaerosolizing management
during COVID-19 pandemic has highly increased. SDF is a caries-arresting agent that causes staining of tooth
structure. Managing this discoloration will increase its acceptance in treating primary teeth. The main aim of this study
was to quantify the color change associated with the application of SDF on extracted carious primary molars, the
potential masking of this color change by potassium iodide (KI), composite (CMP) and glass ionomer cement (GI) and
the effect of aging on this color masking effect.
Methods: An in-vitro study in which 52 carious primary molars were collected, prepared, and distributed randomly
into four groups equally as follows: Group A: SDF 38%; Group B: SDF 38% + KI; Group C: SDF 38% + CMP; Group D:
SDF 38% + GI. Color changes were recorded for each sample at baseline, and after application of the tested materials.
Moreover, all samples had undergone Suntest aging followed by a third color reading. CIELAB values L*, a*, b*, ΔL, Δa,
and Δb were measured, ΔE was calculated, and data were analyzed using multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA)
and post-Hoc Scheffé test (p < 0.05).
Results: MANOVA revealed the significant influence of the factor ‘material’. SDF caused an obvious color change
compared to the color of carious dentin. Regarding ΔL, the color change of groups C and D was not significant
directly after application of the tested materials. After aging, it was significant among all groups, including groups C
and D. In Δa there was a difference between SDF and groups B and C after application of the tested materials, and
aging produced the same results. The color shifts of Δb of all tested groups varied significantly from one another. After
aging, there was no difference between group D and either group A or B.
Conclusions: Treatment with SDF caused obvious discoloration of carious dentin. Directly after SDF application, all
tested materials could effectively mask the color change associated with the application of SDF. CMP was the only
material whose color masking effect was not completely reversed by aging.