Background: In 2019, the Patient Autonomy Act went into effect, allowing Taiwanese citizens to establish legal
advance decisions. In an effort to secure a more realistic and accurate perception of situations, a virtual reality video
was developed by the palliative care team of Chi-Mei hospital in southern Taiwan for citizens to use before
advance care planning. This study explores the change in participants’ preference and certainty regarding end-oflife
decisions after using this tool.
Methods: Participants were at least 20 years old and capable of reading and understanding the information
provided in the written handout with information about the legal process of making an advance decision. They
completed pre-test questionnaires, viewed a six-minute 360-degree virtual reality video on a portable headset, and
then completed a post-test questionnaire about their preference on the five medical options—CPR, life-sustaining
treatments, antibiotics, blood transfusion, and artificial nutrition and hydration—followed by feedback on the
helpfulness of the virtual reality. The control group included 40 participants who only read the handout and
completed pre-test and post-test questionnaires.
Results: After viewing the virtual reality video, preference for not using CPR, life-sustaining treatment, antibiotics,
blood transfusion, and artificial nutrition and hydration increased significantly in the virtual reality intervention
group. Uncertainty regarding the five medical options mentioned above significantly decreased. The intervention
was generally recognized by participants for its help in making decisions.
Discussion: The decrease in the number of participants who could not make decisions indicates that the virtual
reality video may be helpful for users in making end-of-life decision. According to feedback, the virtual reality video
helped equip users with better understanding of medical scenarios, and that it is a good decision tool for advance
care planning.
Conclusion: This is the first study since the Patient Autonomy Act has been passed that explores the effectiveness
of using a virtual reality video as a decision tool in advance care planning and reveals decreased preference of CPR,
life sustaining treatment, antibiotics, blood transfusion, and artificial nutrition and hydration after intervention. This
decision aid proved to be an effective tool for clarifying their end-of-life care preferences.