Background: Palliative care is recognised as a public health issue with the need for earlier integration in the wider
healthcare system. However, research indicates that it continues to be accessed late in the course of an illness,
public understanding of palliative care is limited, and common misconceptions prevail. Strategies to address this
are needed in order to reduce barriers to palliative care delivery and improve access.
Methods: An explanatory sequential mixed methods study, comprising a cross-sectional survey and interviews was
undertaken. Sociodemographic characteristics, public awareness, knowledge and perceptions of palliative care were
examined and strategies to raise awareness and overcome barriers within a public health framework were
identified. Survey data were analysed using SPSS v25 with factor analysis and non-parametric statistics and
qualitative data were analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: A total of 1201 participants completed the survey (58.3% female, mean age 61 years) and 25 took part in
interviews. A fifth of participants (20.1%) had previously heard about palliative care and had an accurate
understanding of the term. Being female, higher educated, married, and older, increased respondents’ levels of
awareness. The three most commonly held misconceptions included: Palliative care is exclusively for people who
are in the last 6 months of life (55.4% answered incorrectly); A goal of palliative care is to address any psychological
issues brought up by serious illness (42.2% answered incorrectly); and a goal of palliative care is to improve a
person’s ability to participate in daily activities (39.6% answered incorrectly). Talking about palliative and end of life
care was advocated but societal taboos restricted this occurring with exposure limited to personal experience.
Conclusions: Current knowledge gaps and misconceptions derived from limited ad hoc personal experiences and
fear of engaging in taboo conversations may deter people from accessing integrated palliative care services early in
a disease trajectory. The results indicate the need for public education programmes that move beyond merely
raising awareness but provide key messages within a public health approach, which may change attitudes to
palliative care thus ultimately improving end of life outcomes.