Background: Fear of childbirth (FOC) occurs before, during and after pregnancy and is harmful to both the pregnant
woman and the fetus. Identifying the prevalence and predictors of FOC can help us generate strategies for alleviating
women’s FOC.
Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among a convenience sample of 646 pregnant women receiving
antenatal care at a subordinate hospital of a university in China. Data were collected using a basic information form,
the Childbirth Attitude Questionnaire, the Childbirth Self-Efficacy Inventory, and the 10-item Connor-Davidson Resilience
Scale. The minimum and maximum total scores of the Childbirth Attitude Questionnaire are 16 and 64, respectively,
with higher scores reflecting a greater degree of FOC. We conducted hierarchical regression analysis to explore
the predictors of FOC and used a structural equation model to further examine the direct and indirect associations
between FOC, resilience and childbirth self-efficacy.
Results: The total prevalence of FOC was 67.1%. The percentages of women with mild (score of 28–39), moderate
(40–51), and severe FOC (52–64) were 45.4, 19.5, and 2.2%, respectively. The average score on the Childbirth Attitude
Questionnaire was 32.49, indicating mild FOC. The final regression analysis revealed six variables predicting FOC that
explained 64.5% of the variance in FOC: age, gestational age, parity, spousal support, resilience, and childbirth selfefficacy.
Furthermore, childbirth self-efficacy mediated the relationship between resilience and FOC, and the mediation
effect rate was 53.5%.
Conclusions: A high prevalence of FOC among pregnant Chinese women was found in this study. Age, gestational
age, parity, spousal support, resilience, and childbirth self-efficacy were predictors of FOC. It is suggested that healthcare
professionals should pay close attention to FOC and implement targeted interventions in accordance with these
predictors, especially resilience and childbirth self-efficacy.