Background: Rehabilitation plays an important role in the management of patients with pulmonary arterial
hypertension (PAH) and current guidelines recommend implementation of a monitored individualized exercise
training program as adjuvant therapy for stable PAH patients on optimal medical treatment. An optimal
rehabilitation model for this group of patients has not yet been established. This randomized prospective study
assessed the effectiveness and safety of a 6-month home-based caregiver-supervised rehabilitation program among
patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Methods: A total of 39 patients with PAH were divided into two groups: intervention group (16 patients),
subjected to a 6-month home-based physical training and respiratory rehabilitation program adapted to the clinical
status of participants, and control group (23 patients) who did not perform physical training. The 6-min walk test
(6MWT), measurement of respiratory muscle strength, quality of life assessment (SF-36, Fatigue Severity Scale – FSS)
were performed before study commencement, and after 6 and 12 months. Adherence to exercise protocol and
occurrence of adverse events were also assessed.
Results: Physical training significantly improved 6MWT distance (by 71.38 ± 83.4 m after 6 months (p = 0.004), which
remained increased after 12 months (p = 0.043), and respiratory muscle strength after 6 and 12 months (p < 0.01).
Significant improvement in quality of life was observed after the training period with the use of the SF-36
questionnaire (Physical Functioning, p < 0.001; Role Physical, p = 0.015; Vitality, p = 0.022; Role Emotional, p = 0.029;
Physical Component Summary, p = 0.005), but it did not persist after study completion. Adherence to exercise
protocol was on average 91.88 ± 14.1%. No serious adverse events were noted.
Conclusion: According to study results, the home-based rehabilitation program dedicated to PAH patients is safe
and effective. It improves functional parameters and quality of life. Strength of respiratory muscles and 6MWD
remain increased 6 months after training cessation.