Background: Information and communications technologies (ICTs) have empowered people to communicate and
network at a global scale. However, there is lack of in-depth understanding of the use of ICTs for women’s empowerment.
This study examines how the concept empowerment is defined, utilized and measured in research studies, the
existing evidence on the use of ICTs for women’s empowerment and the gaps in knowledge at the global level.
Methods: The authors’ conducted a scoping review using the Arksey and O’Malley methodology. The search identified
papers from ten databases, including Scopus, Embase, ABI Inform, Soc Index, Sociological Abstracts, Gender Studies,
Springer Link, PsychInfo, Science Direct, and Academic Search Complete over the period of 2012–2018. Search
criteria included articles that focused on women’s empowerment and utilized technologies as interventions. Out of a
total of 4481 articles that were initially identified, 51 were included.
Results: Technology played a variety of roles in supporting the development of women’s capacities and resources.
Results revealed the use of ICT interventions in the overarching areas of outreach (e.g., health promotion), education
(e.g., health literacy opportunities), lifestyle (e.g., peer coaching and planning), prevention (e.g., screening opportunities),
health challenges (e.g., intimate partner violence apps), and perceptions of barriers (i.e., uptake, utilization and
ubiquity to ICTs for women). Despite the positive use of technology to support women in their daily lives, there was
a lack of consensus regarding the definition and use of the term empowerment. The concept of empowerment was
also inconsistently and poorly measured in individual studies making it difficult to determine if it was achieved.
Conclusion: This scoping review provides a comprehensive review of current and emerging efforts to use ICTs to
empower women. The findings suggest a need for collaborative efforts between researchers, program implementers
and policy makers as well as the various communities of women to address the persistent gender disparities with
respect to ICTs.