Background: Objectives were to describe barriers to pediatric cancer symptom management care pathway
implementation and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on clinical research evaluating their implementation.
Methods: We included 25 pediatric oncology hospitals in the United States that supported a grant submission to
perform a cluster randomized trial in which the intervention encompassed care pathways for symptom
management. A survey was distributed to site principal investigators prior to randomization to measure contextual
elements related to care pathway implementation. Questions included the inner setting measures of the
Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR), study-specific potential barriers and the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on clinical research. The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to compare characteristics of
institutions that agreed that their department supported the implementation of symptom management care
pathways vs. institutions that did not agree.
Results: Of the 25 sites, one withdrew because of resource constraints and one did not respond, leaving 23
institutions. Among the seven CFIR constructs, the least supported was implementation climate; 57% agreed there
was support, 39% agreed there was recognition and 39% agreed there was prioritization for symptom management
care pathway implementation at their institution. Most common barriers were lack of person-time to create care
pathways and champion their use (35%), lack of interest from physicians (30%) and lack of information technology
resources (26%). Most sites reported no negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic across research activities. Sites
with fewer pediatric cancer patients were more likely to agree that staff are supported to implement symptom
management care pathways (P = 0.003).
Conclusions: The most commonly reported barriers to implementation were lack of support, recognition and
prioritization. The COVID-19 pandemic may not be a major barrier to clinical research activities in pediatric
oncology.